     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022654

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P159437                                    Comoros Statistics Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Comoros                                    Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1590                                  30-Jun-2020                                            2,615,953.50

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jan-2017                                30-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             2,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              2,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          2,615,953.50                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Vandana Chandra             Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Comoros Statistics Project development objective (PDO) was to strengthen the capacity of the National
   Statistical Office (INSEED) to improve the production and dissemination of statistics (Financing Agreement,
   pg. 5). This PDO can be unpacked as follows:

   Objective 1: To strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Office (INSEED) to improve the production
   of statistics.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



   Objective 2: To strengthen the capacity of INSEED to improve the dissemination of statistics.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project had four components (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, p. 6):

   Component One: Implementation, analysis and dissemination of the 2016 Population and Housing Census
   (IDA US$1.20 million; US$1.4 million actual)

        a. The enumeration phase of the 2016 population and housing census including data collection and
           training of enumerators.
        b. The carrying out of a post-enumeration survey including sampling activities, training, data collection,
           matching, data treatment and analysis.
        c. Data processing: analysis and dissemination, data entry, data cleaning and the tabulation and
           analysis of the final survey results.

   Component Two: Implementation of the 2018-2019 Household Poverty and Living Standards Survey (IDA
   US$0.55 million; US$0.7 million actual)

        a. Preparation of the questionnaire and design of the household poverty and living standards survey.
        b. Preparation of the training materials and documents, support of the training, calendar preparation
          and the quality control of the fieldwork and collection data.
        c. Survey implementation and collection of data on household consumption and living standards, data
          processing, dissemination of survey results and provision of support to INSEED in: (i) cleaning and
          compiling survey data; (ii) developing a poverty estimation methodology, including the estimation of
          consumption aggregates, price indicators, and poverty line; and (iii) analyzing survey data,
          preparation of survey reports and dissemination of survey results including gender-specific statistics.

   Component Three: Strengthening of Human and Infrastructure Capacity (IDA US$0.55 million; US$0.3
   million actual)

        a. Technical assistance to strengthen human capacity in processing SNA and price statistics including
           training for the design and documentation of the methodology for updating SNA, CPI, GDP and
           training on household survey data processing, poverty indicators measurement and analysis,
           compilation of gender statistics and report writing.
        b. Provision of support for the acquisition of IT equipment, including laptops, computers, printers,
           software, and equipment for connection to solar energy panels.

   Component Four: Project Management (IDA US$0.2 million; US$0.28 million actual)



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



  Provision of support for the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the project, including the production
  of project reports (progress and completion), monitoring and evaluation activities, and preparation of the
  final audit report.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The planned project cost at appraisal was US$2.5 million compared to the actual cost at closing of US$2.68
  million (7.2 percent more than the planned project cost). The front page of this ICRR reports an actual cost
  of US$ 2.61 million instead of US$ 2.68 million.

  The excess of US$0.18 million was due to several related reasons:

      1. Extension of the Loan Closing date by six months to enable the completion of activities that were
         paused when the COVID19-related mobility restrictions were announced. At government’s request,
         the Loan Closing date was delayed to December 30, 2020, to enable completion of the 2018-2019
         Household Poverty and Living Standards Survey which had collected only 52 percent of the data
         when it was paused.
      2. On May 2, 2020, government requested a restructuring of the project to take advantage of the
         exchange rate depreciation. It wished to use the additional local currency funds to finance a new
         subcomponent comprised of a high frequency phone survey to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on
         household welfare. The new survey would use the same sample frame as the ongoing household
         survey.

  Table 1: Planned vs Actual Project Costs

                                           IDA Project                          Total Planned    Total Actual
                         IDA Project                          DPs and
                                              Actual                             Cost for IDA    Cost for IDA
                           Planned                           Government
                                           Contribution                          and Others      and Others
                         Contribution                        Contribution
                                            (Thousand                             (Thousand       (Thousand
                       (Thousand US$)                      (Thousand US$)
                                               US$)                                  US$)            US$)
    Component One            1,200             1,400              570                1770            1,970
    Component Two             550               700               340                 890            1,040
   Component Three            550               300                90                 640             390
   Component Four             200               280                                   200             280
                             2,500             2,680             1,000               3,500           3,680



  The Development Partners for the project were:

  Component One: Component One: United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), World Bank Trust Fund for
  Statistical and Capacity Building (TFSCB), United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
  (UNICEF), French Development Agency (AFD) and Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI).

  Component Two: African Development Bank (AfDB)



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



                       Component Three: African Development Bank (AfDB)

                       Component Four: None.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Comoros Statistics Project was designed to address the statistical needs of the country as articulated
in the National Strategy for Development of Statistics (NSDS) for 2015-2019. Among other things, NSDS
had a special focus on strengthening the statistical capacity of the National Institute of Statistics and
Economic and Demographic Studies (INSEED) to produce quality and timely statistics in line with
international best practice, promote access and use of data, improve the quality and consistency of
economic and administrative statistics, and build the capacity of INSEED to respond to the statistical needs
of policymakers, development partners and civil society. The NSDS was aligned with the government’s
Strategy for Accelerating Growth and Sustainable Development (SCA2D) for the period 2015-2019.
Implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the SCA2D, especially to achieve growth and poverty
reduction, required timely and higher quality socio-economic data which was severely lacking in Comoros.

From inception to completion, the PDO was highly relevant for and directly aligned with the 2014-2017
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) which also underscored the importance of strengthening statistical
capacity in Comoros to facilitate evidence-based diagnosis and policymaking, especially in fostering better
governance and private sector-led growth and job creation. The project supported the first pillar of the
Bank’s CPS aimed at “increasing public sector capacity” by building government’s statistical capacity and
improving the quality, consistency, and frequency of statistics. Under the CPS, the Bank’s support was
organized around four themes: (a) support for the implementation of the NSDS; (b) support to produce data;
(c) dissemination and access to data; and (d) statistics training. The project supported these four themes
and strengthened national capacity for statistical development. The CPS focused on implementation of the
NSDS through strengthening INSEED’s capacity to produce and disseminate timely and quality statistics
that are essential for measurable results. Among other things, this objective directly enabled tracking
Comoros’s progress towards the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared
prosperity, as well as the achievement of SDG targets.

The PDO continues to be highly relevant for the CPS for 2020-2024 which focuses on the economic and
social recovery of poor households in the context of COVID-19-related crisis, Cyclone Kenneth and other
natural disasters. The availability of census and household survey data made available by the Statistics
Project has made it possible for existing projects such as the Social Safety Net Project to better target poor
households affected by these natural shocks, or the human capital development projects in education and
health to channel limited resources to the needy and employ gender-sensitive approaches which were not
possible earlier. There is repeated emphasis in the NSDS on the need for INSEED to produce quality and
timely socio-economic statistics. Although neither objective explicitly incorporates these issues, the
evaluation of efficacy reveals that timeliness was integral to the outcomes.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Strengthened capacity of the National Statistical Office (INSEED) to improve the production of statistics.

                Rationale
                The causal chain for this objective envisioned that INSEED’s ability to start producing official socio-economic
                statistics consistent with international best practice would build INSEED’s capability to respond to the
                statistical needs of policymakers, development partners and civil society. By strengthening INSEED’s
                capacity, the project would improve Comoros’s national statistical system, making the poverty and living
                standards surveys the key tools for policy planning and tracking of poverty.

                Inputs and Outputs

                The key activities in the causal chain focused on boosting INSEED’s capacity through technical training of
                INSEED staff, local consultants, enumerators, and field workers, as well as empowering one of INSEED’s
                senior technicians as a project coordinator for the Population and Housing Census and Household Poverty
                Survey. INSEED received an IT-infrastructure upgrade in the form of new equipment, electrical installations
                and improvement in its premises, software, and significant computer training of its own staff. A part of the
                cartography of the census was digitized and will be useful for future censuses. Together with the training of
                INSEED staff, these activities prepared INSEED for similar data collection activities in the future.

                The outputs were the new databases of the Population and Housing Census and Household and Living
                Standards Survey; digitization of enumeration areas to facilitate future surveys; and INSEED staff trained on
                state-of-the-art statistics and computer knowledge (survey solutions software) to conduct largescale data
                collection operations in the future.

                Outcomes

                Indicator 1: Number of micro-datasets from the population census and household poverty survey available in
                the INSEED micro-data library which is open to the public. (Baseline: 2 datasets in 2016; Target: 4 datasets in
                2020; Actual: 6 datasets by project closing in 2020). The overachievement of this target suggests INSEED’s
                substantially strengthened capability to produce and disseminate statistics.

                Indicator 2: Number of beneficiaries within and outside INSEED benefitting from project-provided training
                based on an assessment of the needs of INSEED, line ministries and School of Statistics, and evaluation of
                performance against this program. (Baseline: 0 in 2016; Target: 60; Actual: 200 at project closing in 2020).
                The overachievement of this target indicates significant effort at capacity building through training that also
                extended to improvements in the curriculum of the Institute of Technology’s Statistical Department hosted by
                the University.


                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



Indicator 3: Proportion of beneficiaries of project-provided training who have achieved improvements in
statistical skills and knowledge. This indicator measured the proportion of training participants who achieved a
higher score in the evaluation test administered after the training compared to the test administered before
the training. (Baseline: 0%; Target: 70%; Actual: 100% in 2020). This indicator represents a relatively low bar
for achievement and could usefully have been replaced with the share of training participants who had a
achieved a minimum score. Nevertheless, the overachievement of this target reflects a positive (albeit
uncertain in magnitude) contribution to strengthening the statistical capacity of INSEED and other staff.

The training offered through the project helped to improve the skills of the supervisors and enumerators
during the population census and household survey.

While issues of data quality and timeliness were not explicitly incorporated in Objective 1, timely production of
data featured explicitly in the outcome indicators and was achieved. The issue of data quality remained open.
Absent a good indicator of quality, this ICRR takes the usage of the data by government and external users
as a proxy for the quality of the data and finds that the usage of the data indicator scores equally well.
Government and the development partners used the data for targeting welfare programs, tracking poverty,
and targeting beneficiaries of the relief efforts of COVID-19 and Hurricane Kenneth. Other examples include
use of census data by the health ministry to identify the target population for vaccines, and the education
ministry to identify the school-age populations. UNDP is using the data for its vulnerability assessment.

The achievement of the outcome indicators supports a rating of substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthened capacity of INSEED to improve the dissemination of statistics.

Rationale
The causal chain for this objective was that in addition to producing statistics, INSEED also needed to
improve its capacity to disseminate the statistics it produced to support better policy implementation and
tracking of growth and poverty reduction by government, development partners and civil society.

Inputs and outputs

Several activities served as inputs in the causal chain for this PDO. Dissemination of the statistical databases
of the population census and household poverty survey required TA to strengthen the capacity of INSEED
staff in data processing, analysis and the production of reports presenting the findings from the newly
collected datasets with a special lens on gender and poverty. INSEED staff was trained in the new
methodology to update and rebase national accounts, CPI and GDP data. The outputs of these activities
were 12 thematic reports produced from the population census; 4 reports from the household and poverty
survey; online posting of data from the updated and rebased national accounts from 2007 to 2018 and
forecasts from 2019 to 2022; data from production units from 2019 to 2020; monthly price index bulletin from
2017 to March 2021; a series of CPI indexes from 2000 to March 2021; various methodological

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



                            reports related with the national accounts, CPI and GDP data; and consultation meetings involving different
                            stakeholders were organized. As part of the dissemination of the population census, INSEED published on its
                            website a statistical bulletin on the 2017 census. In line with international best practice, it also posted one-
                            tenth of the database prepared in collaboration with the United Nations Population Fund.

                            Outcomes

                            Indicator 1: The indicator for the price (CPI) and national accounts (GDP) data was the “proportion of
                            statistical outputs supported by the project that are disseminated according to the statistical release
                            calendars.” (Baseline in September 2016): 0%; Target for June 2020: 70%; Actual at project closing in
                            December 2020: 100%). The overachievement of the target reflects that INSEED was successful in producing
                            and disseminating statistics in a timely manner despite the disruption in schedule caused by Covid19.
                            Moreover, its capacity to produce and disseminate timely data has been sustained since 2018.

                            Indicator 2: Number of statistical reports available and disseminated by INSEED utilizing data from project-
                            funded data production activities related with the population census and household and poverty survey.
                            (Baseline in 2016: 0; Target in June 2020: 3; Actual in October 2020:16). The actual output of 16 reports
                            exceeded the target by a huge margin and was a validation of INSEED’s significantly improved capacity to
                            produce timely micro-datasets as well as process, analyze, and present the data in reports, and disseminate
                            them in a timely manner.

                            Indicator 3: Proportion of project-funded survey reports with key gender statistics made publicly available.
                            (Baseline in 2016: 0%; Target in June 2020:100%; Actual in October 2020: 100%). The target was achieved
                            and reflected INSEED’s improved capacity to disseminate timely statistics from the population census and
                            household survey.

                            Indicator 4: Publication of methodology for national accounts, CPI and GDP update. This indicator supported
                            the preparation of a manual documenting the methodology for updating NA, CPI and GDP using
                            internationally agreed concepts and definitions. (Baseline in 2016: No; Target in June 2020: Yes; Actual in
                            October 2020: Yes). This indicator was achieved.

                            Indicator 5: Focus groups to provide feedback on the quality, relevance, and timeliness of statistics. As noted
                            in the ICR, this indicator is missing in the results framework annex. This was the only indicator that was not
                            achieved as the focus group discussions were not formally held.

                            The ICR correctly notes that indicator 5 for Objective 2 is missing in the results framework. As 4 of the 5
                            outcome indicators for Objective 2 were either achieved or overachieved, they support a substantial rating.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



  The overall Statistical Capacity Index score for Comoros rose from 30 to 46.7 over the lifetime of the project
  (2017-2020) due to substantial improvements in methodology, sources of data and extensive TA from
  development partners such as the African Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund in revising
  and rebasing the national accounts and CPI.

  Government, DPs and private researchers have timely access to reliable statistics that they can now use in
  social protection, education and health including COVID-19 related projects as well as for policy planning,
  implementation and poverty monitoring. This is evidence of INSEED’s substantially improved capacity to
  produce and disseminate official statistics.

  As each objective has a rating of substantial, the overall efficacy rating for the project is also Substantial with
  appropriate recognition that the African Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund also made
  useful contributions.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The actual expenditure of US$2.68 million was efficiently used in comparison to the substantial benefits
generated. Prior to the project, Comoros lacked reliable statistics that government and DPs could use to plan,
implement, and monitor programs targeted at poverty reduction per se and socio-economic conditions more
broadly.

The per capita unit costs of the two main components of the project were reasonable in comparison to the costs
of other projects in the Africa region. For example, the cost of the population census at about US$1.70 per
capita is within range of other Sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries (Madagascar US$1.4; Sierra Leone
US$1.5; and Ghana US$3.0). Similarly, the cost of the household survey estimated at about US$82 per
household is comparable to other SSA countries such as Tanzania and South Sudan.

The priority assigned to competitive bidding in the awarding of contracts contributed to keeping project costs
close to budget. The overrun of 7 percent of the project cost above budget was spent on two critical activities
during the six-month extension: completion of the household survey that was paused due to the pandemic, and
the inclusion of a new high-frequency COVID-19 survey. Outputs from these two activities were central to
government’s fight against poverty and pandemic mitigation.

The project performed well on timeliness. It was approved by the World Bank on January 9, 2017, signed on
March 15, 2017, and became effective four months later on July 14, 2017. It was on track but had to be
restructured in May 2020 to accommodate disruptions due to Covid-19 and the addition of a new component to
enable government to study the impact of the pandemic on household welfare. According to ISR 7 and the ICR,
all planned activities were satisfactorily completed close to budget by the time of project closing.

The main reasons for delays were: (i) public awareness problems regarding the population census (enumerators
were turned back in some villages); (ii) delays in the availability of the census data for the sample frame of the


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



household surveys; (iii) delays in receiving funds from the AfDB to start the first wave of the household survey;
(iv) unforeseen delays in data collection for the household survey due to the Covid-19 pandemic; and (v) delays
due to the communication problem between INSEED and the government in the validation of the population
census results.

 Notwithstanding these delays, the disbursements were timely and did not require any major modification in
plans.

Therefore, project efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was closely aligned with the government and the World Bank assessed development priorities for
Comoros. Recognizing that without reliable and timely statistics it could not track implementation of the Strategy
for Accelerating Growth and Sustainable Development for the period 2015-2019, the government designed the
NSDS which would be implemented through INSEED during 2015-2019. The PDO was equally well aligned with
the World Bank’s 2014-2017 CPS, the first pillar of which was focused on Bank support for NSDS by reinforcing
INSEED’s statistical capacity.

The two PDO-level objectives of the project were substantially achieved. The project bolstered INSEED’s
capacity to improve the production and dissemination of national statistics. INSEED’s improved capacity was
evident in its efficient execution of the Covid-19 related high-frequency survey which was added as a new
component in the last year of the project. In addition to the two PDO-level objectives, six (6) of the seven (7)
intermediate-level indicators were also fully achieved.

The per capita unit costs of the two main components of the project - the population census and living
standards/poverty survey - were reasonable in comparison to the costs of other projects in the Africa region.
The project was implemented on schedule with only one restructuring necessitated by a pause in the



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



household survey due to Covid-19. A six-month extension at government’s request facilitated completion of
originally scheduled activities and the new component comprised of the Covid-19 related survey.

The benefits from the project were substantial. Value for money is reflected in INSEED’s improved capacity to
undertake large-scale data collection and produce and disseminate timely reports for a wide range of users.

Based on the High relevance of the PDO, Substantial achievement of the two PDO-Level objectives and
intermediate indicators, and Substantial efficiency rating, the overall outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The key risks to the development outcomes are driven by INSEED's weak human capacity, lack of
commitment from government towards statistical reforms that make it autonomous and independent,
a deficient information system and absence of a communications strategy.

Weaknesses in the technical skills of INSEED’s staff remain. Its uncompetitive salary scales increase the risk
of trained staff departing in pursuit of better-paying jobs and difficulty in attracting qualified staff to INSEED.
This, in turn, increases its dependence on local consultants.

While persistent demand for data will ensue, the lack of commitment of regular budgetary support from
government jeopardizes the sustainability of INSEED’s ability to produce and disseminate official statistics.
Despite (i) a 2011 law to make the National Directorate of Statistics into an autonomous and independent
national institute called INSEED that would operate under the Ministry of Finance like other government
departments, and (ii) publication of laws and decrees in 2014 and 2015 which led government to approve
INSEED’s organizational structure and appoint its Director General, the law has not been operationalized.
INSEED’s reliance on government subsidies which are inadequate increases its dependence on DPs'
resources to cover operating costs and staff salaries exacerbating its vulnerability and increasing the risk of
not being able to deliver on its mission to produce and disseminate official statistics.

 INSEED’s weak information system and absence of a communications strategy risk diminishing the
effectiveness of its dissemination of new reports and databases. Examples include DPs' lack of awareness of
the availability of the 2017 population census results, or absence of the poverty survey’s thematic reports
although the summary results were published on the website.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s quality at entry was strong as it strategically aligned with the government’s development
  priority. The project’s technical design was based on INSEED’s needs as outlined in the NSDS 2015-

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



2017 and confirmed during the preparation stage by a large group of stakeholders at INSEED, main
official data-producing units in line ministries and departments, researchers, media and DPs. The design
of each project component was in line with international best practice on census, poverty and living
standards surveys, prices, and national accounts.

The project preparation phase meticulously identified the constraints in the national statistical system.
These constraints were also noted in the NSDS. As capacity of INSEED staff was a key constraint, the
project took a holistic approach to capacity building centered around data production and dissemination.
Previous experience in implementing the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) project and
preparation of this project revealed that despite limited resources and poor working conditions, there was
strong willingness, commitment, and motivation among INSEED’s staff, which was mostly young, to
strengthen its capacity and help in achieving this project’s objectives. This information supported a
harmonized approach to capacity building in INSEED. Consultations and coordination with other DPs
preempted duplication and facilitated sharing of responsibilities to support the harmonized approach to
building INSEED’s capacity.

A sound institutional implementation framework was ensured by establishing a coordination team at
INSEED to take responsibility for day-to-day project management. One of INSEED’s senior technicians
was appointed head (project coordinator) of the coordination team and directly reported to the Director
General of INSEED. As previous experience with the TFSCB project suggested that INSEED’s capacity
was weak in financial management and procurement, the project design ensured that the project
coordinator was assisted by a financial management specialist and a procurement officer, as well as
other short-term consultants recruited through the project. These arrangements were intended to foster
project ownership within INSEED, ensure that the financial and procurement requirements of the project
were appropriately addressed, and INSEED gained capacity and experience in managing World Bank
projects.

 The monitoring and evaluation aspects of the project were supported by a strong results framework. The
achievement of the overall development objectives was to be assessed through a measure of the
availability and timeliness of statistical products. Progress towards the PDO was to be monitored through
two sets of indicators which also comprised two of the project’s four main components: (i) implementation
of the population census and (ii) household poverty and living standard survey; and seven intermediate
indicators reflecting progress in data production and dissemination performance as well as skills
development. In addition to (i) and (ii), the other two main components focused on (iii) strengthening of
human and infrastructure capacity, and (iv) project management.

Lessons from similar projects and complementarities with other ongoing initiatives by the DPs were
appropriately considered and incorporated in the project design. The overall design of the project was like
other Statistical Capacity Building (StatCap) projects financed by the World Bank since 2004.The
household poverty and living standards survey (LSMS) was based on the West African Economic and
Monetary Union (WAEMU) framework developed by the World Bank to harmonize household surveys
and improve quality and comparability of poverty statistics.

Project risk was substantial and related to INSEED’s implementation capacity, project design and
fiduciary. There were also risks associated with potential funding gaps. However, the identified risks were
managed with adequate mitigation measures which were incorporated in the project’s design. (i)
INSEED’s limited implementation capacity was related with a young and inexperienced staff. The
planned mitigation measures from the World Bank comprised the establishment of a project coordination


                                                                                                Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



  team, close monitoring of project implementation, and provision of training and other forms of technical
  assistance when needed by the World Bank. (ii) INSEED’s implementation capacity risk also extended to
  its limited ability to coordinate effectively across multiple DPs and project activities though this risk was
  minor. The planned mitigation measures from the World Bank included extensive planning and
  coordination with other DPs in the project preparation, design and implementation stages and provision of
  technical assistance to INSEED. (iii) For INSEED’s limited fiduciary capacity (financial and procurement
  management) risk, the planned mitigation measures involved the recruitment of experienced financial
  management and procurement specialists; and (iv) the risk related with the potential funding gap for the
  census was mitigated by an arrangement with UNFPA and UNICEF to provide additional financial
  support to the census starting 2017 to fill the funding gap.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was solid as the Bank team followed project implementation closely, proactively
 taking steps to redress potential threats that could diminish achievement of development outcomes. The
 mitigation measures to avoid the risks related with INSEED’s capacity had positive results as the newly
 appointed project coordinator managed the project well and implemented all project activities according to
 project specifications and schedule.

 World Bank teams conducted regular bi-annual and periodic supervision missions during the project’s life
 (2017-2020), issuing regular project updates, and keeping in close communication with INSEED. There
 was also a mid-term review and a virtual (due to the Covid-19 travel restrictions) project-closing mission. In
 addition to the TTLs, several technical experts based in Moroni, Dakar, Antananarivo, and Washington DC
 constantly provided training and advice to the client when needed. The processing of the data collected
 was the subject of several working sessions with the World Bank technical teams based in Dakar
 (Senegal). The Bank’s local office also maintained continuous contact with the authorities to proactively
 resolve any threat that emerged. World Bank communications with INSEED in the field were highly
 effective in shaping discussions to adopt the WAEMU survey methodology and use of CAPI instead of
 PAPI for the household survey. The Bank team organized technical assistance for the use of CAPI for
 INSEED staff to enable them to transition to a more modern technology.

 The World Bank supervision teams were engaged in regular and sustained dialogue with the DPs (UNFPA,
 AfDB, UNICEF, AFD, GAVI) to strengthen coordination and harmonization of their interventions.

 The Bank team responded promptly to changing situations to avoid implementation delays. The 2019-2020
 household survey had two waves of data collection to take account of seasonality. When there was a delay
 in AfDB financing of the first wave, as per project arrangements, the World Bank agreed to begin financing
 the surveys pending receipt of AfDB financing.

 Overall, facilitated by appropriate supervision, the project’s implementation was effective in contributing to
 the achievement of development outcomes. Therefore, the quality of World Bank supervision is
 rated Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project Results Framework was effective for tracking outcomes. The two main and seven intermediate
 indicators were adequate for the M&E activities included in the project design for monitoring progress
 toward project outcomes and objectives.

 The design of the M&E activities efficiently anchored the key activities and their related indicators in the
 theory of change. The activities covered data production, processing, analysis, and dissemination, as well
 as training of INSEED's staff, particularly in processing national accounts and price statistics, and
 upgrading of INSEED’s infrastructure (IT hardware and software). The outputs in the form of datasets,
 analytical reports and documentation on methodology, and the related indicators were transparent,
 measurable with baselines and targets, time-bound and could be tracked. The sampling methods used to
 construct them were in line with international best practice. The indicators were adequate to measure
 progress towards the outcomes and the PDO of improving INSEED’s capacity to produce and disseminate
 official statistics for evidence-based policymaking.

 The M&E design and arrangements were well-embedded institutionally in INSEED, the agency selected to
 implement the project. The task was appropriately assigned to INSEED’s project coordinating team which
 would report on progress against the project indicators at least once a year. The M&E activities included
 regular progress reports prepared by INSEED, interim financial reports, audit reports and the Mid-Term
 Review report.



b. M&E Implementation
  There was delay in the start of the monitoring process. At the time of the mid-term review in November
  2018, the project coordination team at INSEED was reminded by Bank staff that it had not fulfilled its
  monitoring and evaluation role. The Bank team recommended that the project team fulfill its obligations
  with the assistance of INSEED’s own monitoring and evaluation service. In the months that followed, the
  project team produced four quarterly progress reports and one end-of-the-project report documenting
  information on the budget, capacity building, data production and dissemination, procurement, and
  financial management. The reports also documented implementation challenges, a status update on all
  issues, recommendations and progress on actions agreed at previous supervision missions through ISRs
  and Aide Memoires. Annual work programs were prepared by the coordination team in close consultation
  with the INSEED director.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



  Most of the data needed for M&E was easily available and of good quality as it consisted of datasets and
  reports that were directly produced by the project’s components and were being shared as they became
  available by INSEED with governments, local researchers and DPs.



c. M&E Utilization
  The monitoring and evaluation reports were used to provide evidence of achievement of project
  development outcomes to INSEED and development partners. The government relied on
  recommendations from the Bank supervision missions which enabled it to carry out the actions agreed
  upon in a timely manner.

  The project was restructured but not as an outcome of the monitoring and evaluation process. About 94
  percent of the funds were disbursed and the project was on track to completion when the outbreak of
  Covid19 disrupted the ongoing poverty survey. The government requested the Bank for an extension to
  complete the survey and implement a new Covid19-related survey.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   As the project’s safeguards categorization is C, it did not trigger any social or environmental safeguard
   operational policies. The project had no environmental impact. It collected data on key gender
   characteristics to inform policies to promote gender equality. The project’s indirect beneficiaries are users of
   official statistics including academics, DPs, government departments and policymakers.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project's procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory. There were slight delays of a
   few months between the deadlines set for some project activities in the updated procurement plan and
   actual achievements. There were no delays in contract payments. As priority was given to competitive
   bidding processes in awarding contracts, there were savings in some activities which were reallocated.

   The project’s Financial Management performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory to Satisfactory. The
   internal control function was not well organized within the project as the roles and responsibilities related to
   this function (and specified in the procedures manual) were often blurred between the Administrative and
   Financial Director (DAF), the coordinator, and the Director General of INSEED. Quarterly Interim Financial
   Reports (IFRs) were prepared and provided reliable information on the financial management of the
   project. There were no delays in the submission of annual audit reports or the project financial statements
   to the Bank. Those reports were all unqualified.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



   Weaknesses in budgeting, budget monitoring and reporting were addressed through capacity building. The
   project accountant and the Administrative and Financial Director (DAF) of INSEED benefited from the
   capacity building activities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None identified.



d. Other
   None identified.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The Needs of the Implementing Agency Matter

Incorporating the data production and dissemination needs of the implementing statistical agency
directly in the project’s design can contribute greatly towards smooth implementation
of project activities. The Comoros Statistics Project enjoyed a smooth and successful
implementation experience because at the preparation stage, the project team consulted with and
incorporated directly into the project design the statistical agenda of INSEED, the national statistical
office (selected as the project implementing agency). This facilitated implementation at every stage
of the project.

Strategically Locating the Project Coordination Unit

In Comoros where the capacity of the national statistical agency is particularly weak, implementing
an ambitious statistics project can be a challenge. Agency staff are not always willing to cooperate
and learn from an externally appointed project manager. Establishing a project coordination team
within the national statistical agency comprised of the latter’s technical staff (and consultants for
financial management and procurement) can be an important way to overcome this barrier.

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Comoros Statistics Project (P159437)



Appointing a senior technical staff member directly accountable to the Director General of the
agency as the project manager can be a gamechanger in motivating staff to cooperate with one of
their own to achieve the project’s objectives and strengthen their technical capacity to produce
quality and timely statistics.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project and the narrative and available evidence support the
ratings. It is well written, accurate and generally aligned with the project development objective. The report is
concise, meticulously follows the guidelines, and is focused on results. The quality of evidence and analysis is
aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. It pays attention to the discussion of the project’s results
framework so that the reader can deduce the theory of change underlying it. The ICR offers several creative
suggestions/insights from the project on how to improve outcomes especially in statistical capacity building
projects, however their value addition would be greater if they were presented as lessons.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
