     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022694

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P118826                                     IN: Bihar Social Protection

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53490                                   31-Mar-2020                                         42,065,971.29

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Dec-2013                                 30-Sep-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             84,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              50,293,550.25                                              0.00

 Actual                                          42,065,971.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl               Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 5) and the Financing Agreement of May 28, 2014 (p.4),
   the objective of the project was “to strengthen institutional capacity of the Department of Social Welfare and
   the Rural Development Department to deliver social protection programs and services and expand outreach
   of social care services for poor and vulnerable households, persons with disabilities, older persons and
   widows in the state of Bihar”.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



   This ICR Review did not apply a split evaluation because the original PDO indicators were weak in reflecting
   project achievements, and the change in indicators and targets was explained by the need to better capture
   intended project outcomes. Therefore, per guidelines, the entire project assessment was based on the revised
   PDO indicators and targets.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Strengthening Social Protection Systems and Capacity (appraisal estimate US$32.9
   million, actual US$16.53 million): This component was to finance the strengthening of the core systems
   and capacity of the Bihar Rural Development Society (BRDS) and the State Society for Ultra-Poor and
   Social Welfare (SSUPSW), which are the program implementation arms of the Rural Development
   Department and the Department of Social Welfare respectively, at the state, district and block levels. This
   component had two sub-components:

   Sub-Component 1.1: Strengthening systems and capacity for safety net delivery: This sub-component was
   to provide support to strengthen the delivery of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
   Scheme (MGNREGS) and Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) programs, focusing on: i) streamlining program
   delivery mechanisms; ii) strengthening staff capacity and performance incentives; and iii) putting in place
   monitoring and accountability mechanisms.

   Sub-Component 1.2: Strengthening systems and capacity for social pension and social care service
   delivery: This sub-component was to support SSUPSW to strengthen the delivery of social pensions and
   social care services for persons with disabilities, widows and older persons by focusing on: i) promoting an
   enabling policy environment; ii) developing standardized procedures and tools; iii) strengthening staff
   capacity and performance incentives; and iv) setting up monitoring and accountability mechanisms.

   Component 2: Strengthening Outreach and Social Protection Service Delivery (appraisal estimate
   US$87.1 million, actual US$43.57 million): This component was to support the establishment of 101
   Social Care Service Centers to increase state-wide coverage of social care services. This component
   included three sub-components:




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



  Sub-component 1: Establish and Strengthen Social Care Services: This sub-component was to support the
  establishment Social Care Service Centers that were to provide high quality care, support and rehabilitation
  services for older persons, widows and persons with disabilities.

  Sub-component 2: Pilot Models in Social Protection Delivery: This sub-component was to support: i)
  establishment of mobile outreach and therapy services; and ii) development and pilot of workable models
  for Community Based Rehabilitation (CBR).

  Sub-component 3: Innovation window: This sub-component was to finance small-scale pilots that were to
  contribute toward the project objectives by testing innovative mechanisms for increasing community level
  outreach for effective delivery of social protection programs and services at the local level; enhancing
  promotion and participation of stakeholders and project beneficiaries; and providing social protection for the
  poor and vulnerable during emergencies and disasters.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was originally estimated to cost US$120.0 million. This amount was revised to
  US$50.4 million. The actual cost was US$60.06 million. In October 2019 US$22.0 million and in June 2020
  US$8.6 million of the financing was cancelled. The reasons for cancellations are discussed below.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$84.0 million (of which US$42.06
  million was disbursed) and US$36.0 million of Borrower contribution (of which US$18.0 million
  materialized).

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$36.0 million. The actual contribution was
  US$18.0 million due to the reduction in cost during project implementation.

  Dates: The project was restructured five times:

        On June 20, 2018 the project was restructured to: i) realign the project results framework to better
         reflect the intended outcomes and introduce slight revisions to the rural development component to
         allow for better alignment with the SP tracking system; ii) revise PDO indicators so they better
         capture project outcomes and to make them more realistic and achievable under the revised
         implementation workplan which had to be modified due to implementation delays. The ICR did not
         provide further information on the targets that were revised.
        On October 16, 2019 the project was restructured to: i) allow for a partial cancellation of $22 million
         largely due to the delayed operationalization the social care service centers as well as savings which
         emerged due to the exchange rate differences between US$ and INR. This resulted in realigning
         some of the costs under the components and adjusting disbursement estimates for the remaining
         implementation period.
        On March 30, 2020 the project was restructured to extend the project closing date to June 2020 to
         allow for completion of project activities, which were delayed due to implementation bottlenecks.
        On June 30, 2020 the project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date from June 30, 2020 until
         September 30, 2020 to allow for the completion of project activities; and ii) cancel $8.6 million (SDR
         6.2 million) of the credit, relocate between categories and revise the disbursement estimates to
         correspond to the revised closing date.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



         September 29, 2020 the project was restructured to make adjustments in components and costs.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) at the time of appraisal, Bihar was India’s third largest state with a population of
104 million of which approximately 54 million people lived below the poverty line. Bihar’s economy had
been growing rapidly at 11 percent per year between 2004/2005 and 2010/2011 and made impressive
improvements in human development outcomes in terms of access to schooling and health. However, the
state still faced illiteracy, under-nutrition and infant and child mortality. In addition, certain groups including
persons with disabilities, older persons and widows, were especially vulnerable to economic shocks and
rising living costs.

Social protection (SP) spending was relatively high in Bihar and several programs were in place to meet the
needs of the poor and vulnerable. These included three main types of social assistance programs with in-
kind or cash transfers: i) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) (a
rights-based, demand-driven public works program that guarantees all rural households up to 100 days
annually of unskilled public works employment on demand); ii) Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) (cash transfers to
poor rural households for building houses; and iii) social pensions (cash transfers for older persons, widows
and persons with disabilities). During the FY 2010-11 the expenditures for these programs were US$1.034
billion and accounted for 74 percent of the total SP in the state or about 3.04 percent of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP).

Two principal departments were responsible for the administration of these programs. The Department of
Rural Development implemented the MGNREGS, IAY, and the Below Poverty List (to identify poor
households in rural areas). The Department of Social Welfare was responsible for social pensions and care
services.

The government provided significant resources for the three major programs, but the performance of these
programs had to be improved, including by building capacity for program management and implementation.
According to the PAD (p. 2) the potential was high to increase program coverage and thereby to address
deprivation and poverty in Bihar.

At the time of appraisal, the objective of the project supported the government’s Five -Year Plan (2012-
2017) and its goals of inclusive growth and development for long term sustainability. The project was in line
with the United Nation’s 2030 Agenda which aims to ensure that SP programs are supported by effective,
accountable, and transparent institutions.

The objectives were in line with the Bank’s Country Program Strategy (CPS) (FY13-17) at the time of
appraisal, especially engagement area three which focused on increasing the effectiveness of service
delivery in the social sectors. Also, the project was aligned with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) (FY18-22) third focus area “investing in human capital” (“improving the coverage and
coordination of social protection systems”).



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



               Taking everything together, relevance of objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen institutional capacity of the Department of Social Welfare and the Rural Development Department
                             to deliver social protection programs and services

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that activities for streamlining program delivery
                             mechanisms, standardizing processes, creating an enabling environment as well as putting in place
                             monitoring and accountability mechanisms were to result in certain outputs. These outputs were to include
                             introducing computerized accounting, timely payment of MGNREGS workers, monitoring and closing
                             idle/invalid accounts as well as improving HR policy and performance management through the HRMS web
                             based electronic system. Furthermore, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such
                             as promoting enabling policy environment, developing standardized development tools, strengthening staff
                             capacity and performance incentive, and establishing monitoring and accounting tools were to result in
                             outputs such as creating an enabling environment to formulate policies for women, elderly, and Person with
                             Disability (PWP), develop Social Security Pension (SSP) Management Information System (MIS), and
                             develop operations manuals and guidelines for capacity building. All these outputs were to result in the
                             objective stated above.

                             Outputs:

                                        A social security pension delivery and management system, the Social Security Pension MIS
                                         (SSPMIS) was implemented. The SSPMIS provides end-to-end solution to the Department of Social
                                         Welfare, Government of Bihar in handling the social security pensions targeted to elderly, disabled
                                         and widows across the state. Linked to a state-level call center, the SSPMIS is currently handling cash
                                         transfers to about 9.4 million beneficiaries every month.
                                        At the time of the 2018 project restructuring, the project was at the advanced stage of putting in place
                                         a digital financial management system that was to support the Rural Development Department (RDD)
                                         and other state departments in obtaining timely and reliable financial expenditure information from
                                         Panchayats, Blocks and Districts on their programs.
                                        To strengthen the financial management system, BRDS recruited 128 district level accounts and audit
                                         specialists, while at the block levels 326 Block Accountants were appointed.
                                        The program Management Information System (MIS) was established and produced periodic reports,
                                         achieving the target of doing so.

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)




      The project financed the hiring and training of a total of 850 SSPUSW staff. Also, the project
       supported the development of an e-attendance mobile app with geo-tagging to facilitate a systematic
       and transparent HR policy for personal management.
      HR policy and web-based Human Resource Management System (HRMS) was established at BRDS.
      An M&E system in BRDS was established to improve BRDS’ capacity for data analysis and program
       management to inform policy and programmatic decision making.
      An operations manual and standards of care for social care services was delivered through the
       Buniyad Centers and Mobile Therapy Vans (MTVs).

Outcomes:

      The number of social pension beneficiaries who received benefit payments on time was 9.38 million,
         achieving the target of 5.7 million.
        100 percent of blocks submitted audit reports on the Annual Financial Statement, achieving the target
         of 70 percent.
        100 percent of blocks submitted annual financial statements generated through digital application,
         achieving the target of 80 percent of blocks.
        85 percent of project beneficiaries were satisfied with social care services received, achieving the
         target of 80 percent of beneficiaries.
        52 percent of social care services grievances and 67 percent of social security pension grievances
         were redressed, not achieving the target of 80 percent.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen institutional capacity of the Department of Social Welfare and the Rural Development Department
to expand outreach of social care services for poor and vulnerable households, persons with disabilities, older
persons and widows in the state of Bihar

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory envisioned that activities such as establishing one stop social care
service centers with assistive devices, strengthening capacity of staff, providing mobile therapy vans and
establishing finance mechanisms to increase community level outreach of SP programs as well as enhancing
community participation were to results in the following outputs: one stop social care centers providing
adequate counseling and essential services, therapy vans providing services and pilot interventions linking
beneficiaries with training and employment services. All these outputs were to result in the objective stated
above.

Outputs:

      In 2018, in each of the 38 districts, one social care service center (known as Buniyad Center) was
         operational, achieving the target of 38 centers being operational. These one-stop shops for the target

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



                                    population provided high quality care, support and rehabilitation services to elderly, disabled and
                                    widows. During 2017, these centers provided services to about 36,000 individual beneficiaries.
                                   23 one-stop-social care centers were constructed, and 76 buildings were under different stages of
                                    construction, not achieving the target of 101 centers being constructed.
                                   38 Mobile Outreach and Therapy Vans (MTV) in each of the districts had been procured and was
                                    delivering social care services to elderly, disabled and widows in remote rural locations, achieving the
                                    target of 38 MTVs. These vans were fully equipped with diagnostic, therapy equipment and audio-
                                    visual systems as well as a professional team to operate as one stop shops to deliver quality care,
                                    support and rehabilitation services to the beneficiary groups in local settings.
                                   The construction of the remaining 66 Buniyad centers was completed. However, since the project only
                                    constructed a total of 89 centers, the revised target of 99 centers was not achieved.

                            Outcomes:

                                   The number of project beneficiaries who received social care services increased from 3,305
                                    beneficiaries in 2017 to 317,000 beneficiaries in 2020, achieving the revised target of 300,000
                                    beneficiaries.
                                   In total the project benefited 9.69 million people, achieving the target of 6.0 million people. 54.1
                                    percent of beneficiaries were female, achieving the target of 45 percent.
                                   24.38 percent of total beneficiaries who received social care services were vulnerable and
                                    marginalized people. 22.45 percent of total beneficiaries who received social security pension
                                    beneficiaries were vulnerable and marginalized people.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project almost fully achieved its first objective to strengthen capacity to deliver social protection programs
                            and services. Likewise, it almost fully achieved its second objective to increase institutional outreach capacity
                            of social care services for poor and vulnerable households, persons with disabilities, older persons and
                            widows. The aggregation of achievements under the two objectives is consistent with a Substantial efficacy
                            rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

Both, the PAD and the ICR did not conduct traditional measures of efficiency in its economic analysis. Instead,
the ICR (p. 9) summarized project benefits across multiple dimensions. But its arguments were related to the
social protection sub-sector rather than to project efficiency itself.

Operational efficiency:

The efficiency of implementation was affected by significant shortcomings. Aspects of design also contributed to
reduce efficiency. The project experienced significant implementation delays related to procurement, financial
management as well as delays in the construction and operation of care centers, and coordination challenges
between BRDS and SSUPSW. Delays were also related to the hiring of project staff at different levels.
Implementation arrangements foresaw that the project implementing agencies in the Social Welfare Department
(State Society for the Ultra Poor and Social Welfare) and the Rural Development Department (Bihar Rural
Development Society) were to directly hire these contractual staff. However, it was later decided that an
outsourced model for hiring these personnel was more suitable. This resulted in the government of Bihar having
to seek various departmental clearances as well as a State Cabinet decision and having to restart the
procurement of various related contracts, which were already at advanced stages of procurement, causing a
significant delay in the implementation of the Project (Project Restructuring Paper, Report No, RES32429, para.
2). Delays in construction and operation of Buniyad Centers and operationalizing 28 Mobile Therapy Vans were
resolved in the 6th year of the project (ICR, p. 11). After effectiveness in 2014, disbursements remained at a
near zero level in 2015 and 2016, increased to US$11.6 million in 2017, and to only US$21 million in 2018.
US$30.6 million were cancelled, although there were exchange rate gains. The project disbursed 70% of the
credit proceeds after cancellations at closing.

Given an insufficient analysis on project efficiency and significant shortcomings in the efficiency of
implementation, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated High. Overall efficacy was rated Substantial, and efficiency was rated
Modest. Therefore, the project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 17) the government continues to be committed to reducing poverty and improving
access of social protection and service delivery to vulnerable and marginalized groups. The government also
continues to provide financing to the systems and programs supported under the project. The government is
looking at different options to implement the same model in other Indian states. However, as the
implementation of this project showed, frequent changes in leadership and champions, negatively impact
implementation and sustainability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 10) the project was built on lessons learned from relevant global, regional and
  national experience in supporting systemic reforms of social protection programs. The project design also
  took the Bank’s experience of working in Bihar over several years under the Bihar Capacity Building
  Technical Assistance program into account. Lessons learned that were reflected in the project’s design
  included the importance of strengthening implementing agencies management/administration functions,
  introducing clarity, transparency and consistency in program processes, and putting in place real-time
  M&E systems to increase accountability.

  According to the PAD (p. 13) the Bank team identified relevant risks and identified the following as High
  or Substantial: i) high fragmentation of SP programs and services which might hamper and delay project
  activities; ii) relatively new implementing agencies with limited capacity to administer services, fiduciary
  limitations which might results in implementation delays; iii) shortcomings in project design associated
  with the novelty of the operation; and iv) failure to adequately test and evaluate critical investments
  proposed under the project. Key mitigation measures included: i) capacity building to improve the
  administration of service delivery; and ii) financing to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the
  project. During the subsequent project period, capacity constraints persisted and contributed to
  implementation shortcomings.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



  The design of the Results Framework was overly ambitious and complex. It tried to measure outcomes
  beyond the project’s scope (see section 9a for more details). Careful costing of components was
  needed early in the design phase (ICR, p. 15).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 16) the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions on a bi-annual basis.
 The Bank team stated (October 27, 2021) the Bank team also engaged in monthly supervision missions (in
 person) to address implementation delays and resolve problems which was fundamental to improving
 project implementation.

 When implementation progress was slow, the Bank team intensified project supervision. The project
 benefitted from the field-based Bank team to support continuous dialogue to address implementation
 bottlenecks. According to the Bank team (December 13, 2021) the Bank team addressed the complexity of
 project design and the challenge of measuring implementation progress by restructuring the project in
 2018.

 The project experienced implementation delays in several areas such as procurement and financial
 management, which negatively impacted project implementation and disbursement. The Bank addressed
 these issues by providing technical support. Also, the Bank restructured the project five times. As a result
 of implementation delays the project scope was reduced in 2019 and 2020 resulting in the cancellation of a
 total of US$30.6 million.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives of the project were clearly specified, but the original Results Framework of the project was
 not able to adequately reflect the achievements of the project. One of the main reasons was that the
 project Results Framework was more geared towards reporting on the activities under the Department of
 Rural Development where only 23 percent of the project resources were invested. Besides this, each of the


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



 five PDO indicators had four sub-indicators that measured progress towards four SP programs, making it
 overly complex and difficult to adequately and timely measure implementation progress.

 According to the PAD (p. 12) the existing framework within both implementing agencies was expected to be
 used for results monitoring.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project established an M&E system in BRDS as well as an M&E unit at the state level. This resulted
  in stronger data analysis and program management capacity.

  When the project was restructured in 2018, the Results Framework was revised to better reflect its
  intended outcomes.

  According to the ICR (p. 15) project indicators and data were collected and reported on a regular basis.
  Also, both implementing agencies ensured effective implementation of the project’s M&E.

  The Bank team stated (October 27, 2021) that M&E data were largely reliable and of adequate quality.
  Also, BRDS and SSPUSW M&E functions are likely to be sustained since they are a part of government
  reporting activities. The sustainability of project M&E activities is ensured after project closure through
  government support.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 15) M&E data was used to inform decision making and make implementation
  adjustments such as through the project restructurings. Data was derived from several sources such as
  progress reports, implementation support missions, field visits, and the Management Information System
  (MIS).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.36 (Forest Management), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management) and 4.11
   (Physical Cultural Resources).

   According to the PAD (p. 16) an environmental assessment (EA) was conducted by the government of
   Bihar for the proposed project in selected sites. The EA also included a review of the existing capacity of the
   Rural Development Department (RDD), Department of Social Welfare (DoSW) and the Bihar State Building
   Construction Corporation Limited (BSBCCL) for environmental management. The Environmental


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)



  Management Framework (EMF), developed as an outcome of the EA, provides guidelines for site selection,
  design, construction and maintenance of environment-friendly Buniyad Centers in line with relevant legal
  and regulatory requirements related to environment aspects.

  According to the ICR (p. 15) the project complied with the Bank’s safeguard policies. The Bank team
  (October 27, 2021) stated that the two implementing agencies established the necessary safeguard
  mechanisms and staffing and shared regular safeguards data to the Bank team. However,
  recording/reporting was slow and did not take place on a frequent basis. According to the Bank team
  (December 13, 2021) the safeguard rating at project closing was Moderately Satisfactory.

  The project developed a three-tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) (state, district, and block)
  which allowed complaints to submit grievances to different platforms. According to the ICR (p. 15) at project
  closing 52 percent of the complaints related to social care services and 67 percent of complaints related to
  social security and pensions were resolved. The Bank team stated (October 27, 2021) based on the
  exchange with the client and follow up by the Bank’s safeguards specialist, the Bank team was informed
  these complaints are being resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 15) the project followed Bank’s procurement guidelines. During project appraisal
  the procurement risk was rated High due to the implementing agencies’ lack of experience (PAD p. 58) in
  implementing Bank projects. At the beginning of implementation, the project experienced delays due to
  weak capacity in both implementing agencies. The Bank provided procurement training and technical
  assistance to address these capacity issues. Also, external procurement consultants were hired to support
  staff in both implementing agencies. These measures resulted in stronger capacity and better procurement
  performance. According to the ICR (p. 16) the project’s procurement risk was reduced from High to
  Substantial in the 2018 Procurement Risk Assessment and Management System (P-RAMS) assessment,
  and by the time the project closed, 99 percent of the public works procurement had been completed.

  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 16), the project had adequate Financial Management (FM) systems in place. The
  two implementing agencies were responsible for the project’s FM function. Commercial banks were
  responsible to facilitate payments at the state, district, and block levels and complied with the agreed FM
  agreements. However, at the beginning of project implementation the BRDS and SSUPSW lacked the
  necessary capacity to submit the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and audit reports in a timely manner.
  The Bank provided assistance to address these issues. The annual financial audit was conducted by firms
  of chartered accounts that were contracted on terms the Bank agreed with.

  According to the Bank team (October 27, 2021), the external auditor’s opinions were unqualified except for
  the opinion of March 31, 2017. However, these issues were resolved.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              This ICR Review rated efficiency
                                                                              as Modest because of
                                                                              insufficient analysis of project
Outcome                          Satisfactory       Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              efficiency and significant
                                                                              implementation shortcomings
                                                                              that reduced efficiency.
                                                                              This ICR Review rated Quality-at
                                                                              Entry as Moderately Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory       Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              in view of moderate
                                                                              shortcomings in M&E design.
                                                                              There is no disagreement: the
                                                                              ICR's rating of the Quality of
Quality of M&E                   High               Substantial
                                                                              M&E (p.13) was Substantial as
                                                                              well.
Quality of ICR                   ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 17 to 18) provided useful lessons learned:

      Remaining flexible and proactive is important for adjusting costing associated with
       exchange rate fluctuations. In this project, the Bank team reacted well to the fluctuations
       by restructuring the project and adjusting its costing.
      Projects that aim to strengthen institutional capacity in a low-capacity context require
       time to put in place necessary capacity across all tiers of government. In this project,
       capacity needed to be built in financial management, procurement, disbursements,
       safeguards, and HR resulting in implementation delays.




13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                               Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Bihar Social Protection (P118826)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR included a concise and adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and provided
useful lessons learned that can be applied to similar future Bank projects. Overall, quality is considered
substantial, although the ICR’s efficiency analysis focused on the improved sector efficiency (which should be
considered an aspect of efficacy in this case) rather than assessing efficiency in use of project resources as
described in guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
