     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022628

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P122383                                     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A1988                                   30-Jun-2019                                             2,993,681.09

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Feb-2016                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              3,000,000.00                                      3,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               2,993,681.09                                      2,993,681.09

 Actual                                           2,993,681.09                                      2,993,681.09




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Chikako Miwa                J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s Project Development Objective (PDO) and its Global Environmental Objective (GEO) was “to
   help create the ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in priority ecological landscapes in
   the far northeast of China (Heilongjiang and Jilin), using the Amur Tiger as a flagship species” (Project Paper,
   para 18). The project’s financing agreement was not available for review.




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



   This review will assess the extent to which the whole of this objective was achieved in Section 4. The
   reference to the Amur tiger as the “flagship species” is interpreted as emphasizing the world-wide significance
   of the project’s biodiversity objective and is therefore included in the PDO statement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Institutional Coordination to Mainstream Wildlife Conservation Across Sectors
   (Approval: US$1.73 million, of which GEF US$0.72 million; Actual: US$1.62 million, of which GEF US$0.68
   million) intended to support establishment of an enabling policy, institutional, and planning framework. It
   facilitated increased cooperation and collaboration among provincial, national, and international institutions
   in their respective efforts to conserve wildlife and habitat in northeast China. It consisted of two
   subcomponents: (a) Policy and Planning and (b) Institutional Arrangements.

   Component 2: Conservation of Priority Ecosystems and Increased Effectiveness of Habitat
   Protection in the Changbaishan Landscape (Approval: US$9.18 million, of which GEF US$1.57 million;
   Actual: US$9.22 million, of which GEF US$1.59 million) intended to support consolidation and strengthening
   of the Sino-Russian corridor through the strengthening of existing Nature Reserves (NRs) and creation of
   new ones, improvement of wildlife habitat in the project’s core zone, and provision of support for an
   integrated wildlife-monitoring program. This component covered four subcomponents: (a) Increased
   Management Effectiveness in existing NRs, (b) Creation of new NRs, (c) Habitat Restoration, and (d)
   Technical Monitoring.

   Component 3: Reducing Human Wildlife Conflict in Priority Forest Landscapes (Approval: US$9.01
   million, of which GEF US$0.56 million; Actual: US$9.26 million, of which GEF US$0.57 million) intended to
   reduce human-tiger conflicts in a buffer zone in proximity to the assemblage of existing and new NRs
   supported under Component 2. It covered three subcomponents: (a) Improved Patrolling and Enforcement,
   (b) Pilot Mitigation Measures, and (c) Increased Public Awareness.

   Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (Approval: US$0.66 million, of
   which GEF US$0.15 million; Actual: US$0.67 million, of which GEF US$0.16 million) intended to support
   project management activities carried out by the Implementing Agencies and coordination between
   provinces and across international boundaries.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$20.58 million (Project Paper, page 6). At
   project closing, the actual cost was US$20.82 million (ICR, page 44).

   Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed by US$3.00 million grant from the Global
   Environment Facility (GEF) and a total of US$17.58 million in co-financing from the following sources:(a)

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



   US$8.76 million from Jilin Province, (b) US$6.07 million from Heilongjiang Province, (c) US$0.75 million
   from the State Forestry Agency and (d) US$2 million from the World Wildlife Fund for Nature to fund costs
   directly associated with project implementation (Project Paper, para 43). At project closing, the project was
   financed by US$2,993,681 grant from the GEF and US$17,826,319 from government co-financing (ICR,
   page 2).

   Dates: The project was approved on February 23, 2016 and became effective on May 23, 2016. The Mid-
   Term Review was published on November 13, 2017. The project was closed on December 31, 2020, which
   was 18 months after the original closing date of June 30, 2019.

   Restructuring: The project had two restructurings to extend the project’s duration: a project extension of 9
   months in December 2018 due to implementation delays; and another project extension of 9 months in
   March 2020 due to the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) to the final closing date of
   December 13, 2020.

   This review did not consider there was a need for a split rating of the PDO stated.in Section 2a.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: China’s rapid economic growth led to unprecedented rates of poverty
reduction, but also impacted the natural resource base and generated major environmental liabilities.
Human activities accelerated fragmentation of remaining natural forests, and the wildlife they supported.
Systematic poaching of wildlife, and encroachment and degradation of habitat led to severe losses in
biodiversity, altering food webs and ecosystem functions. At the national level, China adopted a landscape
approach through the establishment of ecological corridors connecting nature reserves to provide habitat
for the conservation of viable size populations of key biodiversity while decreasing human-wildlife conflict.
At the provincial and local levels, China still needed an innovative approach to mainstreaming biodiversity
considerations into its economic development strategy. Key challenges included the absence of a coherent
policy and legal framework combined with weak management and monitoring systems, as well as the lack
of awareness of and support for alternative livelihoods further exacerbated human-wildlife conflicts.
Geographically, one priority area for biodiversity conservation was the forests of the Changbaishan
Landscape in northeastern China in proximity to the Russian border, which included the Jilin Municipality
and the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in Jilin Province, and the southern part of the Mudanjiang
Prefecture in Heilongjiang Province.

Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal, the project’s objective was in line with the national 12th
Five-Year Plan (FYP) (2011-2015) which proposed the creation of new and strengthening of existing
reserves to enhance biodiversity conservation. The objective was also aligned with the goal of the National
Tiger Recovery Program, which was committed at the St. Petersburg Tiger Summit in 2010, to double the
number of Amur Tigers (Siberian tigers) individuals in the wild by 2022. At project closing, the objective
aligned with the national 13th FYP (2016-2020), which emphasized the importance of restoration of
ecosystems, building ecological corridors and biodiversity protection networks, and comprehensively
improving the stability and eco-services of various natural ecosystems. The project was also aligned with
the Government’s National Park System Development Program, which adopted an integrated approach and

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



supported consolidation of protected areas for conservation, setting up an improved policy framework and
institutional structures, establishing an integrated monitoring system, and building up a network to connect
fragile ecosystem and wildlife habitats for the restoration, protection, and mainstreaming of biodiversity.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the project’s objective was in line with the Country
Partnership Strategy FY2013-2016, in specific, Strategic Theme 1: Supporting Greener Growth and
Outcome 1.5: Demonstrating Sustainable Natural Resource Management Approaches. The objective was
also in line with the Global Tiger Initiative, which was founded in 2008 by international partners including the
World Bank and the GEF and led by the 13 Tiger Range Countries including China. At project closing, the
project objective was aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2020-2025, in specific,
Engagement Area Two: Promoting Greener Development and Objective 2.4: Strengthening Sustainable
Natural Resource Management. The project intended to contribute to three Supplementary Progress
Indicators on Landscape (Ecosystem) Management and Restoration to achieve Objective 2.4 (CPF, page
51).

Prior Sector Experience: The formulation of the objective was in line with the World Bank’s prior sector
experience. Prior to the project, the World Bank had experiences in supporting the country’s environment
sector by demonstrating sustainable Natural Resource Management approaches, but a limited experience
in supporting implementation of operations related to biodiversity conservation. To strengthen the
implementation arrangement, the project engaged the World Wildlife Fund for Nature as a co-financier to
support project activities in Jilin province, in order to build upon its solid experience in conservation
programs including the establishment of 62 giant panda nature reserves (Project Paper, para 100). The
World Bank also engaged the State Forestry Administration’s Feline Research Center located in
Heilongjiang’s Northeast Forestry University to support the project through the design and implementation
of the integrated monitoring program and participation in the Advisory Committee on Conservation of Tigers
in Northeast China.

The project’s overall objective was well aligned with the Government’s national plans and programs and the
World Bank’s country assistance strategies. The objective was also in line with the country and sector
context and the prior sector experience. On the other hand, the lack of clarity of the project’s precise
objective undermined the undoubted relevance of the need to “create the ecological conditions for recovery
of threatened biodiversity in priority ecological landscapes in the far northeast of China”. To “help” the
achievement of this objective implied a low level of ambition for an important task, resulting in an ambiguity
on what the project aimed to achieve (e.g., whether the project committed to establishing an enabling
environment only or actually enhancing biodiversity on the ground). The low level of ambition might have
been compensated by robust PDO indicators. However, this was not the case since the two indicators only
called for “enhanced biodiversity protection” in project nature reserves and “biodiversity-friendly”
management of areas outside the nature reserves (ICR, para 10). These indicators were output-focused or
did not provide baseline data to assess “enhanced biodiversity protection” or improvements in criteria used
to measure “new biodiversity-friendly” and hence a weak confirmation of the project’s contribution to the
creation of “ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in priority ecological
landscapes.” Therefore, despite the high relevance of the overall objective to government and Bank
development strategies, the relevance of the project’s objective is rated substantial because of the lack of
clarity on expected achievements.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                          Page 4 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To help create the ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in priority ecological
                landscapes in the far northeast territory of the Recipient (Heilongjiang and Jilin), using the Amur Tiger as a
                flagship species

                Rationale
                Theory of Change (TOC): The project’s TOC envisioned that project activities such as formulating plans and
                regulations for conservation and restoration, holding meetings and joint events on wildlife and habitat
                conservation at international and regional levels, and conducting international and domestic study tours would
                result in outputs such as plans and regulations on conservation and restoration developed, the Northeast
                China Tiger Landscape Conservation Committee established, and cross-provincial cooperation and
                collaboration with Russian counterparts strengthened, leading to an intermediate outcome of a policy,
                institutional, and planning framework on conservation and restoration to be established. A critical
                assumption here was that capacity building would succeed at provincial and local levels. The TOC also
                envisioned that project activities such as creating new Nature Reserves (NRs), strengthening patrolling
                activities and enforcement, and establishing integrated cross-provincial ecological monitoring programs would
                result in outputs such as three new NRs established, incidence of snares decreased, and integrated cross
                provincial ecological monitoring program developed, leading to intermediate outcomes, such as
                effectiveness of protected area and network management enhanced, and wildlife-carrying capacity
                increased through restoration, expansion, and connectivity of critical habitats. The TOC also
                envisioned that project activities such as creating establishing and equipping new and existing protection
                stations, implementing alternative livelihoods activities, and conducting public awareness activities would
                result in outputs such as wildlife monitoring stations established, farmers participated in alternative livelihood
                activities, and public awareness activities reached target audiences, leading to intermediate outcomes, such
                as biodiversity friendly landscapes adjacent to protected areas expanded, and human-wildlife conflict
                in priority forest landscapes reduced. A critical assumption here was that biodiversity and wildlife
                conservation would have the buy-in of the communities in the project area. All the intermediate outcomes
                above would result in an outcome of ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in the
                priority ecological landscapes created. In the long-term, the outcome was expected to contribute to
                impacts, such as greener growth through sustainable natural resource management, and improved
                ecosystems management and biodiversity conservation.

                Outputs (based on the ICR, paragraphs 26 to 52 and Annex 1):

                      The Plan for Amur Tiger Habitat Conservation and Restoration was updated and presented to Jilin
                       Provincial Development and Reform Commission (DRC). In addition, a provincial-wide tiger
                       conservation management plan was submitted to Heilongjiang Provincial DRC for approval, thus
                       meeting the target for the preparation of the two plans.


                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



         o In Jilin province, the Plan for Amur Tiger Habitat Conservation and Restoration was endorsed
             by the provincial government and formed the basis for the provincial and national plans for the
             establishment of the National Park of Northeast Tiger and Leopard. Biodiversity and tiger
             conservation were integrated in the 13th Five-Year Plan, which was the first time in Jilin
             province and was a breakthrough in mainstreaming wildlife protection and integrating it into
             economic development.
          o In Heilongjiang province, the Amur Tiger Habitat Conservation Plan informed the provincial
             government to establish man-made ecological corridors to allow tigers, leopards, and their
             preys such as sika deer to migrate, where habitat fragments were not fully reintegrated. This
             was incorporated into the design of a national highway project (Danzhou-Acheng National
             Highway), which built three such corridors to allow wild animals to cross the highway and
             connect their habitats. Under the project, a Compensation Regulation for Wildlife Associated
             Conflicts in Heilongjiang was formulated and submitted to the provincial government. The
             Heilongjiang Nature Reserve Protection Plan was developed under the project to support the
             identification of and planning for priority habitat areas for tiger protection. Furthermore,
             three local regulations and measures were developed and implemented to facilitate the
             management and conservation of wildlife in Dongning County, and Muling and Laoyeling
             Nature Reserves, and their accompanying buffer zones. These documents also informed the
             pilot National Park of Northeast Tiger and Leopard.
    The Northeast China Advisory Committee for Tiger and Landscape Conservation was established,
     meeting the target.
    Three meetings were held to achieve cross-provincial collaboration with Russian counterparts, not
     meeting the target of four. The fourth meeting that was originally planned to be held towards the end
     of the project was cancelled due to implementation delays and the impact of COVID-19.
    319 Nature Reserves (NR) staff members in the provincial governments and the public-owned
     enterprise received training on effective management of NRs, exceeding the target of 296.
    An average management effectiveness score of four existing NRs was increased from the baseline of
     48.75 to the actual result of 77.5, exceeding the target of 60. A Management Effectiveness Tracking
     Tool (METT) was used to measure the management effectiveness of each NR. The METT included 68
     questions to measure all six elements of management identified in the International Union for
     Conservation of Nature World Commission on Protected Areas, that were, context, planning, inputs,
     process, outputs, and outcomes. The project supported NRs to update existing management plans
     and develop NR-specific implementation regulations by providing training and equipment.
     Improvements in the management effectiveness score for each NR were as follows.
          o At Hunchun NR, the management effectiveness score improved from the baseline of 60 to the
             actual result of 83, exceeding the target of 71.
          o At Wangqing NR, the management effectiveness score improved from the baseline of 51 to the
             actual result of 76, exceeding the target of 63.
          o At Muling NR, the management effectiveness score improved from the baseline of 48 to the
             actual result of 74, exceeding the target of 57.
          o At Laoyeling NR, the management effectiveness score improved from the baseline of 36 to the
             actual result of 78, exceeding the target of 47.
    Newly protected areas for tiger and other wildlife were 686 square kilometers (km2), not meeting the
     target of 866 km2. At appraisal, the indicator was designed to be measured by the total areas newly
     brought under Natural Reserve (NR) status in the three proposed areas: Tianqiaoling (500 km2),
     Lanjia (186 km2), and Niaoqingshan (180 km2). At project closing, Tianqiaoling Provincial NR was


                                                                                              Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



         newly established and Lanjia was newly integrated in the National Park of Northeast Tiger and
         Leopard.
        Percentage decrease in incidence of snares in defined sampling sites in the project area was 90
         percent, exceeding the target of 24 percent. Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tool (SMART) patrol
         techniques were applied during project implementation, removing a total of 70,500 snares for trapping
         animals (ICR, para 36).
        A cross-provincial, integrated technical monitoring program was established, meeting the target. The
         project financed installation of 1,260 infrared digital cameras. The integrated technical monitoring
         program enabled the two provinces and the Russian counterparts to coordinate in monitoring of key
         wildlife populations and their prey, associated habitat and other key environmental indicators including
         biodiversity richness. It also contributed to the national level wildlife monitoring system to guide and
         inform decisions on field activities and resource allocation. The monitoring data were collected by
         the forest bureaus and analyzed by the Feline Research Center, resulting in three reports: Species
         Diversity of Mammals, Field Survey of Ungulate Preys, and Monitoring of Population Dynamics and
         Spatial Distribution of Amur Tigers and Leopards, based on camera monitoring and field surveys from
         2017 to 2019 (three winters). In addition, the Feline Research Center used the project’s monitoring
         data to prepare a plan for building eight man-made ecological corridors, including four domestic ones
         and four International Sino-Russia corridors for the China Russia Cross-boundary Cooperation on
         Protected Areas Initiative that was initiated by the National Forestry and Grassland Administration.
        555 Forestry staff members (166 women) received training on implementation of SMART patrolling
         techniques for wildlife conservation, achieving twice the target of 274.
        28 wildlife monitoring stations were developed in areas adjacent to the project-supported NRs,
         meeting the target of 28 stations. The project supported the restoration and establishment of 26
         existing and two new forestry protection stations. Construction and equipping of 2 new and upgrading
         and equipping of 26 existing wildlife monitoring stations outside of project supported nature reserves.
        5,014 farmers received benefits derived from alternative livelihood support, exceeding the target of
         3,000 farmers. The communities adjacent to the NRs needed support to shift from traditional forest
         production and hunting of wild animals to biodiversity-friendly activities, such as beekeeping,
         cultivation of black fungi (Auricularia auricula-judae), medicinal plants, hazelnuts, ferns, and berries.
         The project provided training, extension service, financial support, identification, and implementation
         of alternative livelihoods, as well as compensation to mitigate human-wildlife conflicts. In addition, the
         project provided employment opportunities to the communities and farmers such as patrolling, anti-
         poaching activities and snare removals, field surveys, camera monitoring, and supplementary feeding.
        267,500 people participated in public awareness activities, which was more than three-fold the target
         of 75,000 people.
        Areas brought under enhanced biodiversity protection were 3,697 km2, increasing from the baseline
         of 0 km2 and meeting the target of 3,697 km2. Although the project reported the results of this
         indicator as an outcome, the indicator measured only output-level results, namely the area where the
         project activities of Sub-components 2a (increased management effectiveness in the existing NRs)
         and 2b (creation of new NRs) were implemented. The indicator (as defined) did not measure changes
         brought to the ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in the existing and new
         NRs.

In addition to the outputs in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs which
did not have any formal target.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)




      The National Park of Northeast Tiger and Leopard was established by the central government in
       August 2017, being informed by the project (ICR, para 49). The project activities to improve
       management effectiveness and carrying capacity were fully integrated into the management of the
       national park.
      275 feeding sites for wild animals established by the project implementation entities, providing about
       125,000 kg of fodder, grain, and salt (ICR, para 37). The video footages of animals feeding showed
       that the feeding sites supported the wild animals in wintertime.
      Sika deer breeding populations were introduced with support from the project in the Wangqing Nature
       Reserve in Jilin Province, which after rewilding would increase the population of ungulates in key
       habitats of tigers. The introduction was supported by a deer breeding center in Jincang Forest Farm
       that was established by the Wangqing Nature Reserve in June 2016, covering an area of 1,350 acres
       (ICR, para 37).

Outcomes:

      New areas outside existing protected areas managed in a biodiversity-friendly manner were 2,252
       km2, increasing from the baseline of 0 km2 and meeting the target of 2,252 km2. According to the
       Project Paper’s definition (para 32), “biodiversity-friendly” landscapes fulfilled the following criteria: (i)
       tree diversity achieved based on a broadleaf-conifer ratio of 50-60 percent broadleaf: 50-40 percent
       conifers; (ii) crown cover of 40 percent or greater; (iii) understory (i.e., shrub cover) not greater than
       10-20 percent; and (iv) cleared of snares. Promoting cultivation of broadleaf trees such as hazelnut
       trees for alternative livelihoods increased the percentage of broadleaf trees and contributed to
       improving the environment for wild animals to survive (ICR, para 35).

In addition to the outcome defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
outcomes which did not have any formal targets.

      The Feline Research Center (China’s center of excellence in this field internationally and a recognized
       center for technology and information exchange in feline conservation research) undertook an
       integrated technical monitoring program for the two provinces and with Russia, Results showed that
       the minimum number of individual Amur tigers recorded by cameras in a total survey area of 2,677
       km2 increased in three consecutive years during the project: 15 (including 2 cubs) in 2017, 22
       (including 4 cubs) in 2018, and 28 (including 5 cubs) in 2019 (ICR, para 39). The increasing number of
       cubs indicated a healthy and positive trajectory of stable growth of wild animal population.
      Based on the monitoring data from 2015 to 2019 in Jilin Province (where close to 90 percent of the
       Amur tigers in China are located) (ICR, para 40) the following achievements were measured:
             o The Amur tiger population more than doubled in the four years, increasing from 7 to 16.
             o The activity frequency of the Amur tiger captured by cameras increased almost five-fold from
               45 times in the spring of 2015 to 216 in the spring of 2019.
             o The richness of ungulate preys (i.e., wild boars, roe deer, and sika deer) measured by the
               Relative Abundance Index increased 1.8 times in the four years.
      The farmers’ attitude to restricted access to the nature reserves changed to support for nature
       reserves and biodiversity conservation, based on interviews of farmers living in proximity to project-
       supported reserves during the ICR mission and third-party social impact monitoring reports (ICR, para
       45).
      Increases in household income were measured among project beneficiaries who participated in the
       alternative livelihood activities on beekeeping and black fungi cultivation. According to the Project

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



                                   Management Offices’ progress reports and the borrower’s Project Completion Report, beekeepers
                                   increased their household incomes by approximately US$1,200 per year on average; likewise, black
                                   fungi producers increased their household incomes by approximately 30 percent (ICR, para 46). The
                                   communities’ market access was also improved through training to sustain their livelihood and
                                   income. After the project ended, some of these activities were continued under funding from domestic
                                   programs including the Native Forest Protection Program, the eco-compensation system, and the
                                   compensation fund for commercial natural forest logging ban.

                            Summary. The project’s outputs and outcomes show that the project has helped create the ecological
                            conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in priority ecological landscapes in the far northeast territory
                            of China (Heilongjiang and Jilin). The efficacy with which the project has achieved the project’s objective is
                            rated by this review as high.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As described above, the extent to which the project’s objective was achieved is rated high because the
                            efficacy of the evidence of the project’s outcomes was high based on credible measurements by an
                            internationally respected research institution.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   No economic or financial analysis was conducted at appraisal and project closing. A small Recipient-Executed
   Trust Fund (RETF) which amounted below US$3 million was not required to conduct economic or financial
   analysis as per the small RETF guidelines. Moreover, the GEF grant was used primarily for covering the costs of
   technical assistance, training, patrolling, and purchase of equipment for the protected areas.

   Efficiency of Project Management: The total cost for Component 4 on project management and M&E was
   US$0.67 million, which accounted for only 3 percent of the total project cost of US$20.82 million (ICR, page 44).
   The project built provincial-level project management offices based on the existing structures of the Forestry
   sector, which saved costs and contributed to internalize institutional capacity building. In addition, the project
   implemented the US$17.8 million of counterpart funded activities, which achieved a leveraging effect for a
   relatively small GEF grant financing.


                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



Aspects of Project Design and Implementation that Affected Efficiency: There were a few aspects of the
project’s design that negatively affected its efficiency at project initiation, as described in Section 8.a of this
review. Implementation efficiency was, however, problematic. At the design stage, the project duration was
planned to be four years to ensure effective implementation, but it was cut to three years due to the prolonged
GEF approval process. However, during implementation, delays were caused by a number of factors beyond the
project’s control: (i) the central government’s regulation issued in 2016 to separate new project accounts from
the existing ones, delaying the establishment of its designated account by 10 months; (ii) the lengthy institutional
reform process which lasted between 2018-2019 and impeded implementation at the provincial and local levels,
especially in Heilongjiang province; and (iii) the COVID-19 outbreak starting in January 2020, which made it
impossible to complete the remaining activities as planned by March 31, 2020, including the finalization of field
surveys, infrared camera monitoring, alternative livelihood support, community awareness building, and study
tours. In total, the project duration was extended for 18 months beyond the original three years.

No economic or financial analysis of the project was conducted by the ICR in line with the guidelines for the
reporting on small RETFs. The project management cost accounted for 3 percent of the total project cost,
suggesting cost-effectiveness. The project was completed with a reasonable length of extension, considering
the external factors that affected implementation efficiency.

Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was substantial, as it was well aligned with the Government’s national plans and
programs and the World Bank’s country assistance strategies, but at a low level of ambition considering the
objective’s importance. The efficacy with which the objective was achieved was high, as the project more than
fully achieved its objective and supported the national program which scaled up the project results to enhance
biodiversity and wildlife conservation further than anticipated. Efficiency was substantial, as the project’s
management was cost-effective. Overall, there were minor shortcomings in the project’s relevance and
efficiency and its overall outcome is therefore rated satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were the following risks to the sustainability of the achieved results presented in the ICR:

Social Risk: There was a risk that human-wild life conflicts might be observed after the project closed. To
mitigate the risk, the project provided the farmers with awareness raising activities and employment
opportunities to co-manage the nature reserves and the national parks. After project closing, some of the
alternative livelihood activities were continued under funding from domestic programs to minimize any
potential human-wildlife conflicts.

Financial Risk: There was a risk that the alternative livelihoods activities might not be sustained financially
after the project support ended. Even though the financial viability of farmers’ activities were expected to
remain satisfactory, market prospects for the higher-value agricultural produce and non-timber forest
products could be affected by downward pressure on market prices due to over-supply. To mitigate the risk,
local authorities and farmers in the project areas developed strong market awareness and gained the skills
and flexibility to manage the risk. The National Park of Northeast Tiger and Leopard and other domestic
programs including poverty reduction programs also focused on community development and alternative
livelihoods to improve the sustainability of farmers’ livelihoods.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s strategic relevance and approach at appraisal were adequate and responsive to issues of
  national, provincial, and local priority. Preparation and appraisal of technical aspects were well
  conducted, as the World Bank provided international experience, engaged the Government in the
  integrated landscape approach, and incorporated innovations and social benefits into the project design.
  The environmental and social aspects were assessed and addressed by mitigation plans during
  preparation. The implementation arrangements for M&E were strong, which established a cross-
  provincial, integrated technical monitoring system. On the other hand, the national, provincial, and local
  Project Management Offices (PMOs) were all new to World Bank-assisted projects and thus lacked
  experience in project and fiduciary management. It took quite some time for the series of training and
  capacity-building activities held during project preparation and implementation for the PMOs to learn the
  World Bank’s procedures and gain a deep understanding of the project objectives and approach.
  Insufficient communication between the World Bank team and the PMOs during preparation and early
  implementation resulted in some of the above issues not being clarified with a mutual understanding until
  after the MTR (ICR, para 73). Moreover, the project design allocated no grant funding to operate the
  National PMO and implement the alternative livelihood activities, which hindered a smooth start-up (ICR,


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



  para 69). Overall, the quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory, but only marginally so because of
  the weak arrangements for project implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team maintained a focus on development impact during implementation, consistently
 emphasizing the targeted outcomes and the innovations being tested under the project. Supervision inputs
 and processes were not fully adequate in early periods until the Mid-Term Review (MTR) in terms of level
 of support, frequency of field visits, and communication with the clients. Based on the recommendations in
 the MTR, the World Bank team undertook more frequent and closer interactions with the client, paid more
 visits to the project sites, held frequent audio meetings in between physical missions, and provided hands-
 on support to help solve the problems on time, which built an effective and trusting working relationship.
 The World Bank team also facilitated coordination among the relevant agencies, such as the National
 PMO, provincial finance bureaus, provincial forestry departments, the Feline Research Center, and the
 audit office to address challenges regarding staffing, counterpart funding, financial management,
 reimbursement, and monitoring. The World Bank team also ensured that the M&E implementation was
 financed by the grant when there was a gap in the counterpart funding in 2019 after the second extension
 of the closing date. Performance reporting such as Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and Results
 Reports were candid in flagging key bottlenecks that needed to be resolved. The supervision of fiduciary
 and safeguard aspects involved specialists in financial management, procurement, and social and
 environmental safeguards, who participated in the missions consistently. Overall, considering the improved
 supervision and support to the project after the MTR, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The cross-provincial, integrated technical monitoring system to monitor the tiger population, habitat, and
 prey was designed and implemented by the Feline Research Center. As the ICR noted, establishment of
 such a sophisticated technical monitoring system was not common for a small Recipient Executed Trust
 Fund project (para. 78). Performance monitoring of project implementation was undertaken by the
 provincial PMO, with inputs from the local PMOs and project entities and with the assistance of
 implementation support consultants. On the other hand, the Theory of Change was not well elaborated
 especially regarding the institution building aspects of the project, and thus not adequately reflected in the

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



 Results Framework. The formulation of the PDO was weak, as the word “help” made it vague as to what
 extent the project aimed at creating the ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity by
 project closing. The PDO indicators did not clarify the project’s expected outcomes either, as they only
 called for “enhanced biodiversity protection” in project nature reserves and “biodiversity-friendly”
 management of areas outside the nature reserves (ICR, para 10). Moreover, the formulation of the PDO
 indicators did not measure what changes were necessary in the ecological conditions for recovery of
 threatened biodiversity in the existing and new Nature Reserves.



b. M&E Implementation
  All the indicators in the Results Framework were measured and reported. Regarding the M&E
  implementation arrangements, the National PMO provided oversight and coordination, while the
  Provincial PMOs were responsible for day-to-day project performance monitoring and technical
  monitoring of biodiversity and ecosystem status. All the responsible agencies ensured attention to
  effective M&E implementation. The M&E functions and processes for the integrated technical monitoring
  system were likely to be sustained after project closing, as these were adopted by the pilot National Park
  of Northeast Tiger and Leopard at various locations and financed under its budget and other domestic
  and international sources of funding.

  The additional information on M&E implementation in the following paragraph was included in comments
  from the World Bank’s project team on the draft ICRR.

  The Bank's project team advised IEG that to collect data for the integrated technical monitoring system,
  two field surveys were conducted from 2017 - 2019, as well as a series of fixed, automatic camera traps
  were run biannually for six month per year (cumulatively 18 months of data). The Spatial Monitoring and
  Reporting Tool (SMART) system collected and consolidated data with 580 continuous monitoring sites
  and 1,260 infrared digital cameras, covering a total survey area of 2,677 km2. In addition, the two field
  surveys collected 360 samples covering 2,424 km2 and an overall sampling intensity of about 37.7 km
  per 100 km2. A total of 2,004 Amur tiger image data (427 videos and 1,577 photos) were collected. In the
  end, 80 percent of the Amur tigers in China were captured on camera and almost all of them were
  identified individually. The field surveys were carried out in winter when the temperature could be as low
  as -30 degrees centigrade in the project areas. Just to install, maintain and replace the cameras were a
  tremendous effort, let alone the heavy work to fetch the data from each camera, screening the data to
  ensure quality, and analyzing the large amount of data. A 35 people specialist team in the Feline Center
  was involved in the M&E work. Cumulatively the actual time spent on data collection, processing and
  analysis was more than two solid years.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders to guide resource allocation and
  decision-making. The data from the integrated technical monitoring system were used to provide
  evidence of achievement of outcomes that were not fully captured by the Results Framework. The
  technical monitoring data were also used as firsthand information to produce reports during
  implementation and expected to be further utilized for scientific research in the future. The counterparts
  involved top national experts for Northeast tiger protection, and adopted an international methodology
  working closely with the Russian and other international experts through international workshops, study

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



  tours, joint patrol and contests, and signing a cooperation MOU, with an aim to further utilize the M&E
  findings as firsthand information for scientific research and other similar programs in China and
  internationally (Bank project team comments to IEG).

  The shortcomings of the M&E design were well compensated by establishing a partnership with the
  FRC, which provided high-quality biodiversity data that were collected in extremely difficult conditions
  and analyzed in their integrated technical monitoring system. The M&E implementation was adequate to
  generate M&E findings that were disseminated and used to inform the direction of the project, strategy
  development, and a future pilot program. The project also led to a successful international collaboration
  with long term potential benefits for increased biodiversity in northern China. Based on these
  achievements M&E quality at the project's close is rated high.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was given an Environmental Assessment Category B. The
   triggered safeguards policies were: Environment Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04),
   Forests (OP 4.36), and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The prepared mitigation measures were an
   Environmental and Social Assessment including an Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for
   OP 4.01, 4.04, and 4.36, an integrated Pest Management Plan (PMP) for OP 4.09. These safeguards
   documents were disclosed locally in March 2015 and at the World Bank’s InfoShop in April 2015. Both the
   ESMP and PMP were implemented in compliance with the guidelines and requirements (ICR, para 79). No
   Occupational Health and Safety incidents in relation to project activities were found or reported throughout
   project implementation.

   Social Safeguards: The project triggered both World Bank Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework, a Process Framework, and a Social
   Assessment including a Social Management Plan were prepared during the project preparation. An Ethnic
   Minority Development Plan and Social Action Plan were also prepared, which included detailed and specific
   measures to help affected indigenous people (i.e., Xian people) restore their incomes and develop
   alternative livelihoods. During implementation, a third-party external monitor assessed the social impact on
   local communities and the implementation status of public consultations and alternative livelihood
   measures. The external monitoring reports showed that wildlife damage cases increased due to the
   increasing presence of wildlife and confirmed that the wildlife damage cases were verified and
   compensated in accordance with local regulations of Hunchun in 2019. At project closing, the
   project completion reports from all the three Provincial Project Management Units confirmed that the project
   did not involve any land acquisition and resettlement, nor did it introduce any direct negative social impacts
   in the local communities and ethnic minority villages (ICR, para 89). However, no explicit statement was
   made in the ICR about compliance with social safeguards.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: In early periods of implementation, there were issues with financial management
   including delays in establishing the project’s designated account and in submitting withdrawal applications,
   due to insufficient information flows and clarifications from the World Bank to the client to compensate for
   the Implementing Agencies’ unfamiliarity with the World Bank’s operational procedures and guidelines. The
   grant disbursement had reached only 10 percent at that time of the Mid-Term Review mission in November
   2017 (ICR, para 75). These issues were eventually resolved through the World Bank’s improved
   implementation support, concerted efforts by all the relevant parties, training on financial management, and
   implementation support. The provincial project management units ensured that grant proceeds were being
   used for the intended purposes and for project implementation progress. Financial reports were submitted
   in a timely manner. External audits had no qualified opinions.

   Procurement: Throughout implementation, procurement was conducted in line with the World Bank’s
   guidelines. Annual procurement plans were prepared and updated. The World Bank provided training and
   hands-on support to the three Project Management Offices in contracting consultants and goods
   procurement and worked with them to help shorten the preparation and review time and processes while
   strengthening quality assurance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were reported in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               The Quality at Entry was
                                                                               “moderately satisfactory” due to
                                                                               the insufficient identification and
                                                                               support during preparation and
                                                                               early implementation to fill in the
                                                                               capacity gaps of the PMOs on
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   project and fiduciary
                                                                               managemnet. The Quality of
                                                                               Supervision was satisfactory.
                                                                               Overall, the Bank Performance
                                                                               is rated moderately satisfactory
                                                                               according to the harmonized
                                                                               guidelines.

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided five lessons. Some of them are summarized below because they may provide
lessons of interests for other biodiversity projects.

Collaborative communication between the Bank and stakeholders can ensure constructive
commitment and re-start stalled project implementation. In early years, this project’s limited
grant financing and lengthy preparation process made it challenging to attract the attention and
maintain commitment of the participating entities and higher-level authorities. According to the ICR,
despite the initial communication challenges and delays, the World Bank team cultivated a closer
communication with the Government and later established an effective working relationship based
on trust and respect (para 95). At project closing, the project successfully completed the US$17.82
million project which also led to the Government establishing the new National Park of Northeast
Tiger and Leopard with a total area of 14,600 km2, which was almost fourfold of the original project
area of 3,697 km2.

The participation of a high-level independent research institution can lend credibility to a
project’s monitoring and evaluation. In this project, the Feline Research Center in China, which
was an internationally recognized center for technology and information exchange in feline
conservation research, supported the design and implementation of the integrated monitoring
program. It generated monitoring data and evidence-based analysis that were used to monitor tiger
and other key wildlife populations and their prey and habitat, informed resource allocation and
decision-making, and facilitated international cooperation. The Center contributed to improved
conservation of habitat protection and recovery of biodiversity through using the monitoring data to
guide SMART patrol and field surveys, which played a critical role in increasing effectiveness of
habitat protection. Moreover, it provided important inputs and capacity building for the national
monitoring systems which formed the basis for future scientific research.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is candid and generally outcome oriented. The report
follows the majority of the guidelines, makes attempts to triangulate data to reach concise conclusions where
possible, and is focused on results. The quality of evidence and analysis is aligned to the messages outlined in
the ICR.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conser (P122383)



On the other hand, the Theory of Change presented in the ICR (page 6) does not articulate causal relationships
from inputs, outputs, and outcomes, which does not help the reader to understand the expected outcomes of
the project to create the ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity within the project
implementation period. The ICR’s lessons are largely focused on implementation issues with little focus on
development results. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 17 of 17
