     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022725

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150058                                    Renovation of General Education Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56910                                  31-Dec-2020                                        16,544,123.53

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2015                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            77,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             14,186,010.92                                             0.00

 Actual                                         16,544,123.53                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7), the
   project objective was as follows:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



         To raise student learning outcomes by: (i) revising and implementing the curriculum following a
          competency-based approach; and (ii) improving the effectiveness of instruction by creating and
          disseminating textbooks aligned with the revised curriculum.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Curriculum Development (Appraisal: US$17.5 million; Actual: US$10.46 million): This
   component aimed to support the development and implementation of a revised competency-based
   curriculum for all school subjects from grades 1 to 12. Activities included: establishing a Core Technical
   Committee (CTC) and up to 11 Subject-Specific Technical Committees (SSTCs) to lead the curriculum
   changes; piloting the new curriculum; providing training to teachers and "Curriculum Champions" who act as
   peer coaches for fellow teachers; and developing guidance materials for publishers of textbooks and other
   pedagogical materials.

   Component 2: Development and Dissemination of Aligned Textbooks (Appraisal: US$21.6 million; Actual:
   US$0.48 million): This component aimed to support the development of revised textbooks and pedagogical
   materials. Activities included: developing textbooks in alignment with the new learning outcome standards
   upon completion and official adoption of the new curriculum by the Ministry of Education (MOET);
   translating several textbooks into ethnic minority languages; and providing textbooks to schools with high
   numbers of economically disadvantaged students.

   Component 3: Learning Assessment and Analysis for Continuous Improvement of Curriculum and Policy
   (Appraisal: US$35.4 million; Actual: US$5.48 million): This component aimed to improve and expand the
   national learning assessment system and research capacity to inform education policy. Activities included:
   establishing multiple sites for the National Centre for Sustainable Development of General Education
   (NCSDGEQ) and the National Center for Foreign Language Testing (NCFLT), which were designed to
   advance research in areas related to curriculum, assessment, and learning, and to provide research and
   training for teaching and learning of foreign languages; improving the coverage and quality of the national
   assessment system; and promoting public awareness of the reform process.

   Component 4: Project Management (Appraisal: US$2.5 million; Actual: US$0.12 million): This component
   was to support project management and monitoring.



   At a December 2020 restructuring, US$60.46 million of the IDA financing was cancelled due to two main
   activities that were not implemented: textbook development (including bilingual textbooks and textbook
   distribution to disadvantaged schools) and construction of the NCSDGEQ and NCFLT (including their
   associated research and capacity building activities).




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 77.0 million. This was later revised to US$ 14.2 million, with
           an actual cost of US$ 16.5 million.

   Financing

         The project was to be financed entirely by an IDA Credit of US$ 77.0 million. This was later revised
           to US$ 14.2 million, with an actual disbursement of US$16.5 million.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         December 2020: The project was restructured such that US$60.46 million of the IDA financing was
           cancelled due to significant implementation delays and changes in implementation arrangements
           (the project became effective 13.5 months after approval due to a delay in countersigning; the rollout
           of the new curriculum was postponed to September 2020; the national assessment was also
           postponed to 2020; and the MOET withdrew from the construction of the NCSDGEQ and NCFLT).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Vietnam has been experiencing robust economic growth and a stable macroeconomic environment;
however, its global competitiveness is weak due to low-value-added products and modest technology.
Investment in education has been identified as a key pathway for structural transformation of the economy
from rural, small-holder agriculture to urban employment. While the country has achieved universal primary
and lower secondary education, there remain disparities in access, particularly for disadvantaged and
minority ethnic groups, and low quality in primary education (for example, previous large-scale Grade 5
reading assessments indicated inadequate abilities for the poorest students to write at the level expected
for their age). Moreover, employers report challenges in hiring new workers with adequate skills, such as
the ability to think critically, solve problems, and communicate verbally. Previous attempts by the



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



               government to reform the curriculum towards more active learning fell short due to unclear and inconsistent
               standards and lack of coordination among all curricula (by subject and by grade).

               The government’s recent social and economic development plans (2012-2016, 2016-2020) identified the
               development of high quality human resources as a key action, to be measured by improved education
               quality and outcomes. More specifically, the 2014 Resolution – the “Reform of General Education
               Curriculum and Textbooks after 2015” – aimed to develop key qualities, competencies, and skills for all
               graduates as 21st century citizens, and the 2019 Education Law further institutionalized the government’s
               shift from content-based to competency-based education.

               The Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (FY 2012-16), in place at the time of project appraisal,
               identified improved basic public service delivery and access (including education) as a key outcome, with
               Grade 5 learning outcomes as a key indicator. The more recent Country Partnership Framework (FY 18-
               22), however, shifts the focus of education priorities to labor market readiness through the tertiary education
               sector. The relevance of the objectives is therefore rated High, although it is noted that the objective
               statement did not specify the project's focus on the basic education sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Raise student learning outcomes

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear, although the means to achieve the intended outcome (to raise student
                             learning outcomes) was narrowly focused on curriculum without addressing other factors that could
                             also affect student learning outcomes (i.e. class size, classroom management, school leadership). The key
                             outputs were a revised competency-based curriculum and accompanying textbooks. The intermediate
                             outcomes of increased teacher capacity to deliver the new curriculum and increased access to the learning
                             materials by disadvantaged school children were important intermediate elements of the results chain that
                             would contribute to the intended outcome to raise student learning outcomes. The link between the activity
                             to establish learning assessment and research centers (which would have accounted for about half of the
                             appraised project cost) and the intended outcome to raise learning outcomes was less direct and likely
                             outside the time frame of the project period.



                             Outputs


                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 13
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)




     Establishment of a CTC and 17 SSTCs, which led the development of the new curriculum and online
        teacher training tools. CTC members had an average of 35.17 years of relevant professional
        experience (target: 15 years). The CTC and SSTCs also drafted guidance materials for textbook
        publishers on textbooks and other pedagogical materials.
       Development, pilot, and rollout of the new curriculum. The MOET endorsed and launched 29 new
        competency-based school curricula consisting of a general curriculum and 20 subject-specific
        curricula in December 2018, which were then piloted in 1,165 classrooms in 48 schools at three grade
        levels (grades 3, 8, and 12). The new curriculum was rolled out to the first full cohort of grade 1
        students across the country in the 2020–2021 school year. Due to the initial delays, the full rollout to
        all grade levels is expected to be completed in the 2024-25 school year.
       Training of 151,930 teachers on the new competency-based approach, although only a small
        proportion was directly financed through the project. This represented about 40% of all primary
        teachers. Teacher training was delivered through professional development modules to increase
        understanding of the curriculum and its implications for classroom practices and learning
        assessments. 21,320 “Curriculum Champions” were identified, who were supporting their peers to
        implement the new curriculum (target: 8,000). According to the ICR (page 17), an online teacher
        satisfaction survey showed a high level of satisfaction with the modules among the respondents,
        including in areas such as the usefulness of the modules in classroom applications and their
        contribution to improving student learning. Of the 433,325 teachers who participated in the online
        satisfaction survey, 418,600 (96.6%) responded favorably to the survey questions regarding the
        usefulness of the modules, with an average score of 3.26 (out of 5), and 417,814 (96.4%) provided
        positive responses to statements regarding the contribution of the modules to enhancing student
        learning experiences and results, also with an average score of 3.26.
       Production of 110 new textbooks for nine subjects at the primary level (for grades 1 and 2) and for 12
        subjects at the secondary level (for grade 6). The project supported the development of training
        materials for textbook appraisers and detailed guidance for textbook appraisal, including quality
        standards, criteria, and indicators for textbooks.
       Completion of one round of the National Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA), including training of
        researchers, teachers, administrators, and experts from the Vietnam Institute of Educational Sciences.
        The NLSA for primary, lower, and upper secondary education was administered to twelve nationally
        representative samples of grades 5, 9, and 12 students on fourteen subject exams during June and
        July 2020. Because of the delays in launching the NLSA, only one round was completed during the
        project period.

However,

     Textbook production was dropped, due to a government decision to use private funds rather than IDA
      funds for textbooks. MOET’s initial attempts to procure a large group of individual textbook writers and
      editors did not succeed (175 candidates were selected and contacted to negotiate contracts, but the
      negotiations were unsuccessful as most of the selected candidates were already under contract with
      publishers for textbook compilation). Instead, the government chose to take on a textbook appraisal
      role to ensure quality and alignment with the new curriculum. Therefore, the project provided support
      to identify measures to monitor the quality of textbooks and increase transparency in textbook
      selection.
     Textbook distribution to disadvantaged schools was dropped, due to a new government policy stating
      that all students should be provided with books, notebooks, and school supplies by parents, schools,


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



                                     or local authorities. Instead, the government suggested that disadvantaged schools provide textbooks
                                     that could be borrowed from libraries.
                                    The online learning management system was dropped.
                                    Bilingual textbook development was dropped.
                                    Construction/establishment of national learning assessment centers was dropped, due to substantial
                                     delays in civil works procurement processes.
                                    Research and analysis on learning assessment and curriculum development were not carried out.



                            Outcomes

                                  Student learning gains in math and Vietnamese language were not measured, due to delays in
                                   administering the NLSA such that only the baseline round was conducted. However, ex-post field
                                   surveys by the Bank team in two provinces indicated the following improvements among grade 1
                                   students (ICR, page 15): According to teachers’ evaluations of student reading comprehension, by
                                   the 19th–23rd week of the 2020–2021 school year after the new curriculum was rolled out that
                                   previous September, the majority of students who had finished learning syllables could pronounce
                                   them clearly and read well, and by the end of the first semester in January 2021, many children could
                                   read materials (i.e., reference and additional learning materials, excluding textbooks) other than the
                                   first-grade Vietnamese books that were part of the curriculum. In math, teachers commented that
                                   students who had been engaging in various creative and experiential activities under the new
                                   curriculum exhibited confidence and speed in the area of communication skills.
                                  The proportion of teachers implementing the new curriculum was not measured, although
                                   approximately 40% of primary teachers were deemed qualified to teach the new curriculum,
                                   surpassing the target of 25%. However, while the project provided the training materials, the training
                                   itself was funded almost entirely by another Bank project and by provincial committees.
                                  Improvements in the student:textbook ratio in the bottom ten percent of schools (according to income
                                   distribution) were not measured, due to dropping of the relevant activities.

                            In addition, the ICR (page 12) suggested that mobilizing private sector financing for textbook development,
                            rather than utilizing IDA funds as originally planned, was a better way to support the government's new
                            multiple-textbook policy. By developing the MOET's capacity as a textbook appraiser, private
                            publishers strengthened their capacity as textbook developers, and schools put more focus on curriculum
                            intent rather than on textbooks (i.e. teaching to the exam).



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



  Achievement of the objective to raise student learning outcomes is rated Modest due to significant shortfalls
  in implementing key outputs (i.e. textbook production and distribution, construction of learning centers,
  learning assessments and research) and lack of sufficient evidence on increased student academic scores or
  on increased access to the new curriculum for disadvantaged students.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
  Modest                                                    Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, page 17) provided the economic basis for the project, including
benefits directly deriving from improved student cognitive ability and hence increased ability of workers to be
more effective and efficient over the course of their working lives due to the larger and more coherent set of
knowledge and skills they possess -- in other words, increased labor productivity. The costs are calculated as
project costs. Under different scenarios for the extent to which wages would increase, the cost-benefit analysis
showed that the internal rate of return (IRR) ranges from 19.86 % to 27.2%, and the benefit:cost ratio ranges
from 2.67 to 6.84.

The economic analysis at completion (ICR, Annex 4) updated the cost-benefit analysis with the number of
students benefiting from the new curriculum under the new rollout schedule and the opportunity costs
associated with cancelled project funds. The IRR ranged from 1.24% to 27%, with a net present value of US$
81.5 million.

The project implementation period was marked by significant delays and policy changes that lead to shortfalls
in activities completed. The amount of time elapsed between project approval and effectiveness was 13.5
months, the MOET's approval of the new curriculum did not take place until December 2018, the National
Assembly cancelled the use of IDA funds for textbook development, and the MOET’s extensive internal review
process caused significant delays in implementation. The project was able to disburse only about 21.5%
(US$16.54 million) of what was planned, leading to the cancellation of US$60.46 million from the original
committed credit amount of US$77 million, thereby indicating negligible efficiency.




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 27.20
                                                                                      Not Applicable

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              27.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on High relevance (due to strong alignment with country conditions, country education strategy, and
Bank country strategy), Modest efficacy (due to low achievement of outcomes) and Negligible efficiency (due to
significant implementation delays and low disbursement), the overall outcome is rated Unsatisfactory, indicating
major shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The original set of activities for the project was significantly reduced and the timeline of key outputs was
delayed; however, the overall trajectory of project implementation remained supportive of intended changes
to the general education system in Vietnam. The development of the new competency-based curriculum and
the related teacher training, as well as the development of the NLSA, are highly likely to contribute to the
intended outcome to raise student learning outcomes. As noted in the ICR, these activities laid the
necessary foundation for moving forward with education reforms. Government policies remain supportive of
such reforms, including full rollout of the new curriculum by the 2024-25 school year.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design centered on curriculum reform, a technically complex effort that involved a significant level
  of risk. Readiness to initiate the reforms was facilitated by the country's recent participation in Russian
  Education Aid for Development (READ) capacity development activities, including technical advice from
  experts and practitioners on curriculum and learning assessment reform processes. Also, project design
  drew on lessons from the country's previous attempt at curriculum reform (toward more student-centered
  and active, collaborative learning), which had failed due to lack of coherence and clarity in the endorsed
  principles. However, the risk assessment did not adequately take into consideration the political climate,
  which ultimately impacted project implementation: according to the ICR (page 27), "there was already a
  sign of challenges during the project preparation in navigating the possible ramifications of political
  decisions on the curriculum reform. The MOET expressed its reservations about pushing through the
  project approval without the National Assembly’s official endorsement of the curriculum reform. Even
  after the approval by the Board in June 2015, the Ministry of Finance and Vietnamese president also
  voiced their dissent in relation to the use of IDA funds for the project on the grounds that ODA resources

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



  should be utilized only for interventions for which national funds or expertise were inadequate or
  unavailable." The timetable was also overly ambitious, considering that curriculum reform is highly
  technical and politically sensitive. Lastly, as noted in the ICR (page 28), the results framework had
  shortcomings in that the level of ambition for some of the key project indicators (25% of teachers trained
  and equipped to teach new curriculum, 10% increase in student: textbook ratio for ethnic minority
  students) would have been of insufficient magnitude to achieve the intended outcomes.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 As discussed above, project implementation faced many challenges due to conflicts between initially
 planned activities and government policies, including in textbook distribution to disadvantaged groups, use
 of public funds for textbook development, and use of IDA funds for technical assistance. Also, despite the
 Bank team's repeated guidance, there was no systematic communication plan in place for the curriculum
 reform activities; such a plan was critical for garnering support and buy-in from multiple stakeholders. For
 example, at the time of the mid-term review, a qualified communication consultant still had not been hired.
 Although communication activities were being conducted toward the end of the project period, strategies in
 place at an earlier stage might have facilitated project implementation. The lack of coordination among the
 various stakeholders also prevented a more timely project restructuring, despite the Bank team's
 concerted efforts. Lastly, the ICR (page 36) noted some inconsistencies in the submission of
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), especially in the first two years of project
 implementation. ISRs were submitted to management prior to the planned missions with an indication that
 updates, including performance ratings, would be provided at the conclusion of the missions; however, no
 updates or revisions were actually submitted.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were shortcomings in M&E design, including the selection of indicators and targets. The key
 outcome indicator - increased scores in math and Vietnamese - was unlikely to be directly and immediately
 impacted during the short timeframe of the project, given the multiple activities that needed to be completed
 in sequence (curriculum revisions, textbook development, teacher training, learning assessments based on

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



 new competency-based curriculum). Also, targets for the two other key outcome indicators - 25% teachers
 prepared for new curriculum and 10% improvement in student:textbook ratio for disadvantaged populations
 - were of insufficient magnitude to produce the intended outcomes. M&E arrangements largely relied on the
 establishment of the national learning assessment system, but again the timeline for conducting the
 baseline and endline assessments was overly ambitious.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project management and Bank teams made concerted efforts to revise the data collection
  methodology, given the significant changes in government policy and project design. In the absence of
  timely baseline data for learning assessment, or any endline data, ex-post field surveys were conducted
  in six provinces. The surveys were to identify any challenges in implementing the new curriculum in grade
  1 and thereby inform the curriculum roll-out for other grades. An impact evaluation study was also
  planned to replace the national assessments, but due to delays in finalizing the design of the study, it was
  not completed.



c. M&E Utilization
  The delays in revising the definitions of some indicators and finalizing methodologies to set the
  baselines and targets limited the usefulness of the M&E data in measuring achievements and informing
  project implementation decisions. The inability to complete the impact evaluation study also prevented
  full evaluation of the impact of the new curriculum on student learning outcomes. Nonetheless, there
  were adequate M&E data available to enable some assessment of project achievements.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to planned civil works
   (construction of national assessment and research centers), triggering the safeguard on Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). An Environmental and Social Management Plan was developed. However, the
   civil works were subsequently cancelled. Project performance with regards to environmental safeguards
   was rated satisfactory throughout the project period.

   The safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) was also triggered due to potential barriers
   related to curriculum and textbooks for ethnic minorities. A bias avoidance framework was developed, which
   was included in the curriculum and textbook development process. However, the bilingual textbook activity
   was dropped, although the curricula for eight ethnic minority languages was developed.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: According to the ICR (page 34), the project complied with all fiduciary
   requirements, including (a) timely submission of the interim financial reports; (b) internal and external
   audits carried out per the Bank’s recommendations; and (c) unqualified audits with no major control or
   accountability issues raised.

   Procurement: The project was in compliance with the Bank’s procurement guidelines and policies
   throughout the implementation period. However, there were consistent delays in the procurement of goods
   and technical assistance services and contracts implementation, and the procurement packages for
   textbook development and the construction of the NCSDGEQ and NCFLT were cancelled, leading to
   overall low disbursement for the project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (page 38) and adapted by IEG:

      The lack of an effective communications plan to go hand-in-hand with a complex reform
         process can undermine decision-making and collaboration among key stakeholders and lead
         to diminished outcomes. In the case of this project, there was no well-defined communication
         strategy nor was the staffing of critical communications specialists ensured early in the
         project period. Given the multiplicity of stakeholders in the curriculum reform process,
         changes in policies and interference from divergent interests caused significant delays and
         disruptions to project implementation.

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)



         Ensuring that there is an institutional mechanism to promote coordination among various
          stakeholders can mitigate risks such as unforeseen shifts in government policies. In the case
          of this project, the significant shift in textbook development and distribution policies meant
          adjustments in implementation arrangements, new roles for private textbook publishers and
          authors, and new expectations for schools and parents, all of which lead to delays and
          disruptions to project implementation.

Also,

         A PDO outcome that is too far removed in the results chain from the direct project
          interventions can make measurement and attribution challenging. In the case of this project,
          there were multiple key steps in the results chain (curriculum revision, textbook development,
          teacher training, learning assessments based on the revised curriculum, establishment of
          learning and research centers) that made it less likely that improved student learning
          outcomes would be realized (and measurable) during the tight project time frame.
         M&E design that develops a comprehensive assessment system as part project design but
          then relies on that system to measure project outcomes can be problematic. In the case of
          this project, the learning assessment system was to be constructed as part of project
          activities but needed to wait for curriculum revisions and design of the new learning
          assessments. The baseline assessment was therefore conducted late in the project period,
          and an endline assessment was never carried out.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and straightforward. It was candid about the project implementation experience within the
challenging political/policy environment, including areas where the Bank could have better anticipated the
challenges. Despite the significant shortfalls in implementation and numerous dropped activities, the ICR
provided sufficient evidence to assess the project's achievements. Within the context of unsatisfactory
outcomes, the ICR put appropriate focus on how the project contributed to laying the foundations for further
developments in the education sector.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
        Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)




                                                                                 Page 13 of 13
