     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022639

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P143914                                    GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Gabon                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16689                                   30-Apr-2020                                           7,067,669.10

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Mar-2014                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             7,521,000.00                                    7,521,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              7,521,000.00                                    7,067,669.10

 Actual                                          7,125,048.14                                    7,067,669.10




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa                April B. Connelly            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective/global environment objective (PDO/GEO) of the project was to enhance
   protection of biodiversity in selected forested wetlands on the Ramsar List through knowledge creation and
   development of conservation measures for sustainable wetlands management (Grant Agreement, Schedule
   1, page 6). The formulation of the objective in the PAD (para 25) was identical to the one in the Grant
   Agreement.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Generating Knowledge and Monitoring of Selected Critical Wetlands Ecosystems
   (Estimated: US$0.60million; Actual: US$0.59 million) intended to generate knowledge on wetlands in
   Gabon and set up a reliable monitoring system to produce early warnings on potential alterations of wetland
   ecosystems. The component was divided into the following two subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1:
   Knowledge Creation on Wetland Ecosystems supported research on the biological wealth and socio-
   economic dimensions of Gabon’s wetland ecosystems, in order to help decision makers better understand
   their importance. Subcomponent 1.2: Monitoring System for Wetland Ecosystems defined and
   operationalized an appropriate monitoring system for the wetlands by developing monitoring strategies in
   management plans and building upon the preceding monitoring system work for the Petit Loango and
   Monts Birougou national parks.

   Component 2: Support for Sustainable Management of Selected Critical Wetland Ecosystems
   (Estimated: US$3.11 million; Actual: US$3.00 million) intended to promote sustainable management of
   critical mangrove ecosystems through the following three subcomponents. Subcomponent 2.1: Planning for
   Sustainable Management of Selected Sites developed monitoring plans for the selected Ramsar sites in line
   with the Ramsar Handbooks and based on extensive consultations at those sites and the research
   conducted under Subcomponent 1.1. Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening Surveillance Capacities in the
   Selected Sites intended to enhance monitoring of the selected Ramsar sites by providing equipment,
   infrastructure, and training. This subcomponent also intended to strengthen capacities of local communities
   to monitor wetlands activities through consultations, technical assistance, and awareness raising.
   Subcomponent 2.3: Environmentally Friendly, Community-Driven Activities in Wetlands intended to help
   communities adjacent to the selected Ramsar sites develop income-generating activities for sustainable
   wetlands management.

   Component 3: Strengthen Institutional Framework to Support Wetlands Management (Estimated:
   US$3.33 million; Actual: US$3.04 million) intended to establish an institutional framework favorable to the
   sustainable management of the Wetlands of International Importance (WII) at both the national and local
   levels. With guidance from the Ramsar Handbooks, analyses were undertaken to: (i) assess the existing
   policy framework for wetland protection in Gabon; and (ii) assess the institutional structures currently
   governing each WII site. The studies proposed recommendations to strengthen policy and institutional
   frameworks to better achieve wetland protection objectives. With support from the Ramsar Convention (and
   based on the data analysis and information obtained in Component 1 and the work on priority setting and
   resource use planning of Component 2), this component developed a national wetlands strategy in
   consultation with appropriate agencies.

   Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (Estimated: US$0.48 million;
   Actual: US$0.48million) intended to support the overall daily administration of the project to ensure that
   regular M&E was carried out and that results fed back into decision making on project implementation. As
   the Directorate for Environment and Nature Protection (DGENP: Direction Générale de l’Environnement et
   la Protection de la Nature) was responsible for the overall administration, coordination, and

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



   implementation of the project, Component 4 supported the DGENP by recruiting specialists and assistants
   for procurement, financial management, and M&E.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$7.521 million (PAD, para 50). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$7,125,048 (ICR, page 2).

   Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed by US$7.521 million grant from the Global
   Environment Facility (GEF) (PAD, para 50). At project closing, the project was financed by US$7,125,048
   grant from the GEF (ICR, page 2).

   Dates: The project was approved on March 27, 2014, and became effective on July 29, 2014. The Mid-
   Term Review was completed on February 2, 2018. The project was closed on December 31, 2020, which
   was eight months after the original closing date of April 30, 2020.

   Restructuring: The project was restructured in April 2020 to extend the project duration for a total of eight
   months mainly due to implementation delays as a result of: (i) the serious conflicts after the 2016 general
   election which halted the project activities for five months; and (ii) changes to public bank accounts which
   required project accounts to be closed and then re-opened under the new location and system and halted
   the project activities for three months (ICR, para 92).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Gabon was endowed with exceptional biodiversity, yet it faced challenges in
biodiversity management outside the national parks network. The Government set the preservation of
critical wetlands as one of its priorities, as wetland ecosystems were essential in providing drinking water
and energy to major urban centers, and also sustaining fisheries production. Gabon became a party to the
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (WII) in 1987 and registered nine sites on the
WII list. Those sites represented a wide variety of aquatic ecosystems, such as mangroves, savannas,
waterfalls and rapids, lagoons, rivers, and lakes, of more than 2.8 million hectares (PAD, para 14). New
priorities set by the Government for biodiversity preservation clearly targeted the WII, which allocated all the
funds from the GEF-5 replenishment (2010-2014) to foster significant progress on WII management.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the project’s objective was in line with the Government’s
economic vision to modernize and diversify the country’s economy by 2025, called Emerging Gabon, as
well as its strategic roadmap, called the Strategic Plan for an Emerging Gabon (PSGE: Plan Strategique
Gabon Emergent, 2011-2025). Specifically, the objective was aligned with the PSGE’s one of three pillars
on Green Gabon (Gabon Vert) that aimed at instituting sustainable forest management and transforming
Gabon into a global leader in certified tropical timber production; developing agriculture and livestock
farming to improve food security; and creating sustainable and responsible fisheries strategic plan. In
addition, the objective was aligned with the National Climate Plan established in 2010, which aimed to
control greenhouse gas emissions and improve climate change adaptation capacity. At project closing, the

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



               objective was in line with the PSGE and the Government’s new wetlands management strategy that was
               developed with support from the project. In addition, the objective was aligned with the Nationally
               Determined Contribution submitted in 2016 with a target year of 2025.

               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project’s objective was in line with the Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2012-2016, specifically, Outcome 5: Sustainable management of natural
               resources under WBG Strategic Theme 2: Vulnerability and Resilience. At project closing, the objective was
               in line with the same CPS at the time of appraisal, as a succeeding Country Partnership Framework was
               still under development.

               Previous Sector Experience. This project built upon the past experience with the GEF-funded project called
               Strengthening Capacity for Managing National Parks and Biodiversity project (PARCS, P070232, US$10
               million, 2006-2013), including the development of Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tools (SMART) in the
               selected Ramsar sites. The National Agency of National Parks (ANPN: Agence Nationale des Parcs
               Nationaux), which was an Implementing Agency of the past project, retained key staff to execute this
               project’s Components 1 and 2. The DGENP, which was an Implementing Agency of this project and
               executed Components 3 and 4, participated in an earlier World Bank-funded Development Policy Operation
               together with ANPAN and received capacity building support from an Institutional Development Fund.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Enhance protection of biodiversity in selected forested wetlands on the Ramsar List through knowledge
                             creation and development of conservation measures for sustainable wetlands management

                             Rationale
                             Parsing the Objective Statement: Based on the formulation of the objective statement, “to enhance
                             protection of biodiversity in selected forested wetlands on the Ramsar List through knowledge creation and
                             development of conservation measures for sustainable wetlands management,” the expected outcome of the
                             project objective was to enhance protection of biodiversity in selected forested wetlands on the Ramsar list.
                             Both the knowledge creation and the development of conservation measures for sustainable wetlands
                             management were considered intermediate outcomes contributing to the PDO/GEO outcome.

                             Theory of Change (TOC): A significant issue for enhancing biodiversity within wetlands in Gabon was that a
                             wide array of resources and ecosystems exist outside of the protected area system. This meant the project
                             needed to undertake capacity strengthening and awareness raising not only within ANPN, which managed
                             parks and protected areas, but also within DGENP under the Ministry of Forests, Environment and Protection
                             of Natural Resources, which managed the Wetlands of International Importance (WII) network as the

                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



focal point for the Ramsar Convention. Moreover, the WII sites without an associated National Park status did
not benefit from any targeted government resources but were supported by conservation activities funded by
local and international NGOs. Public awareness raising was also critical to ensure the success of surveillance
and monitoring activities. Given the development challenges described above, the project objective’s TOC
envisioned that project activities such as enhancing knowledge creation for sustainable wetlands
management would result in outputs such as critical data and studies delivered, including: baseline data on
flora and fauna for ecological monitoring; identification of new species; and economic valuation of ecosystem
services. The TOC also envisioned that project activities such as collecting baseline data necessary for
implementation of the Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tools and strengthening capacity of Geographic
Information System (GIS) in the government institutions would result in outputs such as ecological monitoring
system implemented. Those outputs above would result in an intermediate outcome of an increased
knowledge base for effective design of conservation and management of wetlands. A critical
assumption here was that knowledge and data created was of high quality and relevant. Moreover, the project
objective’s TOC envisioned that project activities such as preparing and initiating wetlands management
plans based on the data and studies generated above would result in outputs such as: management plans
developed; Ramsar info sheets updated; a national wetlands management strategy developed; and a manual
for the management of wetlands developed. The TOC also envisioned that project activities such as
supporting implementation of (i) surveillance programs, including equipment purchase, training, and base
rehabilitation, and establishing Local Management Consultative Committees (CCGLs: Comites Consultatif de
Gestion Locale) as Ramsar sub-committees, and (ii) Income-Generating Activities (IGAs) for the surrounding
communities of the Ramsar sites to gain alternative livelihoods in fishing, non-timber forest products, tourism,
and agriculture sectors would result in outputs such as an increase in areas of forests and lands under
sustainable management. A critical assumption here was that local communities were willing to engage in
monitoring sites and participate in alternative IGAs that were environmentally sustainable. The outputs above
would result in an intermediate outcome of conservation measures for sustainable wetlands
management strengthened. The two intermediate outcomes above would result in PDO/GEO outcome of
enhanced protection of biodiversity in selected forested wetlands. The PDO/GEO outcome would
contribute to longer-term impacts of preservation of critical wetlands ecosystems for biodiversity conservation
and delivery of economic and ecosystem services. A critical assumption here was that the Government’s
commitment to sustainable management remained high and would be matched with budget resources.

Outputs:

      A research scheme for the three selected Ramsar sites was developed and being implemented,
       meeting the target. The project initiated eight specific studies to fill in priority information gaps, which
       increased the available historical data by nearly 25 percent (ICR, para 41). In total, the project
       conducted nine studies with a focus on: (i) environmental services of wetland ecosystems; (ii) wetland
       habitats; (iii) wetland fauna, including birds, fish, and large aquatic species; and (iv) flora and fauna of
       mountain wetlands. The research findings informed baseline data of an ecological monitoring system
       of wetlands. In addition, the research supported the development of the national strategy on wetlands
       that was about to be effective by the President’s signature.
      An ecological monitoring system of wetlands was implemented, meeting the target. The project
       initiated implementing the Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tools that was already set up under the
       past GEF-funded project by the National Agency of National Parks by providing baseline data through
       the studies above.
      Land area of 12.01 hectares (ha) adopted sustainable land management practices as a result of the
       project, surpassing the target of 10 ha. Sustainable artisanal organic agricultural activities


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



     were developed as part of the IGAs, namely, the Haute Boumi cooperative (4 Ha of banana and
     cassava plantations); the Itsana agricultural cooperative on the outskirts of the Birougou National Park
     (3 ha); the Ebel Vert agricultural cooperative (3.01 ha); and the Moukimbi agricultural cooperative (4
     ha) (ICR, para 55). These IGAs were provided with technical support on organic farming methods and
     agreed to stop the use of chemical pesticides and slash-and-burn agriculture techniques. The IGAs
     induced positive changes in community behaviors by supporting the communities adjacent to the
     Ramsar sites to access non-destructive activities and related incomes (ICR, para 46). Following
     project closing, the beekeeping project part of the IGAs continued to support livelihoods of the
     vulnerable population of Babongo through honey harvesting and commercialization (ICR, para 81).
    Forest area of 71,331 ha was under sustainable forestry management according to forest type,
     surpassing the target of 30,000 ha. This indicator was limited to the conservation efforts, sustainable
     monitoring, and management of forests degraded as a result of illegal mining activities in the Birougou
     area. This indicator was measured through the SMART patrol monitoring system, which tracked the
     rehabilitation of the old gold-mining activities sites in the premises of the national park covered by
     surveillance patrols (ICR, page 69).
    Direct project beneficiaries reached 524 people, surpassing the target of 100 people. Female
     beneficiaries were 68.9 percent of the direct beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 30 percent.
    The National Ramsar Committee was in place and functional, meeting the target.
    Ramsar Subcommittees at the three selected sites were in place and functional, meeting the target of
     three. The National Ramsar Committees and Subcommittees served as a formal exchange framework
     through which the administration and the rural communities support the development and
     implementation of effective policies for sustainable management of wetland ecosystems.
    Ramsar Information Sheets were updated for nine Ramsar sites, surpassing the target of four sites.
     The RISs were updated for all the nine sites in Gabon, namely, Bas‐Ogooué, Monts Birougou, Petit
     Loango, Setté-Cama, Wonga‐Wongué, Akanda, Pongara, Chutes du rivière Ivindo, and Chutes du
     Mboungou Badouma and Doumé.
    Environmental audits for extractive industries operating in the four selected Ramsar sites were
     conducted, meeting the target of four sites. The project widened its scope in 2019 beyond the set
     target to include agro-industrial and petroleum companies in the Ramsar sites of Bas-Ogooué and
     Petit Loango/Setté-Cama, bringing the number of companies monitored to 25 companies.
    Two maps including human settlements, industrial activities, and hydrological systems for the selected
     Ramsar sites were elaborated, not meeting the target of three maps.
    Implementation of annual work plan was completed for 91 percent (ICR, page 51), not meeting the
     target of 100 percent (PAD, page 27).
    Project safeguard instruments were diligently implemented, meeting the target. This Intermediate
     Results indicator added no value to the Results Framework, as it was mandatory for the project to
     comply with the World Bank’s safeguards policy.
    A wetlands management strategy was developed, meeting the target but at project closing it had not
     yet been implemented as it was awaiting signature by the President (ICR, para. 40). Though this
     indicator was designed as a PDO outcome indicator, the development of the strategy was an output
     as nothing has been implemented.
    Management plans were prepared for two sites, not fully meeting the target of preparing management
     plans for three sites. Though this indicator was designed as a part of a PDO outcome indicator, the
     preparation of the management plan was an output as nothing has been implemented.
     Two management plans for the Bas-Ogooué and Setté-Cama sites were prepared under the project


                                                                                               Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



       and finalized in later half of December 2020, just before the project closing date of December 31,
       2020.

Outcomes:

      Ecosystem services valuations were undertaken for four selected sites, meeting the target of three
       sites. At appraisal, the target was set to cover three Ramsar Wetlands of International Importance
       sites, namely, Bas-Ogooué, Monts Birougou, and Petit Loango/Setté-Cama. The last site was later
       divided into two separate sites, making the total four sites. The ecosystem services valuation
       considered an assessment of 6 priority services, namely, fishery products, hunting products, biomass
       fuel, global climate regulation, water regulation, and erosion protection. The results of the ecosystem
       services valuations showed the Government that the wetlands were important not only for biodiversity
       protection but also economic vulnerability reduction. One key finding of the economic valuation of the
       selected Ramsar sites showed that the value of avoided loss of ecosystem services due to
       conservation of the Ramsar sites amounted to US$43-60 million (ICR, para 39 and page 65). Key
       findings were disseminated in 2018 to stakeholders in government agencies, research institutions, and
       NGOs. Later during the project implementation, the studies on ecosystem values provided inputs to
       development of the wetland management strategy.
      Management plans were implemented for two sites, not fully meeting the target of implementing
       management plans for three sites. The preparation of two management plans for the other sites was
       listed as an output above. The two management plans for Petit Loango and Birougou had been
       prepared by the Government before the project; therefore, the project supported implementation of the
       management plans by financing outlined activities relating to the management of protected areas and
       the engagement of communities.
      The ICR reports that Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) scores for the selected four
       sites were improved as follows. The improvements in management effectiveness of the target sites
       were outcomes of the project, though the results were measured by the Intermediate Results
       indicators. However, it was unknown what project activities contributed to changes in which question
       in the METT questionnaire, as well as what portion of the total wetland areas the project aimed to
       enhance the management of were covered by the sites with METT scores.
             o Monts Birougou site improved from the baseline of 36 to the actual achievement of 64,
                surpassing the target of 45.
             o METT score for Bas Ogooué site improved from the baseline of 13 to the actual achievement
                of 63, surpassing the target of 20.
             o METT score for Setté-Cama site improved from the baseline of 36 to the achievement of 62,
                surpassing the target of 45.
             o METT score for Petit Loango site improved from the baseline of 49 to the actual achievement
                of 74, surpassing the target of 55.

Referring to the TOC above, the project supported capacity development and awareness raising to enhance
protection of biodiversity in the selected Ramsar sites that some of the areas fell outside of the National Park
status. First, the project extended support to the government institutions on capacity development and
awareness raising beyond the National Agency of National Parks, which was the government entity
responsible only for management of parks and protected areas. By reaching out to support the Directorate for
Environment and Nature Protection, the project also supported the government department responsible for
management of wetlands under the Ramsar convention. These government institutions were supported by
technical studies and knowledge generation including ecosystem services valuation, in order to develop the


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



                            national strategy and the management plans for the selected Ramsar sites. The project further supported the
                            government institutions to implement two management plans for the Ramsar sites in Petit Loango
                            and Birougou through strengthening law-enforcement and conducting environmental audits for the industries
                            operating within or close to the Ramsar sites. Second, the project extended support to the community-level
                            and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The project implemented the Income-Generating Activities for
                            the neighboring communities, supported surveillance to detect illegal mining, and created the Ramsar
                            Subcommittees based on local committees, which supported strengthening local capacities to protect
                            biodiversity of wetlands. However, the PDO/GEO outcome indicators in the Results Framework were not fully
                            adequate to measure the outcome-level achievements. Though those indicators provided evidence for the
                            two streams of expected outputs indicated in the PDO/GEO statement, those indicators did not provide
                            evidence on to what extent the biodiversity protection was enhanced in selected forested wetlands, and to
                            what extent the above changes were attributable to the project. Without evidence on the degree of
                            achievement against the expected transformation or at least progress against the assumptions embedded in
                            the theory of change, it is difficult to claim progress against the PDO. Thus the overall efficacy is rated modest
                            due to insufficient evidence on outcomes.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDO/GEO outcome indicators in the Results Framework did not provide evidence on to what extent the
                            biodiversity protection was enhanced in selected forested wetlands, and to what extent the above changes
                            were attributable to the project. Overall, the efficacy is rated modest due to insufficient evidence on
                            outcomes.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis for the Project: At appraisal, no Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was calculated because
   most of the benefits of this project were broad-based public goods and only qualitatively assessed in the PAD.
   At project closing, the most conservative calculation showed that an IRR was 4 percent with negative project
   NPV of minus USD5,922,814 with assumptions of lower-bound annual benefits of US$13,824,740 and 3 percent
   annual increase in O&M costs over the 20-year period of economic feasibility of the project (ICR, page 66).
   When the higher-bound annual benefits of US$18,062,118 were used with the same assumptions above, the
   IRR was 16 percent with a project NPV of US$44,862,099.




                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



Regarding the methodology for the ex-post economic analysis, the economic benefits generated by the project
were assessed in accordance with the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, which classified ecosystem services
to the following four categories: (i) Provisioning services (i.e., products obtained from ecosystems); (ii)
Regulating services (i.e., benefits obtained from the regulation of ecosystem processes); (iii) Cultural services
(i.e., nonmaterial benefits people obtain from ecosystems through spiritual enrichment, cognitive development,
reflection, recreation, and aesthetic experiences); and (iv) Supporting services (i.e., those that are necessary to
produce all other ecosystem services). The monetary value of the various types of wetlands ecosystem services
widely varied among the existing literatures that were published approximately 10 years ago (ICR, page 63). For
example, the monetary value of coral reef services widely varied from the minimum value of $14 per ha/year and
the maximum value of $1,195,478 per ha/year, mainly due to different assessments for cultural services which
covered a variety of items such as cultural diversity, knowledge systems, educational values, social relations,
sense of place, cultural heritage, and ecotourism. Project costs were estimated from the project financing of
US$7.1 million by the GEF and capital one-time investments by the government at the time of project approval
(US$5.4 million) (ICR, page 66).

Economic and Financial Analysis for the Income-Generating Activities (IGAs): At appraisal, no IRR for
IGAs was calculated. At project closing, an IRR for IGAs promoting ecotourism was estimated to be 33 percent
at the lowest estimate with 6 percent discount rate and 10 years project life (ICR, page 67).

Regarding the methodology for financial and economic analysis for the IGAs, it considered net revenues
from tourism, which were estimated at an average based on 2016-2018 reports. Sensitivity analysis considered
at least 50-80 percent of revenue reduction as a result of the COVID impact on the local economy. Project costs
for the IGAs were US$53,000, input from the NGO as US$200 per year, and O&E costs as 5 percent of the
project amount (ICR, page 67).

Aspects of Design and Implementation that Affected Efficiency: The implementation delays caused by the
post-election conflicts and the relocation of project accounts resulted in the extension of the project period for
eight months, as described in Section 2. After the loss of the M&E officer, the post was not refilled with new
personnel, increasing tasks for the project coordinator.

Though there were project delays, the ex-post economic analysis shows there was value to the range of
investments. Given the limitation of working without an ex-post analysis, the overall efficiency is rated
substantial, though marginally so.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is substantial, as it aligned with the strategies of the Government and the Bank
assistance. The efficacy is modest due to insufficient evidence on outcome-level achievements. The efficiency
is rated substantial given the likely benefits, though these are likely to be affected by the current COVID
situation affecting tourism numbers. Given the efficacy rating, the outcome must be rated moderately
unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were following risks to the sustainability of the achieved results presented in the ICR:

Technical Risk: The innovative system on conservation management established at the Ramsar sites might
observe technical risk. To mitigate the risk, the project integrated the monitoring system within the existing
national parks program and SMART system which was expected to be funded and managed by National
Agency of National Parks (ANPN: Agence Nationale des Parcs Nationaux). Moreover, the Bas Ogooué site’s
ecological monitoring system was established within the framework of a sponsorship by the Presidential
Reserve, Ramsar Site of Wonga Wongué (contiguous to Bas Ogooué). Surveillance and anti-poaching
activities would also continue to be supported by ANPN.

Stakeholder Ownership Risk: To mitigate the risk and ensure continuity of community involvement in
management after project closing, the project established Ramsar sub-committees based on the
existing CCGLs, whose formulation was already required under national legislation. While this applies
specifically to sites that are within the borders of the national parks, the road map for the Bas Ogooué site
includes the establishment of a sustainable financing mechanism with the support of private sector
companies operating within the forest to ensure operation of its Ramsar sub-committee. Moreover, the
investments in Income-Generating Activities (IGA) made within communities indicated the potential continuity
of micro-projects after the project, given that their social utility and the economic rationalization would remain
in order.

Economic and Financial Risk: The recession followed by the COVID-19 crisis in 2020 and the ongoing
drop in oil revenues could affect budgets of the project’s implementing agencies to continue maintenance of
equipment and sites, training, and staffing support, particularly in the field. Without sufficient budget, the work
programs of the National Ramsar Committee and other entities established with the support of the project
could be adversely affected. Financial problems for funding national park staff and operations were reported
in a recurring manner. The funding available for surveillance operations did not address the funding needs
for monitoring potential environmental and social impacts by extractive industries. The sustainable financing

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



issues were not part of the project design (ICR, para 116). To address the risk in the long-term, the ICR
recommended the Government to focus on a sustainable funding option, such as a conservation trust fund.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach of the project design was adequate. Technical, financial, and
  economic aspects were appropriately designed. The social development aspects including poverty,
  gender, and indigenous people were integrated in the project design. The fiduciary and implementation
  arrangements including relevant risks were well considered at the design stage. On the other hand, the
  design of the Results Framework showed some shortcomings, including a misalignment between the
  PDO/GEO statement and the indicators for measuring the achievements of development outcomes. As
  described in Section 4, the Results Framework and the PDO/GEO indicators in the PAD (Annex 1, page
  23-27) were designed to measure not the enhancement of biodiversity protection but only the knowledge
  creation and the development of conservation measures for sustainable wetlands management. This
  shortcoming in the project design caused vagueness in what the project objective expected as outcomes
  and this limited the ability for claims made at the outcome level. Thus, the overall quality at entry is rated
  moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank provided adequate supervision at procurement aspects to achieve coordination and collaboration
 between the two implementing agencies which was challenging at times due to political issues within the
 Ministry. The ongoing focus and support to making this coordinated approach work served the project well
 and also helped to support the strengthening of both institutions. Fiduciary compliance was highlighted
 when issues arose, such as the closure of the project’s bank account as per the Government’s request
 close to the end of the project. Throughout the project, the supervision and reporting were consistent on all
 aspects of project tracking, including the annual work plans. The Bank team ensured compliance of the
 IGA micro-projects to the environment and social safeguards, by equipping each micro-project with a
 screening checklist, an environmental and social impacts assessment, and related environmental and
 social management plans to mitigate any potential negative impacts. On the other hand, the project faced
 challenges in financial management such as delays in submission of annual financial reports, non-
 compliance with expenditure ceilings and cash balances, and lack of overall documentation. The details on
 supervision missions, such as the frequency and team compositions of the missions and what technical
 support on financial management was provided, were not mentioned in the ICR. Overall, the quality of
 supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design and arrangements were well-embedded institutionally by utilizing existing reporting
 modalities of the implementing agency to ensure consistency with the preceding monitoring activities. On
 the other hand, the project’s Results Framework mainly focused on measuring output-level achievements.
 As described in Sections 4 and 8.a., the PDO/GEO outcome indicators were not designed appropriately to
 measure the enhancement of biodiversity protection, which was the intended project outcome stated in the
 PDO/GEO. The PDO/GEO outcome indicators focused on outputs-level achievements such as a number of
 ecosystem services valuations undertaken in the PDO/GEO outcome indicator 1, which did not thoroughly
 illustrate what changes in biodiversity protection on the ground were brought or expected to be brought by
 the project. Moreover, it was not clear what rationale was used to set up the baseline and target values of
 the PDO/GEO outcome indicator 2 at the design stage because two sites out of the selected four sites had
 already developed management plans prior to the project. It was also not clearly measured by the indicator
 what changes in the protection of the biodiversity were observed in the selected sites as a result of the
 implementation of the management plans. The PDO/GEO outcome indicator 3 on the wetlands
 management strategy targeted only development of the strategy and not implementation of it. The
 Intermediate Results indicators on the areas with sustainable forestry or land management only showed
 the areas where the income-generating or surveillance activities were implemented by the project. The
 Intermediate Results indicator on the implementation of project safeguard instruments was mandatory for
 compliance and thus not adequate to measure outputs. The Theory of Change (ICR, Table 2, page 9) did
 not fully document how the short-term outcomes would lead to the PDO/GEO and then to the long-term
 impacts.



b. M&E Implementation
  All the indicators in the Results Framework were set with baseline data, but the baseline of the PDO
  outcome indicator on management plans did not reflect the actual value at appraisal, as described in
  Section 9.a. The M&E implementation focused on outputs-level results rather than outcome-level results
  as per the design of the Results Framework. The M&E officer who was lost during implementation was
  not replaced with another specialist and compensated by the project coordinator.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to the implementing agencies and the project beneficiaries to
  make positive shifts in the implementation direction of the project, such as improving compliance with
  fishing regulations in the IGAs, standardizing periodic reports, and enhancing collaborations between the
  field teams in the Ramsar sites. On the other hand, the M&E data was not able to provide evidence

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



  beyond achievements of output-level achievements due to the inadequate design of indicators described
  in Section 9.a.

  Overall, the weaknesses in the Results Framework at the M&E design stage limited full utilization of the
  M&E data to present evidence on outcome-level achievements by the project. The M&E quality is thus
  rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified as category B and triggered the
   following policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36),
   Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). The project prepared the
   Environment and Social Management Framework, Process Framework, and Indigenous Peoples Planning
   Framework, all of which were disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal. The
   safeguard on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) was triggered to address any potential risk of restriction of
   access to resource use as the project prepared management plans for selected Ramsar sites. As a result,
   the project did not encounter any land-taking or compensation-related issues associated with the
   Involuntary Resettlement Policy. The Bank confirmed compliance of the IGA microprojects to environmental
   and social safeguards with support from the Bank specialist to monitor the execution of environmental and
   social specifications and the awareness raising of workplace safety. The project also prepared an Action
   Plan to support indigenous population was developed for the Babongo population and enabled the Babongo
   populations of Mbigou to carry out beekeeping activities under enhanced safety and environmentally
   friendly measures.

   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): The GRM established in the Local Management Committees was
   not fully functional and received only a few complaints. The Bank team addressed this issue through a GRM
   review and assessment allowing the GRM to be more effective by the project closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: Procurement was conducted in line with the Bank’s guidelines. The procurement plan was
   regularly updated and disclosed. Procurement capacity was determined to be adequate throughout the
   project and in line with the workload. Procurement processes and asset verification under the IGA program
   were verified by external auditors acceptable to the Bank, and no issues were raised. All the planned
   procurement activities were completed before project closing and the procurement system was updated
   accordingly.

   Financial Management: The internal control system had weaknesses which led to delays in submission of
   annual financial reports, non-compliance with expenditure ceilings and cash balances, and lack of overall

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



   documentation. In the early stage of project implementation, issues in installing TOMPRO were raised.
   Towards the end of project, the Government required the closure of the project bank account and the
   transfer of remaining funds to a new bank account, causing major delays and financial shortfalls. No
   comment was included in the ICR regarding the timeliness of project external audits and whether the
   external auditor’s opinions were qualified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Land-use planning reform progressed: The wetlands management plans and the intersectoral zoning
   carried out within the selected sites and the implementation of project activities, especially in the Bas-
   Ogooué, provided key opportunities for the Government to pilot national land-use planning processes and
   their adoption at the local level. It was essential for the ongoing work of the Land-Use Planning national
   commission under the lead of the Ministry of Environment.

   Marine and coastal protected areas network created: The 13 national parks network created in 2001
   was extended to nine marine parks and 11 aquatic reserves in 2017, with several of these protected areas
   overlapping or directly linked with the project targeted wetlands. The studies carried out within the project
   framework directly contributed to the extension of the protected areas network in the country.

   Institutional reforms proposed: It was recommended to the Parliament to expand the ANPN’s mandate
   to include protection of all the natural areas within and outside of the national parks and transform the
   ANPN to a country-wide Nature Protection Agency, based on the ANPN’s field results and inter-agency
   collaboration capacity demonstrated under the project. While the institutional reform was ultimately not
   approved by the Parliament, the requested reform demonstrated a recognition of one of the project’s key
   messages of the importance of establishing effective natural resource management mechanisms beyond
   the national parks and the effective institutional strengthening and collaboration of involved agencies.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    The Modest rating for efficacy
                                                                                    necessitates a Moderately
                                                                                    Unsatisfactory rating. There is a
                                                        Moderately
Outcome                         Satisfactory                                        lack of evidence on progress at
                                                        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    the outcome level to show the
                                                                                    impact of the changes on
                                                                                    biodiversity.
                                                                                    The quality at entry is
Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory     moderately satisfactory due to
                                                                                    shortcomings in the design of


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



                                                                                   the Results Framework. The
                                                                                   quality of supervision is
                                                                                   moderately satisfactory due to
                                                                                   insufficient evidence on the
                                                                                   effectiveness of support to
                                                                                   financial management. Overall,
                                                                                   the bank performance is rated
                                                                                   moderately satisfactory.
                                                                                   The shortcomings in M&E
                                                                                   design such as missing
                                                                                   indicators to measure outcome-
                                                                                   level achievements on
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Modest                     enhancements of biodiversity
                                                                                   protection affected the M&E
                                                                                   implementation and utilization.
                                                                                   Overall, the quality of M&E is
                                                                                   rated modest.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons in the ICR can be relevant to other projects on natural resource management
and conservation, and are presented here with some editing.

1. Sustainable financing for conservation of wetlands can potentially enhance a flexibility in
budget allocations to finance essential costs to implement field activities within and beyond
the protected areas. Under the project, provision of operational costs addressed issues of the
recurring shortages of human resources funding due to the inflexible usage of natural resources
management budgets that overly focused on surveillance activities within the protected areas.
Tapping multiple financing options, including conservation trust funds, endowment funds, green
bonds, and debt-for-nature swap, can enable versatile budget allocations to the environmental and
social activities in the fields.

2. Strengthening local capacities on financial management and transferring accounting
responsibilities to decentralized entities can enhance project effectiveness and sustainability
of results. The project supported capacity development in local entities by: (i) opening project
accounts in the field to enable transferring money on the ground; (ii) utilizing local ANPN offices; (iii)
utilizing the decentralized accountant capacity built under the past GEF-funded project; and (iv)
incorporating Ramsar subcommittees and CCGLs into site management. Building upon the project’s
achievements, establishing financial management control systems with appropriate accounting
software would support the decentralized financial management to function well.

3. Integrating the landscape approach into project design can enhance stakeholders’
understanding on issues affecting conservation of wetlands and their biodiversity in the
long-term. Mapping of human activity, flora, fauna, and ecosystems at the project design stage
articulated complex and intersectoral issues to be addressed by the project components and


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GA- Sustainable Mgmt Critical Wetlands (P143914)



activities. The landscape approach needs to be directly linked to structured national Land Use Plan
approaches and local development planning to further enhance its effectiveness.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative generally supports the ratings and available
evidence with an attempt to triangulate data to reach conclusions. The quality of evidence and analysis is
aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. The ICR’s lessons are clear and based on evidence outlined in the
ICR. Although the TOC illustrates expected outcomes from the two streams of project activities, there is a
disconnect between these expected outcomes and the PDO/GEO. The ICR did not mention: (i) the timeliness
of project external audits and whether the external auditor’s opinions were qualified; and (ii) the details of the
Bank’s support through supervision missions, especially on the effectiveness of the support on financial
management. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
