     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0022724

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P126325                                   IN: Maha RWSSP

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53750                                 31-Mar-2020                                        80,622,721.34

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Mar-2014                               30-Sep-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          165,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            96,158,977.08                                              0.00

 Actual                                        80,622,721.34                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kishore Laxmikant          Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve the performance of Maharashtra's sector
   institutions in planning, implementation and monitoring of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program
   and to improve access to quality and sustainable services in peri-urban villages, and in water-stressed and
   water-quality affected areas" (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1 and Project Appraisal Document, para.21).
   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed into the following objectives:
   Objective 1: To improve the performance of Maharashtra's sector institutions in planning, implementation and
   monitoring of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



   Objective 2: To improve access to quality and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in peri-urban
   villages.
   Objective 3: To improve access to quality and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in water-
   stressed and water-quality affected areas.
   The original PDO remained unchanged during project implementation. However, there were significant
   changes to some PDO indicators, Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) and associated outcome targets
   during restructurings. Consequently, a split evaluation is carried out for the ICRR.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Jan-2019

c. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 15 to 19 and Annex 1).
   The program scope, activities, and classification into Results Areas, as defined in the PAD, are given
   below. Changes in scope, activities, indicators and targets during implementation are discussed later
   below in the sections on restructurings.
   Category 1: Institutional capacity building for planning, implementation and monitoring of the sector across
   the state: (estimated cost at appraisal US$64.6 million; actual cost at completion - not reported in the ICR),
   The indicative list of activities was to include strengthening of: (i) current monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
   systems; (ii) rural water supply and sanitation (RWSS) planning processes, tools and guidelines; (iii)
   implementation capacity of sector institutions at state, district and block levels; (iv) program management
   capacity at all levels; (v) water testing laboratories; (vi) training through restructuring of the Maharashtra
   Environmental Engineering Training and Research Academy; (vii) capacities in groundwater management;
   (viii) program implementation capacity for carrying out the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) program in the
   state; (ix) governance and accountability systems in the sector; and (x) impact assessment of program
   initiatives.
   Category 2: Water supply and sanitation service improvements in selected districts: (estimated cost at
   appraisal US$170.4 million; actual cost at completion - not reported in the ICR).
   Support was to be provided to twelve districts (two from each administrative divisions of the state) in the
   following areas: (i) construction, rehabilitation, augmentation and extension of existing water supply
   systems and construction of new sullage management schemed in peri-urban villages; (ii) scaling up of
   sustainable groundwater management practices in critically exploited aquifiers; and (iii) construction and
   rehabilitation of water systems in water-stressed and water-quality affected areas. Technical assistance
   and capacity building support was to be provided for helping deliver NBA across the state including
   preparation of (I) Village Environmental Sanitation Plans and (ii) demonstration models for managing


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



  sullage in peri-urban villages. The districts chosen for support were to be selected based on transparent,
  pre-defined and demand-driven criteria.
  The planned scope and activities above were classified into four Results Areas along with associated
  Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)::(The DLIs are discussed later below in Section 3 on Relevance of
  Objectives).

    • Result Area 1: Strengthened planning and monitoring in the RWSS sector (supported by DLI-1:
    Strengthened M&E systems for the RWSS sector)
    • Result Area 2: Improved institutional capacity for RWSS program implementation (supported by DLI-
    2: Strengthened capacity of sector institutions).
    • Result Area 3: Improved access to quality and sustainable WSS services in peri-urban villages
    (supported by DLI-3: Number of house connections to a Commissioned Water Supply system and DLI-4:
    Number of house connections to a Sustainable Water Supply System and receiving a Regular Water
    Service)
    • Result Area 4: Improved access to safe drinking water in water-stressed and water-quality affected
    areas (supported by DLI-5: Number of Community Safe and Secure Water Systems (CSSWS).




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program cost: The estimated program cost at appraisal was US$235 million. The actual cost at
  completion was US$104.83 million.
  Financing: At appraisal, the program was to be supported by an IDA grant of US$165 million, At
  completion, the actual disbursement was US$ 80.62 million. In total, an amount of US$84.38 million was
  cancelled from the IDA grant.
  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution from the Government of Maharashtra (GoM) was
  planned at US$70 million. At completion, the actual contribution from the GoM was US$24.21 million.
  Dates: The project was approved in March 2014, became effective in August 2014, and the planned
  closing date was March 2020. The actual closing date was September 30, 2020.
  Mid-Term Review: A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried out in March 2017.
  Restructurings: The project underwent five Level 2 restructurings.
  First restructuring (January 2019, disbursed amount US$31.32 million, 39% of total disbursement): The
  original PDO remained unchanged. However, significant changes were made in PDO Indicators (PDOIs),
  Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs), and Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), with changes in
  associated targets and allocations. Some changes were also made in scope, DLI verification protocols,
  and Program Action Plan. The principal changes are summarized as follows:
  PDO Indicators:

    • PDOI-1: The original indicator "number of districts using improved planning processes and
    strengthened M&E systems" was replaced by two new indicators "Number of districts using
    strengthened M&E systems" and "Number of districts using improved planning processes". The


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



  associated targets were revised as follows; M&E target reduced from 33 to 30 and improved planning
  target reduced from 33 to 6.
  • PDOI-2: The original indicator "percentage of completed rural water supply schemes that followed
  GoM's demand-responsive approach and exited the implementation process with a schedule
  performance index (SPI) of between 0.75 and 1.25" was revised to "percentage of sanctioned piped
  RWS systems that followed GoM's demand-responsive approach". The indicator was narrowed to piped
  water systems only and the reference to SPI was dropped to remove complexity. The target of the
  narrow indicator was raised from 30% to 60%.
  • PDOI-3 and PDOI-4; The original two indicators were merged into a single World Bank core indicator
  with a combined target of 385,000 beneficiaries as compared to the earlier separate targets of 340,000
  and 471,000 respectively.

Intermediate Results Indicators:

  • IRI-2: The original indicator "improved planning process for the sector" was dropped as this was
  measured by the new PDOI-2.
  • IRI-4: The original indicator :systems following demand-responsive approaches" was dropped as it
  was measured by the new PDOI-3.
  • New IRI-6: This was added to measure Gram Panchayats (GPs) meeting service delivery standards.
  • For other IRIs, there were some changes in wording and targets.


Disbursement Linked Indicators:
Selected DLIs were amended along with introduction of Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs) as
intermediate milestones along with changes in associated funding allocations.

  • Results Area 1 (Strengthened sector planning and monitoring): The original DLI-1 was retained with
  the addition of five new DLRs.
  • Results Area 2 (Improved capacity for program management): The original DLI-2 underwent a minor
  rewording.
  • Results Area 3 (Improved access to quality and sustainable WSS in peri-urban villages): The original
  DLI-3 and DLI-4 were re-labeled along with the addition of four new DLRs for DLI-3 and two new DLRs
  for DLI-4.
  • Results Area 4 (Improved access to safe drinking water in water-stressed and water-quality affected
  area). The original DLI-5 was retained but the target was reduced from 580 to 214 to reflect actual
  demand based on the selection criteria.

Other changes:

  • The scope was increased to increase support to the Water Testing Laboratories which had been
  transferred to the authority of the Water Supply Services Department in the GoM ad to the Geological
  Surveys and Development Agency (GSDA) which was mandated to manage the laboratories.
  • The Verification Protocol for DLIs was revised to reflect the changes in definitions and other changes.


                                                                                                Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



     • Changes were made in the Program Action Plan (PAP) with the dropping of the original PAP2 and
     PAP5 (dealing with Capacity Development Plans) as these were covered under the DLIs/IRIs.
     • The original PAP4 and PAP7 were merged into one PAP4 since they both covered the same topic.
     • PAP10 was dropped as it was not relevant in the post-restructuring circumstances.
     • Amendments were made to PAP11 and PAP12 to reflect changes in fiduciary arrangements.


   Other Restructurings: Credit cancellations were made as follows: Second Restructuring (March 2020) -
   US$ 30 million; Third Restructuring (June 2020) - US$22.92 million; and Fifth Restructuring (September
   2020) - US$6 million.
   Also, under the Third Restructuring, the original loan closing date was extended by six months to
   September 30,2020.



3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  (Reference PAD paras. 1 to 12 and ICR paras. 1 to 9).
  Country and Sector Context: After a period of rapid growth, averaging 8.3% a year, between 2004 and
  2011, the growth rate in the Indian economy had slowed down to about 5% annually at the time of appraisal
  (2014). Both domestic and external factors contributed to the slowing of growth - increase in inflation,
  rising fiscal deficits, and weakness in external demand for exports. The country's 12th Five Year Plan (FYP)
  for the period 2013 to 2017, called for major investments in infrastructure, including in water supply and
  sanitation. The lack of adequate water supply and sanitation (WSS) services was particularly felt in the rural
  areas which accounted for about 70% of India's population of 1.2 billion. At the time of appraisal, the total
  economic impact of inadequate WSS services was estimated at about INR 2.4 trillion (US$3.8 billion
  equivalent) per year or an annual loss of about INR 2,180 (US$48) per capita.
  While India was estimated to have one of the highest coverage rates for rural water supply, the quality of
  services was poor with water quality problems, low pressure, and unreliable supply with interruptions. By
  2010, about 90% of India's rural population had access to improved water sources but only about 31% had
  access to piped water. Rural sanitation remained a major challenge. Only about 30% of households had
  access to sanitation facilities. India had one of the highest rates of open defecation in its rural areas. As of
  2010, an estimated 60% of the global population practicing open defecation lived in India.
  In India, ensuring provision of rural water supply and sanitation (RWSS) services is primarily a responsibility
  of the state governments While the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) is the nodal ministry
  at the national level, it is responsible for design of national programs, securing funding from Government of
  India (GoI) resources, releasing resources to the states against agreed action plans, monitoring
  performance of the states, and coordinating with external agencies.
  At the state level, institutional management responsibilities for RWSS are decentralized to three-tier
  Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) at the rural local government level. Maharashtra is the second largest
  state in India with a population of about 112 million of which an estimated 55% live in rural areas. It is the
  leading state in India in adopting RWSS reforms, including in promoting decentralization of sector
  management and demand-responsive approaches. At the state ;level, the Water and Sanitation Services


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



Department (WSSD) is the overall lead agency and is responsible for policy formulation, providing
resources and monitoring sector performance. Implementation of the sector programs is the responsibility
of the Zilla Parishads (ZPs) at the district level and Gram Panchayats (GPs) at the village level. Technical
support to the sector is provided by various state-level agencies.
Despite significant progress in institutional strengthening, further improvements are required to enable the
GoM to meet its targets in regard to the RWSS sector. The current Program for Results (PfR) project
aims at supporting the GoM to achieve its goals.
Alignment with national/state-level priorities: (PAD paras. 5 to 8 and ICR paras 1 to 6): The project
development objectives (PDOs) were consistent with national priorities at appraisal, including the GoI's
12th Five Year Plan (FYP) for the period 2012-2017 which called for major investments in water supply and
sanitation to increase the health and well-being of the population, especially in the rural areas. The
PDOs continue to remain consistent with the GoI's currently prevailing priorities being implemented under (i)
the National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) which aims at providing safe and adequate drinking
water in rural areas on a safe and sustainable basis; the program places emphasis on improving the levels
of service delivery, improved planning, and increased sustainability; it also includes piped water supply with
a focus on increasing household connections; and (ii) the national flagship Clean India Mission (Swachh
Bharat Mission). which aims to achieve universal sanitation coverage, improve cleanliness, and eliminate
open defecation; the program targets both rural and urban areas. The PDO also remain consistent with the
state-level priorities of the GoM as expressed in its 10-Year RWSS Program which aims at ensuring that
100% of the population has access to safe water and sanitation, including through increasing the number of
household connections and improving service delivery.
Alignment with the Country Partnership Strategy/Framework: (CPF for FY18 to FY22): At appraisal, the
PDO were consistent with the priorities under the prevailing Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13 to
FY17 particularly its Outcome 2.3 "improved access to water supply and sanitation services". The PDO
remain consistent with the latest Country Partnership Framework (for FY18 to FY22) and two of the three
pathways identified under the Systematic Country Diagnostic as necessary for ending poverty and
promoting shared prosperity:(i) growth needs to be inclusive and addressing inequality; and (ii) need for
strengthening the effectiveness of public institutions in delivering services. The CPF's Focus Area 3 -
Investing in Human Capital includes Sub-Objective 3.3 "increase access to improved rural water supply and
sanitation". The CPF confirms (para. 34) that the World Bank Group (WBG) will provide support for
strengthening the capacity of state and local institutions for efficient and sustainable service delivery,
scaling-up performance-based delivery models, increasing customer voice for accountability, and providing
quality assurance through robust M&E systems.
Relevance of the PDO: Given the country and sector context, the PDO continue to be relevant in regard to
the currently prevailing national/state level and CPF priorities. They were pitched at the right level to
address the RWSS-related priorities of the GoM. Maharashtra is one of the leading states in India in
implementing WSS sector reforms.
Rationale for PfR Support: The Program was a sub-part of a the GoM's larger 10-Year RWSS Program
(2012-2022). The PfR program enabled the Bank to support and incentivize key aspects of the overarching
GoM program. The PfR Program boundaries were defined by a six-year (2014-2020) implementation period
as well as sectoral and geographical priorities. The PfR Program was designed to support the GoI's and
GoM's objectives of strengthening of planning, implementation and monitoring capacities in the RWSS
sector with a focus on community-driven and demand-responsive approaches. The Maharashtra RWSS


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



       PfR Program was the first intervention of its type supported by the WBG in India's RWSS and was followed
       by several other PfR interventions that drew upon the experience under this PfR project.
       Prior Bank experience in the sector: The World Bank has long been engaged in India's WSS sector and
       has financed several projects. Currently, it has a portfolio of WSS and RWSS projects in seven states. The
       focus in recent projects has included strengthening of planning, implementation and monitoring
       capacities. Specifically in Maharashtra, the Bank financed the Maharashtra Water Supply and
       Environmental Protection Project (US$110 million, 1991-98) and the Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and
       Sanitation Project (US$180 million, 2003-2009). Experience under these earlier projects fed into the
       preparation and implementation of the Maharashtra RWSS PfR Project.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To improve the performance of Maharashtra's sector institutions in planning, implementation, and monitoring
     of its Rural Water Supply and Sanitation program

    Rationale
     Maharashtra was among the first states in India to institute sector-wide reforms in regard to its Rural Water
    Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) sector. It was also the first state in India to adopt a Program for Results (PfR)
    project with the Bank. Despite some improvements achieved under earlier Bank-financed operations,
    successful implementation of the RWSS reforms required further strengthening of institutional capacity in
    regard to sector planning, program implementation, and monitoring. The theory of change (TOC) was that
    the project inputs would provide technical assistance, including consulting services and equipment, aimed at
    (i) strengthening sector planning and monitoring and (ii) improving institutional capacity for program
    implementation. This would yield outputs including (i) a strengthened M&E system for the sector; (ii)
    preparation of District Annual RWSS Plans for selected districts; (iii) strengthened capacity in key sector
    institutions; and (iv) improved capacity for water quality testing and training. The intermediate outcomes
    would include (i) an M&E system established and in use in all districts; (ii) annual RWSS Plans prepared and
    used in selected districts; and (iii) adequate staffing and training in key sector institutions. The outcome
    would be improved performance of Maharashtra's RWSS sector institutions.
    Key assumptions underlying the TOC were that: (i) a sector-wide M&E system could improve the GoM's
    ability to monitor progress and performance of the RWSS sector on a dynamic basis; (ii) rural communities
    would be actively engaged in decision-making and the annual district-level RWSS planning process; (iii) the
    strengthened capacity of the key sector institutions would translate into improved service delivery and
    sustainability of the sector investments; (iv) the implementing agencies would have the required capacity to
    implement the water supply and sanitation construction activities; and (v) the GoM would retain its overall
    commitment to follow results-based approaches. The assumptions were reasonable in the prevailing context.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



 As discussed earlier in Section 2, some of the PDO Indicators (PDOIs) and Intermediate Results
 Indicators (IRIs) had significant shortcomings in regard to clarity and measurability, and were not fully aligned
 with the World Bank's Core Sector Indicators. These shortcomings were addressed at the first restructuring
 in 2019.
 Outputs and Outcomes: (based on ICR paras. 45 to 55 and Annex 1 - Results Framework)
 The outputs and outcomes for this objective are discussed under the following Results Areas (as originally
 defined prior to restructuring):
 Results Area 1: Strengthened sector planning and monitoring: The outcome was to be measured by the
 following PDO indicators:

   • number of districts using improved planning processes and strengthened M&E systems.
   • percentage of sanctioned piped rural water supply systems that followed GoM's demand-responsive
   approaches.

 Strengthened M&E system: This was covered under DLI-1 "Strengthened M&E system for the sector". As
 defined in the PAD, a strengthened M&E system was to be able to capture and analyze a minimum set of
 indicators including: (i) sector performance, including design and technical considerations for water supply
 and sanitation services; (ii) fiduciary performance including budgets, funds flow, and procurement aspects;
 and (iii) project/contract management including schedule and cost performance of RWSS schemes (ICR
 para.19). The original IRI was that the WSSD carries out a review of the implementation of the strengthened
 M&E system and identifies required changes and future needs. This IRI was not changed during
 implementation and was achieved by September 30, 2020. The PDO indicator was "number of districts using
 strengthened M&E systems", The original target was exceeded (original target 33; revised target 30; actual
 34; achievement level against original target 103%).
 Improved planning processes: An improved planning process was defined as one that helps assess needs
 and guide investment and program support decisions using: (i) village level data collection on key water-
 related indicators approved by WSSD; (ii) information available from sources such as GSDA; and (iii) tools
 for spatial mapping and analysis. The improved planning process captures village level information and is
 used to build block and district level action plans for planning and prioritizing activities (ICR Annex 1- Results
 Framework). The original outcome target was substantially underachieved. (original target 33; revised target
 6; actual 4; achievement against original target 12%).
 GoM's demand-responsive approach: The ICR reports (para. 46) that the original target in regard to
 demand-responsive planning of rural water supply systems was barely achieved due to difficulties in tracking
 the performance indicator (Schedule Performance Index) that was adopted under the original project.
 Based on this, the efficacy of Objective 1 is rated Modest.


 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



To improve the performance of Maharashtra's sector institutions in planning, implementation, and monitoring
of its Rural Water Supply and Sanitation program

Revised Rationale
The original Objective 1 was not changed during implementation. However, as discussed earlier in Section 2,
significant changes were made in regard to some PDO indicators, IRIs and associated targets. The TOC for
the Revised Objective 1 is essentially the same as provided above under Objective 1. Key assumptions were
essentially the same as for Objective 1. With the changes made in the PDO and IR indicators, the indicators
were relevant, measurable and adequate to assess the attribution of outcomes to the project interventions.
Outputs and Outcomes: (based on ICR paras. 45 to 55 and Annex 1 - Results Framework)
Post-restructuring, outcomes under the Revised Objective 1 were to be assessed on the basis of the
following PDO indicators:

  • number of districts using strengthened M&E systems
  • number of districts using improved planning processes
  • percentage of sanctioned piped rural water supply systems that followed GoM's demand-responsive
  approach
  • strengthened capacity of GoM's key sector institutions
  • percentage of Gram Panchayats (GPs) that maintain Open Defecation Free (ODF) status


The outputs and outcomes are discussed below under the respective Results Areas.
Results Area 1: Strengthened sector planning and monitoring
Strengthened M&E system: This was covered under DLI-1 "Strengthened M&E system for the sector". The
definition of a strengthened M&E system was further clarified and elaborated under the project
restructuring. The Program supported the conceptualization, development, and implementation of a sector-
wide M&E system. The relevant DLI-1 (also the IRI) was "WSSD carries out a review of the implementation
of the strengthened M&E system and identifies required changes and future needs". The ICR reports (para.
47) that the system was rolled out in September 2019 and was operational in all 34 districts of the state by
project closing. The target was achieved. The ICR confirms (Results Framework) that the districts have been
fully equipped to operate the systems and are able to enter the data, generate reports, and capture
information on 67 indicators grouped into 11 modules under three thematic areas of sector performance,
fiduciary performance, and contract management performance. The ICR reports (Results Framework) that
WSSD ensured data validation based on online verification with the districts. The documents and evidence
were reviewed and confirmed by the Independent Verification Agent (IVA) appointed under the project. The
ICR also reports (para. 48) that some challenges remained at project closing, including quality of data entry
and outputs, regular use of the system in decision-making, and integration with the national Management
Information System (MIS). It is further reported that WSSD intends to address these issues.
Improved planning processes: The definition of an improved planning process was further clarified and
elaborated under the project restructuring. The district planning process was strengthened and Annual
District Plans were prepared in 4 districts (67% achievement level against the revised target of 6 districts )
(ICR para. 49). Digital tools and a strengthened district annual planning process were developed by WSSD
with assistance from specialists from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The planning process
included detailed community-wide consultations and interventions were based on the specific needs of the


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



    different villages, including the most needy villages. The ICR reports (para. 49), however, that these plans
    were not yet being consistently used due to the need to quickly identify water supply investments that could
    be included under the Government of India's water supply related program.
    Results Area 2: Improved capacity for program implementation
    Institutional capacity building: This was covered under DLI-2. As reported in the ICR (para. 52) a
    comprehensive capacity-building needs assessment of the water and sanitation sector in Maharashtra was
    carried out by a specialized consulting firm. Based on this assessment, 40 standard training modules were
    developed covering procurement, financial management, communications, M&E, and technical sector skills.
    Annual capacity-building plans were prepared and implemented by MEETRA (Maharashtra Environmental
    Engineering and Research Academy). Training was also carried out for officers and staff at the State, Zilla
    Parishad (ZP), Block and Gram Panchayat (GP) levels. The Program identified and mobilized 2,357 staff for
    the state's decentralized sector institutions through a mix of WSSD's own staff, staff on deputation from other
    departments, and staff contracted from the market. (ICR para. 50).The District Water and Sanitation Mission
    (DWSM) cell was strengthened and the ICR reports that it was instrumental in achieving ODF status in the
    state, establishing an effective water quality monitoring system, and adopting a sector-wide M&E
    system. The DLI-2 required that relevant staffing levels be maintained at a level of at least 75% each year
    during the implementation period. The target was substantially achieved. On average, the actual
    achievement was 67% (achievement level of 89% against the revised target).
    GoM's demand-responsive approach: The revised definition of the GoM's demand-responsive approach was
    "A rural water supply system is considered to have followed GoM's demand responsive approach if a number
    of minimum conditions are satisfied including; (i) confirmation of the Gram Panchayat's (GP's) resolution to
    seek a ne w system; the GP's approval of the new system; the GP's agreement to take over the system
    through WSSD; and establishment of a Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC) including an
    adequate representation of women. WSSD carried out sample surveys through the districts/ZPs and
    confirmed that the processes were followed across the state. The PDO indicator was "percentage of
    sanctioned piped rural water supply systems that followed GoM's demand-responsive approach". Against the
    revised target of 60%, the actual achievement was 100%. The target was substantially overachieved.


    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     To improve access to quality and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in peri-urban villages.

    Rationale
    With rapid urban growth, the demand for water supply and sanitation services increased as well in the peri-
    urban areas. Rising incomes among segments of the population led to an increase in demand for better
    quality services. However, supply of water supply and sanitation services lagged behind demand both in
    terms of adequate access as well as quality. The theory of change (TOC) was that the project would provide
    inputs in the form of technical assistance, including consulting services and equipment, to support water
    supply and sanitation interventions in peri-urban areas. These would yield outputs including (i)



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



 commissioned peri-urban water supply systems and (ii) improved service delivery to peri-urban areas. The
 outcome would be improved quality and sustainable water supply access in peri-urban areas.
 Key assumptions were that: (i) the GPs would continue with their commitment to ensure sustainability of the
 installed systems and (ii) the GoM would continue to provide the required level of support. As discussed
 earlier in Section 2, the PDO indicator, some Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs), and associated targets
 had significant shortcomings in regard to clarity and measurability, and were not fully aligned with the World
 Bank's Core Sector Indicators. These shortcomings were addressed at the first restructuring in 2019.
 Outputs and Outcomes (based on ICR paras. 56 to 58 and Annex 1 - Results Framework):
 Results Area 3: Improved access to quality and sustainable access to water and sanitation services in peri-
 urban villages
 For Objective 2, a single PDO indicator was included under the original project "number of people in peri-
 urban villages who are connected to a sustainable water supply system".
 Achievement of the IRI targets was as follows:

   • Percentage of GPs that are using sustainable O&M (Operations & Maintenance) mechanisms: (baseline
   10%; original target 40%; actual 56%; achievement level 140%).
   • Number of house connections to a commissioned peri-urban water supply system (baseline 0%; original
   target 68,095; actual 48,058; achievement level 71%).
   • Number of house connections to a sustainable water supply system receiving regular water service
   (targets not specified).
   • Number of house connections to sustainable sullage collection and disposal systems (baseline 0;
   original target 51,071; actual - not reported - the target was dropped at restructuring).

 In regard to the PDO, against the targeted number of beneficiaries of 340,000, the actual achieved was
 200,399; achievement level 59%). The outcome target was significantly underachieved.
 Based on this, the ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 2 as
 Modest.



 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 2 Revision 1
 Revised Objective
 To improve access to quality and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in peri-urban villages.

 Revised Rationale
 The original Objective 2 was not changed under the restructurings. However, as discussed earlier in Section
 2, significant changes were made in some PDO indicators and IRIs and in the associated targets, The TOC
 for the Revised Objective 2 remains essentially the same as provided above for Objective 2. Key
 assumptions were essentially the same as for Objective 2. With the changes made in the PDO and IR



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



indicators, the indicators were relevant, measurable and adequate to assess the attribution of outcomes to
the project interventions.
Outputs and Outcomes (based on ICR paras. 56 to 58 and Annex 1 - Results Framework):
Results Area 3: Improved access to quality and sustainable water and sanitation services in peri-urban
villages
Achievements under this objective were assessed under the following key IRIs:
Percentage of piped water systems that are using sustainable O&M models: Under the revised definition,
"sustainable model" was re-defined as "suitable model" as follows: A system is considered to have a
suitable O&M model if the following minimum conditions are satisfied: (i) an appropriate O&M system has
been decided by the GP/system beneficiaries as per the O&M guidelines established by WSSD; (ii) the GP
has adopted the system; and (iii)there is an assessment of annual O&M costs and the GP resolves to collect
suitable levels of tariffs to meet the O&M costs or to make up any shortfalls through other sources. The target
was overachieved (baseline 10%; target 40%; actual 56%; achievement level 140%).
Number of house connections to a commissioned peri-urban water supply system: Under the revised
definition, a commissioned peri-urban water supply system means a peri-urban water supply system that is
physically completed and commissioned and certified by the responsible WSSD engineering officer. The
target was underachieved (baseline 0; target 68,095; actual 48,058; achievement level 71%).
Number of house connections to a peri-urban water supply system receiving service as per service delivery
standards: Under the revised definition, at a minimum, service delivery standards required (i) operation
under a suitable O&M model; (ii) daily water supply at a minimum of 70 liters per day (lpd); (iii) water quality
that meets GoM standards; and (iv) limited disruptions. The target was substantially achieved (baseline 0;
revised target 45,000; actual 41,658; achievement level 93%).
Number of households in peri-urban areas connected to sullage collection and safe disposal systems: The
definition of peri-urban sullage collection and disposal systems are those that: (i) collect sullage generated
from households; (ii) treat and dispose or re-use the treated sullage according to GoM/GoI environmental
standards and norms. The target was not achieved (baseline 0; revised target 28,000; actual 0; achievement
level 0%).
Outcomes: The revised PDO indicator was 'number of people provide with access to improved water sources
in peri-urban schemes". The revised target was overachieved (baseline 0; revised target 185,000; actual
200,399; achievement level 108%). Of the targeted 46 schemes, 45 had been commissioned, with 36
schemes demonstrating initial sustainability based on O&M considerations. Nine schemes had been handed
over to the GPs. Surveys conducted and duly certified confirmed that the GPs were regularly collecting tariffs
towards meeting the O&M requirements. The requirements under the associated DLI indicators (DLI-3 and
DLI-4) were deemed to be fulfilled. The Program helped strengthen sustainability through the adoption of
O&M approaches. A domestic metering policy was developed which was a first in India's RWSS sector (ICR
para. 57). The policy clarifies the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders and provides technical,
procurement, cost-sharing and management options for metering. O&M guidelines were developed and
provide to the GPs. A survey in 2020 confirmed that 56% of the GPs were meeting the O&M criteria and
collecting more than 80% of the targeted revenues towards O&M expenses. The ICR reports (para. 58) that
DLI-4 on service delivery in peri-urban areas was not eligible for any disbursements according to the
conditions set by the Bank during the Program extension in March 2020 due to delays in WSSD adopting the
practice of measuring results with respect to specific service delivery parameters.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 22
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)




    Revised Rating
    Substantial
PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     To improve access to quality and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in water-stressed and
     water-quality affected areas,

    Rationale
    Maharashtra has a number of areas that are prone to be water-stressed and vulnerable to droughts or water-
    quality affected areas due to inadequate water quality in affected aquifers. The theory of change (TOC) was
    that the project would provide inputs in the form of technical assistance, including consulting services,
    facilities, and equipment that would improve access to quality and sustainable services in these areas. The
    resulting outputs would be (i) improved water systems; and (ii) improved aquifer management.These outputs
    would contribute to the outcome of increased access to improved water sources in water-stressed and
    water-affected areas.
    Key assumptions were that (i) the GPs benefiting from the project interventions would continue to ensure
    sustainability of the facilities through adequate O&M coverage and revenue collection policies and (ii) the
    GoM would continue to provide technical, financial, and advisory support as appropriate. As discussed
    earlier in Section 2, some of the original PDO indicators and IR indicators lacked clarity or measurability and
    were modified at the project restructuring in 2019.
    Outputs and Outcomes (based on ICR paras. 59 to 64 and Annex 1 - Results Framework):
    Results Area 4: Improved access to safe drinking water in water-stressed and water-quality affected areas
    For the original Objective 3, pre-restructuring, achievement of the IRI and PDO indicators was as follows:
    IRI: Number of community safe and secure water schemes (baseline 0; original target 580; actual 100;
    achievement level 17%). The target was substantially underachieved.
    IRI: Number of aquifer water management initiatives successfully implemented (baseline 0; original target
    24; actual 12; achievement level 50%). The target was substantially underachieved
    Outcomes: The PDO indicator was "people provided with access to improved water sources in water-
    stressed/water-quality affected areas (baseline 0; original target 471,000; actual 230,454; achievement level
    49%). The target was substantially underachieved. The ICR reports (para. 59) that achievements against the
    pre-restructuring targets were modest: for access, 49% and for community safe and secure drinking water
    systems, 17%.
    Based on this, the ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 3 as Modest.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL
    PHINNERREVISEDTBL
    Objective 3 Revision 1
    Revised Objective



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



To improve access to quality and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in water-stressed and
water-quality affected areas,

Revised Rationale
The original Objective 3 was not revised under the project restructurings. However, substantial changes were
made in some PDO indicators and IRIs and in the associated targets with a reduction in the ambition of the
project. The theory of change (TOC) for the Revised Objective 3 remains essentially the same as provided
above for Objective 3. Key assumptions remain essentially the same as for Objective 3. With the changes in
PDO indicators and IRIs, the revised indicators were relevant and measurable, and adequate for assessing
attribution of the results to the project interventions.
Outputs and Outcomes (based on ICR paras. 59 ti 64 and Annex 1 - Results Framework)
Results Area 4: Improved access to safe and secure water in water-stressed and water-quality affected
areas
Achievements under the IRIs were as follows:
Number of community safe and secure water schemes (CSSWS): Under the revised definition, a CSSWS is
a single village water supply system that satisfies the following minimum conditions: (i) located in an area
categorized as water-stressed or water-quality affected inn accordance with established criteria; (ii) delivers
potable drinking water complying with GoM's standards; (iii) provides at least the minimum quantity of
drinking water according to prevailing GoM norms; (iv) implemented in line with GoM's demand-responsive
approach; and (v) uses a suitable O&M model. Achievements were as follows: (baseline 0; revised target
214; actual 100; achievement level 47%). The target was substantially underachieved.
Number of aquifer water management initiatives (AWMIs) successfully implemented: Under the revised
definition, an AWMI refers to an aquifer area in which relevant structural (physical interventions) and non-
structural (demand management/conservation) measure are implemented with the involvement of the
community with the objective of improving the sustainability of groundwater management to enhance
drinking water security. Achievements were as follows: (baseline 0; revised target 12; actual 12;
achievement level 100%). The target was achieved.
Outcomes: Of the 214 CSSWS targeted post-restructuring (102 in water-stressed areas and 112 in water-
quality affected areas), 148 systems (80 in water-stressed and 68 in water-quality affected areas) were
completed. Requirements in regard to the DLI-5 were certified to be fulfilled and funds disbursed accordingly.
For habitations in water-stressed areas, innovative technological designs were successfully implemented. A
community O&M model was developed and the communities trained in its application, including collecting
maintenance fees from the beneficiary households. For water-quality affected areas, reverse osmosis plants
and de-fluoridation plants were developed under build-operate-transfer (BOT) schemes under which the
BOT contractor would operate the plants for the first 10 years before handing them over to the GPs. WSSD
would provide financial support in the initial years with the GPs progressively becoming responsible for
covering O&M requirements, Under the AWMI program, a total of 12 aquifers were treated under the
Program in seven districts, targeting 102 villages in 72 GPs. Post-restructuring, the PDO indicator for
Objective 3 was "number of people provided with access to improved water sources in water-stressed and
water-quality affected areas". Achievements were as follows: (baseline 0; revised target 200,000; actual
230,454; achievement level 115%). The target was overachieved.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 22
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



             Revised Rating
             Substantial

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                   Rate
                                                                    Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                   Available?
                                                                                            0
            Appraisal                                               0
                                                                                            Not Applicable
                                                                                            0
            ICR Estimate                                            0
                                                                                            Not Applicable

     * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


     6. Outcome



                 Outcome Rating (Split Evaluation)
              Item                                         Before Restructuring               After Restructuring
              Relevance of PDO                             Substantial                        Substantial
              Efficacy of PDO                              Modest                             Substantial
              Objective 1                                  Modest                             Not rated
              Objective 2                                  Modest                             Not rated
              Objective 3                                  Modest                             Not rated
              Revised Objective 1                          Not rated                          Substantial


                                                                                                           Page 15 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



 Revised Objective 2                            Not rated                              Substantial
 Revised Objective 3                            Not rated                              Substantial
 Outcome ratings                                Moderately Unsatisfactory              Satisfactory
 Numerical value of outcome ratings             3                                      5
 Disbursements (US$ million)                    31.32                                  49.30
 Share of disbursement (%)                      39%                                    61%
 Weighted value of outcome rating               1.17                                   3.05
 Final outcome rating                           1.17 + 3.05 = 4.22
                                                Moderately Satisfactory




During implementation, significant changes were made which resulted in a reduction in the overall ambition of
the project. The outcome rating above is therefore based on a split evaluation taking into account the pre-
restructuring and post-restructuring objectives and results. The original objectives are rated pre-structuring and
the revised objectives post-restructuring, and the outcome rating is weighted by the relative share of
disbursements. The numerical value of outcome ratings is based on a six-point scale (6=Highly
Satisfactory). On this basis, the final outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory



a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risks: This risk is assessed as Moderate. Beneficiaries under the project are predominantly in rural
and peri-urban areas. Under the decentralized structure promoted by the GoM, the local bodies at the district,
block and Gram Panchayat (GP) levels would be largely responsible for operating and maintaining the facilities
and systems set up under the program. Given the lack of sufficient technical experience at the GP level, the
GoM would have to ensure that technical and advisory support is provided in a timely and sufficient manner.
Institutional risks: This risk is assessed as Moderate. Substantial gains have been made under the program in
strengthening institutional capacity in key GoM institutions involved in the RWSS sector, including staffing
levels, training, facilities, and supporting equipment. However, sustainability of the gains will
require commitment from the GoM to maintaining and continuing to apply the planning, implementation and
monitoring systems established under the program. The GoM would also have to ensure continuity of relevant
staffing at the higher levels as this was one of the factors that significantly affected the pace of project
implementation.
Financial risks; This risk is assessed as Moderate. Efficient operation and maintenance of the water supply and
sanitation facilities established under the program will require that the necessary revenues are collected. Since
most of the established facilities are administered by the relevant GPs, sustainability of the program benefits will
require the willingness and ability of the GPs to set appropriate tariffs and collect sufficient revenues.

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  For the World Bank, the program was the first Bank-supported PfR operation in the RWSS sector In India.
  Nevertheless, the Bank team was able draw on the experience gained under previous and ongoing Bank-
  financed projects in India's water supply and sanitation sector, including some in the RWSS sector. This
  included a predecessor project in Maharashtra (Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project)
  which was completed in 2009. The strategic relevance and approach were sound and the program was
  well-aligned with priorities under the GoI, GoM and Bank CPFs (prevailing at appraisal as well as the
  latest). Technical, financial and economic aspects were well considered. The design took into account
  poverty, gender and social aspects. Assessments were carried out in regard to environmental and social
  aspects. Policy and institutional aspects were a special focus under the project since institutional
  strengthening was a key objective. M&E aspects received special attention since strengthening the M&E
  system state-wide was a major objective. The risk assessment was adequate and mitigation measures
  were identified. Despite this, as acknowledged in the ICR (para. 95), the program did exhibit weaknesses
  at entry, including issues related to readiness for implementation, some over-ambitious targets, lack of
  clarity and measurability in some key indicators, and unwarranted backloading of infrastructure-related DLI
  disbursements. This contributed to subsequent delays in project implementation.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank supervision team was proactively involved in the program implementation over the duration of the
  project. To address the issue of delays in implementation and lagging disbursements in the earlier years of
  the project, the Bank team identified the need for restructuring as early as 2015. However, due to delays on
  the part of the concerned GoM agencies to complete their internal processes, including audits and
  reporting, the MTR mission was delayed until March 2017 and the first restructuring took place only in 2019,
  over five years into project implementation. For the restructuring, the supervision team was pragmatic in
  recognizing the need to reduce the ambition of the project and make modifications in some PDO indicators,
  IR indicators and outcome targets to align them better with the capacity of the counterparts.
  The Bank team carried out a total of 11 implementation support missions (ISMs) over the implementation
  period of nearly seven years. The team was well-staffed with environmental, social and fiduciary
  specialists. The team benefited in terms of continuity from there being a single Task Team Leader (TTL)
  over the entire implementation period. The team arranged for provision of 'hands-on' support to WSSD for
  development of various capacity building modules, carrying out social audits, and supporting contract
  management. The team's reporting was regular and candid with Implementation Status and Results Reports
  (ISRs) being filed in a timely manner.



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Strengthening of the GoM's M&E system for the RWSS sector was a major objective under the project. The
  presentation of a detailed theory of change (TOC) was not a requirement at the time of project appraisal. The
  M&E design was based on utilizing the GoM's existing M&E system for the sector and building on it to add the
  special requirements in regard to the program. Given the decentralized sector implementation policy being
  followed by the GoM. the M&E system was designed to obtain the relevant information from the various levels
  of administration (state. district, block, and GP/village) together with the required certification and verification
  procedures. Nevertheless, there were some weaknesses in the M&E design including definitions of some PDO
  and IR indicators, which required modification during project restructuring.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, the M&E data were regularly collected for the purpose of tracking implementation
  progress, including achievement of scheduled activities, including construction and operationalization of
  facilities; staffing, training and other institutional strengthening activities; and compliance of various GoM
  administrative bodies with agreed actions.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were regularly reviewed and utilized to assess implementation progress including
  disbursement linked conditions and procurement-related activities. However, the ICR reports (para 89) that
  the GoI had not yet given permission for the State M&E system's interface with the national-level M&E
  system. As a result, the State was running two parallel M&E systems at the closing of the project.
  On balance, the ICRR rates the quality of the M&E system as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)




a. Safeguards
  Environmental and Social Safeguards
  At appraisal, the PAD did not specify whether any environmental and social safeguard policies were
  triggered. The ICR does not provide any information in this regard. An Environmental and Social Systems
  Assessment (ESSA) was carried out during program preparation (ICR para. 90). The ESSA confirmed that
  the state had an enabling policy and legal framework and assessed that the overall environmental and
  social impacts would be positive. The assessment also found that the state's social policies and procedures
  generally adequate for the program. The state has an enabling policy for legal framework to promote
  decentralized service delivery, active participation of women, and safeguard interest of vulnerable sections
  of society. The ICR reports (para. 91) that the Bank monitored compliance with agreed environmental and
  social action plans, including compliance with the requirements of PAP9 that specified necessary capacity-
  building measures for implementing strengthened environmental and social management rules. The Bank
  provided technical support to the WSSD for development pf social audit kits and organizing workshops on
  social audits in 150 GPs. The ICR confirms (para. 92) that, for the peri-urban schemes across 12 program
  districts, there was minimum impact on private land since the land was acquired through donations and no
  acquisition of private land.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: The ICR reports )para. 93) that a Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) was carried
  out during program preparation. The FSA identified areas of weakness and proposed mitigation measures that
  were incorporated in the Program Action Plan (PAP) and Program Operational Manual. During implementation,
  delays occurred in reporting on the utilization of allocated funds, and in consolidation and audit of program
  financial statements. The ICR reports (para. 93) that, although the initial project design included a PAP for
  strengthening accounting systems at MJP (Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran) this was dropped at the first
  restructuring in 2019. It also reports that the implementation of the revised PAP to strengthen sector-wide
  expenditures reporting through the M&E system was significantly delayed.
  Procurement: The ICR reports (para. 94) that, as part of PAP compliance, WSSD had to share a Procurement
  Post Review (PPR) report covering 15% of all contracts carried out under the program before project closing.
  This was significantly delayed but was finally completed and the report shared with the Bank in March 2021.
  The ICR reports that the Bank reviewed the report and found it to be generally in order. No complaints were
  reported through the PPR or brought to the Bank directly.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR reports (para. 67) an additional outcome (not included in the Results Framework) of the program
  was the strengthening of the capacity of the state training organization MEETRA (Maharashtra

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



  Environmental and Engineering Research Agency). The program provided support to MEETRA, including,
  development of a new campus, preparation of a business plan, and supporting linkage with the German
  Corporation for International Cooperation (GTZ).



d. Other
  Gender: The ICR reports (paras. 69 to 71) that by improving access and water quality in rural and peri-urban
  areas, the program significantly benefited women and girls by reducing the physical burden and time spent
  in fetching and carrying water for household needs. Women were adequately represented in various
  committees in the village including the Village Water and Sanitation Committees (VWSC) and the Aquifier
  Ground Water Management Associations. One-third of the positions were reserved for women. The ICR
  reports (para. 70) that an estimated 207,730 women benefited from the program. The ICR also reports that
  social audits were conducted in 35 villages, reaching out to about 2,000 people, during which women
  beneficiaries confirmed the benefits they received from the program.
  Poverty Reduction and Shared Responsibility: As reported in the ICR (para. 72), the program, by design,
  focused on improving the quality of life and sharing the benefits of improved access and water quality with
  the more vulnerable parts of the population in peri-urban, water-stressed or water-quality affected areas that
  were previously lacking adequate service. The ICR reports (para. 72) that an estimated 430,853 people
  benefited from improved access to water sources of which 91,685 (21%) were from vulnerable groups
  (scheduled castes and scheduled tribes).



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                           ---
                              Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                                                                  The ICRR rates Bank
                                                                                  performance regarding Quality
                                                                                  at Entry as Moderately
                                                                                  Satisfactory due to insufficient
                                                                                  readiness for implementation
                                                       Moderately
Bank Performance              Satisfactory                                        and shortcomings in design of
                                                       Satisfactory
                                                                                  project scope and key
                                                                                  indicators. This leads to an
                                                                                  overall rating of Moderately
                                                                                  Satisfactory for Bank
                                                                                  performance.
Quality of M&E                Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)




 The ICR (paras. 102 to 104) lists a number of lessons from which IEG derives the following lessons that are
relevant for similar projects implemented in comparable environments:
1. Clearly defined program boundaries improve PfR implementation readiness: A lesson from this project was
that the defined program boundaries only identified general focus areas (e.g. peri-urban, water-stressed)
instead of defining the program in terms of specific geographic areas or investments. This effectively shifted the
burden of identifying the specific content of the program into the implementation period. thereby causing
disbursement delays and extra costs to the client. Future projects should identify PfR boundaries as specifically
as possible or clearly justify when this is not possible.
2. Program DLIs' feasibility and design should align with the client's implementation capacity and should include
sub-DLRs for more predictable achievement of DLIs: The initial program results and DLIs were designed from a
sectoral perspective without fully considering the state's implementation capacity. Adding simple definitions and
specific quantitative targets makes it more feasible for the state to implement the interventions and facilitates
the DLI verification process and assessment of achievements. Future PfR operations should include DLIs with
associated sub-DLRs to achieve more predictable achievements of DLIs and facilitate the implementation
process.
3. Peri-urban areas need focused policies for water supply and sanitation: The experience under the project
demonstrated the special nature of peri-urban areas which are rural by classification but increasingly urban in
terms of population density, economic structure, and aspirations. Finalization of selection criteria contributed to
substantial delays in the implementation of the peri-urban areas.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain
The project represents the Bank's first PfR operation in the RWSS sector in India. The Bank is currently
engaged in other water supply and sanitation PfR operations, including some in the RWSS sector, in some
other states in India. The experience under the MRWSSP project could be reviewed along with that under the
other operations to derive lessons learned from the collective experience.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, clear, and candid, and generally complies with the relevant OPCS guidelines (except
in regard to length - 30 pages compared to the recommended length of 15 pages or less). The length of the
ICR is justified to some extent by the complexity of the project involving state-wide interventions. The ICR
presents a clear theory of change with a good diagrammatic representation of the results chain from activities
to outcomes. The analysis and conclusions are generally supported by evidence. The ICR has some


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Maha RWSSP (P126325)



shortcomings, The discussion of safeguards and fiduciary compliance is limited without an indication of the
ratings over time and at project closing.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 22
