     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022794

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P149599                                     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic            Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56750                                   31-Mar-2020                                           29,183,193.66

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2015                                 31-Mar-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         29,399,844.69                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objective was “to help improve efficiency and reliability of power distribution in the
   selected load areas served by EDL”. This was as per the Financing Agreement, 2015, p.6, as well as the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD), p.17.




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



   In the analysis that follows, the PDO can be parsed as follows: (i) “to help improve efficiency of power
   distribution in selected load areas served by EDL”, and (ii) “help improve reliability of power distribution in
   selected load areas served by EDL”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Smart metering, distribution improvement and distribution losses reduction (Estimated cost
   at appraisal: US$19 million; Actual cost at closing: US$21.43 million). This component supported the
   rehabilitation, improvement and automation of power distribution and metering infrastructure and equipment
   in the selected load areas to introduce smart metering, improve the reliability of power and reduce
   distribution losses in selected pars of the distribution network. This component included rehabilitating
   power distribution lines, upgrading of conductors, increasing transformer capacity, placement of capacitors
   for reactive power and voltage control, installation of load break switches and reclosers, etc.

   Component 2: Electric utility information service (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$6 million; Actual cost
   at closing: US$6.64 million). This component improved EDL’s information system by (a) supply and
   installation of communications hardware and software links to support advanced metering and distribution
   automation. (b) extension of the geographic information system to support power distribution O&M, and (c)
   supply and installation of an updated corporate financial management information system (FMIS).

   Component 3: Institutional capacity building and project implementation support (Estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$5 million; Actual cost at closing: US$1.32 million). The component included (a) power
   system software, distribution equipment, testers and other instruments, (b) consultancy for the electric utility
   information system, (c) support to measure distribution system performance indicators, and (d) project
   implementation support and incremental operating costs. This component was meant to enhance EDL’s
   institutional capacity to use new technologies to address distribution losses and improve power grid
   efficiency. The ICR notes (p.10) that although only US$1,32 million was spent under this component, in
   total expenditure on institutional capacity building and project implementation support, spread across all the
   components, actually aggregated slightly more than US$5 million.

   Component 4: Contingent emergency response (Total approved: US$0; Actual cost at closing:
   US$0). The objective of the contingency emergency response component (with a provisional zero dollar
   allocation) was to allow for the reallocation of financing in accordance with the IDA Immediate Response
   Mechanism to provide a rapid response to disaster or emergency events, as needed. The component
   would have financed expenditures on a positive list of goods and/or specific works and services required for
   emergency recovery. No relevant disaster or emergency actually occurred; hence the contingency
   component was not utilized.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



   Project Cost and Financing

   The original financing amount of US$30 million, covering the total cost of the project, came entirely from an
   IDA credit. Actual costs of the project at closing amounted to US$29.39 million, or 97.7 percent of the
   total. As mentioned earlier, although Component 3 was significantly curtailed, actual expenditures on
   institutional capacity building and project implementation support – spread the three main components -
   amounted to US$5.18 million, or slightly more than the amount originally allocated under Component 3.

   Borrower contribution

   No borrower contribution was envisaged as part of the project’s financing.

   Dates

   The project underwent a Level 2 restructuring on March 27, 2020, which extended the closing date by 12
   months to March 31, 2021. The restructuring allowed project cost savings (from major goods and services
   packages contracted at lower prices than initially estimated) to be utilized for new activities, such as delivery
   of safety equipment; also to waive two financial covenants, and drop one intermediate results indicator and
   align project targets with the new closing date. The project subsequently closed on (the revised) schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

With a per capita GDP of US$1,660 in 2013, Lao PDR was one of the poorest countries in Southeast
Asia. However, at the time of the project’s inception it was undergoing a rapid economic expansion,
boosted by the resource sector and supported by public investment in basic infrastructure. Underlining a
policy shift towards establishing a rules-based system for governing trade and private sector development,
the country completed its accession to the World Trade Organization in 2013.

Over the two decades prior to appraisal of the project, Lao PDR’s energy strategy had focused on
hydropower development, a national electrification program and export of electricity. Access to electricity
had increased enormously, from 15 percent in the mid-1990s to nearly 90 percent in 2014. Notwithstanding
this success, the domestic power market continued to be prone to low reliability of power and pressures to
import electricity in certain parts of the country, on account of underdeveloped and inefficient transmission
and distribution networks and seasonality of domestic hydropower. Demand for power had meanwhile
continued to grow – driven by the commercial and industrial sectors - in recent years, along with the rising
electrification rate, the peak load growing at 13 percent per annum on average. To meet the rising demand,
Lao had to import about one-third of its electricity requirement from neighboring countries. In 2013,
some1,205 GWh were imported - 80 percent from Thailand, 18 percent from China and 2 percent from
Vietnam – at a cost of US$65 million or about 0.6 percent of estimated GDP in that year.

At the time of appraisal, the key challenges facing the Lao electricity sector included inadequate domestic
(hydro) generation capacity for consumption, especially in the dry season (November – April), lack of a

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



               nationally connected power transmission grid, and inadequate transmission/distribution fees for T&D
               business. While the power sector had achieved a major degree of success by increasing electrification, the
               power grid was increasingly facing new challenges related to the rapid growth of demand for
               electricity. The main challenge were persistently high distribution losses (averaging 13 percent in 2014,
               with some areas experiencing over 20 percent) and sub-standard electricity services, including low
               reliability of supply due to overloading of the distribution grid, particularly in the main load areas.

               Alignment with Country Strategies

               The World Bank Group (WBG) has been supporting Lao PDR’s electricity sector since the 1960s, with a
               special focus on rural electrification since the 1980s. The project, which was intended to address the above
               key challenges, marked a shift in focus of WBG engagement from increasing access and rural electrification
               towards improving efficiency and reliability of electricity supply. High distribution losses were a fundamental
               problem for the electricity utility (EDL), contributing to its troubled financial condition, as it was forced to
               purchase additional power to cover the excessive losses, which it could not recover in terms of revenue. At
               the same time, the low reliability and quality of power supplied affected the smooth running of industrial and
               commercial activities, leading some customers to provide expensive back-up equipment. Against this
               background, modernizing the electricity distribution network, with a view to reducing losses and improving
               reliability was and remains a key national priority.

               The objectives of the project were consistent with the WBG Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY12-16,
               being aligned with all three themes, of (a) competitiveness and connectivity, (b) sustainable natural
               resource management, and (c) inclusive development with a cross-cutting theme of stronger public sector
               management. Improving the quality and reliability of power was expected to have a positive impact on
               competitiveness; the reduction of distribution losses would result in the saving of energy and reduced need
               for new generation; the cross-cutting theme of stronger public sector management would be supported by
               an improvement in the financial management system of the state-owned electric utility, EDL. The project’s
               objectives remained substantially relevant to the new County Partnership Framework (CPF), FY17-21,
               aligning with the CPF’s Focus Area 1 of (i) “Supporting inclusive growth” and its Objective 1.3 of ‘Investing
               in infrastructure for growth and inclusion” and its cross-cutting theme of strengthening institutions and
               systems for improved policy implementation.

               Based on the above, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To help improve efficiency of power distribution in selected load areas served by EDL”

                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)




Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC)

The project was designed to help improve the efficiency and reliability of power distribution in selected load
areas served by EDL (all those served by all existing MV distribution lines in Xaythany district – a total of 22
lines covering 127 km – connected to some 239 km of LV lines). Towards this end, a broad causal
connection could be drawn between the project’s activities and its outputs and outcomes. Key activities were
grouped under three active components: (a) smart metering and infrastructure & equipment upgrades to
medium and low voltage distribution lines, (b) provision of a modern electric utility information system, and (c)
institutional capacity building and implementation support. These activities produced a variety of outputs,
including (i) rehabilitated medium and low voltage lines and installed smart meters, (ii) installed
communication hardware and software links, expanded Geographical Information System (GIS) to support
distribution operation & maintenance (O&M), and updated financial management information system (FMIS),
and (iii) software, instruments, consultant support and trainings. These in turn led directly to PDO-level
outcomes, to help improve power distribution efficiency and reliability.

While the activities were broadly appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes, the theory of change (TOC)
discussion in the ICR does not specifically analyze whether they were of adequate scale to create a critical
mass for change. Also, the TOC was based on the assumption that EDL’s financial condition remained
adequate to carry out an effective distribution modernization program.

Outputs

- 15,163 residential electric meters installed, against a target of 15,000 (target achieved), replacing old
residential analog meters. It was expected that this would help bring down distribution losses by supporting
time-of-use tariffs, and by facilitating automatic meter reading.

- 1,875 non-residential meters installed, to replace old mechanical meters, were installed, against a target of
1,500 (target exceeded).

- 366 km of distribution lines were rehabilitated, against a target of 300 km (target exceeded). Overloaded
medium-voltage transformers, and medium and low-voltage lines were replaced, along with capacitors, load-
break switches and re-closers.


Outcomes

Improved efficiency of power distribution was measured in terms of reduction of distribution losses – both
technical and non-technical. As specified in the results matrix, electricity losses per year in the project area
were measured by the difference (in percentage terms) between total net injected generation and total energy
billed to customers (PAD, p.20). This emphasis on the impact of key technical improvements, rather than on
bill collection or theft control activities, was appropriate given focus of the project’s activities (ICR, p.14).

On this basis, the objective of improving efficiency in load areas served by EDL was achieved as reflected in
the fact that electricity losses were successfully reduced from their baseline of 24 percent to 14.3 percent by
closing and 14 percent two months later (as confirmed by EDL) against the target of 14 percent. This was


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



aided by the implementation and commissioning of smart metering, which had expanded to cover some 20
percent of customers in the district by project closing.

Direct project beneficiaries under the project expanded from a base of 207,000 to 306,000 – exceeding the
target of 297,000.

On this basis, with all outcome and intermediate outcome indicators having met their targets, achievement of
this objective is rated High.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To help improve the reliability of power distribution in selected load areas served by EDL”

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC)

As mentioned above, the project was designed to help improve the efficiency and reliability of power
distribution in selected load areas served by EDL (all those served by all existing MV distribution lines in
Xaythany district – a total of 22 lines covering 127 km – connected to some 239 km of LV lines). Towards this
end, a broad causal connection could be drawn between the project’s activities and its outputs and
outcomes. Key activities here included equipment upgrades to medium and low voltage distribution lines and
to utility information systems, as well as the installation of an expanded GIS to support distribution Operation
& Maintenance.

Reliability of power distribution was evaluated in terms of (a) the average interruption frequency per year in
the project area, and (b) the average duration of outages in the project area. Towards this end, the following
key indicators were used: (i) the System Average Interruption Frequency index (SAIFI), and (ii) the System
Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI). At appraisal, it was noted that EDL did not have the data to
record these indexes since the company lacked the equipment to record the interruption data at final
consumer level. Hence estimation of baselines had to wait upon installation of digital meters and utility
information management systems. Baselines were established subsequently during project implementation,
with the help of specialized consultants, and reflected metrics at the end of 2018. However, though there was
no accurate assessment of SAIDI available at approval, a dramatic improvement in SAIDI was in fact
observed to have taken place between 2012 and 2018 (according to the ICR, by a factor of 20 times. See:
ICR, p.14). Substantial progress in SAIDI and SAIFI was similarly observed since project approval in June
2015, well in excess of the targeted reduction levels.

Outputs



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



                            - Common to Objective 1: 366 km of distribution lines rehabilitated against a target of 300 km (target
                            exceeded). Overloaded medium-voltage transformers, and medium and low-voltage lines were replaced,
                            along with capacitors, load-break switches and re-closers.

                            - As part of strengthening the utility information system:

                               (A) 183 staff trained on procurement, STEP, project management, etc., against a target of 50.
                               (B) Issuance of financial statements: The number of months needed to issue financial statements reduced
                            from a baseline of 9 to 3, an improvement over the target of 4 months.
                               (C) Updated financial action plan for financial sustainability: The Third Financial Action Plan was
                            completed, as per the target, and endorsed by EDL and MEM.

                            - Average duration of outages in the project area: From a baseline of 2.35 hours (calculated as of December
                            2018), and a target of 2.12 hours, actual achievement was 1.0 by 2019 – a significant overachievement. On
                            account of many storm incidents and severe weather events during the latter part of 2020, the average
                            duration registered an increase to 2.40 hours at the beginning of 2021. Notwithstanding this volatility
                            however, the general trend in the SAIDI was clearly downwards (SAIDI having shown a 20-fold improvement
                            between 2012 and 2018).

                            Outcomes

                            Reliability of power distribution improved substantially in the load areas selected, over the duration of the
                            project. The frequency of average interruptions per year was reduced drastically, from a 2018 baseline of
                            19.14 to 10.30 by closing, significantly lower than the target of 17.23. This, achievement was despite the fact
                            that the population of customers in the selected load areas at closing was larger (70,268) than at approval
                            (47,060).

                            Based on the above results, and taking into account the difficulty of establishing accurate baselines at
                            approval, the project substantially achieved this objective.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            It is seen from the above that the project achieved its two objectives. Since there were no other EDL or other
                            development partner’s investments carried out in the geographical project areas during the period,
                            achievement can for the most part be directly attributed to the project. Efficacy was rated High for one
                            objective and Substantial for the other. Overall efficacy is hence rated Substantial.




                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at closing was estimated at 35.8 percent, with a Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$61.2 million which was comparable to the estimated rate at appraisal of 37 percent
and NPV of US$62.9 million. The project’s financial internal rate of return (FIRR) at closing was an estimated
19.3 percent, with the NPV at US$149 million, both of were closely comparable with the FIRR and NPV
estimated at appraisal of 20 percent and US$1534 million.

Operational/Administrative Efficiency

Overall the project was implemented without any cost overrun, with physical implementation running relatively
smoothly (the only exception being the fact of the accidental death of one worker, which led to a three-month
hiatus to investigate the root cause and institute improved safety protocols). The major works were essentially
completed prior to the onset of the covid-19 restrictions, including border closures, in March 2020. However, a
one-year extension was agreed to facilitate the installation and commissioning of the new advanced metering
and use the projected project savings to provide an electronic HR/payroll system and new safety equipment.

On this basis, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?                Point value (%)       *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                     37.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                  35.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives remain substantially relevant to the needs of the LAO PDR’s electricity
sector, as well as to the WBG’s current CPS for Lao PDR. Its overall efficacy was rated Substantial, the project
having achieved its key development objectives. Its efficiency is similarly rated Substantial, on the basis of both

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



economic analysis and Operational/Administrative efficiency considerations. As such, its overall outcome is
rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key risks to development outcome include: (a) Technical risks, arising from a possible deterioration over time
in reliability/efficiency of electricity supply as a potential consequence of rapidly rising demand for electricity;
(b) Financial sustainability risks, arising from the possibility of electricity tariffs remaining too low over the
foreseeable future - resulting in insufficient investment in the power system to properly operate and manage
the distribution network, and a shortage of finance for on-going maintenance; (c) Risks arising from weather-
related disruption and damage to infrastructure. These risks are presumed to be relatively low, in keeping
with the progress made by the sector to date (ICR, pgs. 23-24). Financial risks in particular were being
addressed by the Government through a review of electricity tariffs, which the World Bank was conducting at
the request of the authorities via the Bank-supported technical assistance for capacity building project for the
hydropower and mining sectors.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was aligned with a larger EDL investment program already under way, aimed at
  making fundamental improvements to the electricity network through introduction of a distribution
  automation system, a fault-detection, investigation & restoration system, and a distribution
  management/SCADA system, in four provinces. The project was intended to coordinate with these
  activities and focus on a specifc fast-growing district (Xaythany) that had the highest distribution losses in
  the country. As noted by the ICR (p.23), the technical design of the project was sound and well
  targeted. The project design was relatively straight-forward and self-contained, and sized so as not to
  necessitate additional co-financing to supplement IDA resources. The project’s key performance
  indicators (KPIs) were built around the commonly-used SAIDI and SAIFI indicators, which had not
  previously been monitored by EDL. As such, baseline values for these KPIs could only be collected after
  building up adequate measurement capability at EDL, a process that took nearly three years.

  Planned implementation arrangements were generally appropriate, taking account of the Bank’s fiduciary
  and safeguards policies. EDL had prior experience of working with the Bank on earlier projects and this
  project was consistent with EDL’s usual business activities, aided by specialist consultants and
  contractors who would be procured under the project. Key risks identified revolved mainly around
  fiduciary aspects and EDL’s financial position. An FM capacity assessment of EDL, conducted in 2015,
  confirmed that the utility had adequate FM systems and capacity in place to satisfy the Bank’s OP/BP
  10.00 with respect to financial management. Based on a procurement capacity assessment, it was
  decided to engage a dedicated procurement specialist for the duration of the implementation period. To

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



  address EDL’s financial liquidity problems, the Bank and IFC jointly facilitated the Lao PDR authorities in
  developing the Second Action Plan for Financial Sustainability of EDL and the Lao Power Sector
  Financial Action Plan for 2013-17.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was adequately supervised. The Bank team conducted 11 bi-annual supervision missions over
 a five-year period, providing implementation support from the country and regional offices. The ICR notes
 (p.20) that ISRs prepared were generally well-detailed and provided a candid assessment of issues and
 progress. The team was adequately engaged in implementation issues. When, for instance, a workplace
 accident involving a live power line led to a fatality, the Bank team recommended implementation of a
 safety checklist procedure and form completion for a power shutdown operation be done before work
 restarted, rather than afterward, as had been the practice. The Bank also recommended that EDL
 regularly conduct internal safety audits as part of the utility’s safety management system. When EDL’s
 overall financial condition worsened during the project period, the Bank team took steps to review and
 waive two covenants related to the utility’s financial performance. In addition, under a parallel project, the
 Bank undertook a review of electricity tariffs and a social assessment on tariff affordability in the design of a
 new tariff instruction after 2017.

 The ICR (p.35) notes that development partner dialogue and coordination were well integrated during
 project implementation. The Bank team worked with donors in advance of the NBI annual donor and
 annual governance meetings to ensure that all parties – particularly the NBI governance structure – were
 aware of the funding situation due to shortfalls of country contributions or other liquidity issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the ICR (p.21), the results framework was fairly clear and straightforward. Baselines for the
 SAIFI and SAIDI indicators had to be set during implementation because of a lack of adequate
 measurement capacity and tools at the project’s appraisal stage. However, proxy data available in the
 PAD allowed a reasonable estimate of the original values in the ICR, enabling a robust assessment of the
 results to take place.


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)




b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E function was satisfactorily managed for reporting by EDL. EDL monitored progress of the
  components against the performance indicators and prepared annual progress reports on project
  implementation. Though it took nearly three years, EDL was able to establish baseline values for the
  indicators that did not already have them at appraisal, and these were validated by the Bank. Technical
  assistance activities had their own M&E mechanism. A Mid-Term Review was held in early 2018 to take
  stock of the project’s implementation progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E processes and results were utilized at each stage of project implementation. Key data from the
  project, particularly for SAIFI and SAIDI, were fundamental for optimizing effective O&M of the
  distribution network.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B at entry and triggered the following policies at appraisal: OP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). OP 4.01 was triggered because some mitigation measures needed to be implemented
   during the civil works to minimize site-specific impacts on the environment. Environmental and social risks
   arising were limited on account of the rehabilitation nature of the project, with no involuntary resettlement or
   land acquisition being involved. The impact was limited to the voluntary donation of some land for the
   installation of some 50 power poles along a 9 km section of provincial public road and was located in the
   paddy fields. As regards OP 4.12, protocols for voluntary land donation and a Resettlement Policy
   Framework were included in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). OP 4.11 was
   triggered as a precautionary measure to avoid impacts to stupas, pagodas and other cultural
   resources. The initial site survey did not reveal any physical cultural or historical resources within the
   existing 22 kV distribution right of way. A detailed survey to identify any such resources at the site of the
   new power poles was conducted during the implementation phase.

   As mentioned in the ICR (p.22), the project complied with the triggered safeguards policies. The
   safeguards rating at the close of the project was Satisfactory for both environmental and social safeguards.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   According to the ICR (p.22), the financial management (FM) area presented some challenges that (with
   one exception – timing of audited financial statements) were eventually resolved. Deficiencies were noted
   in compiling a project asset register, updating contract management arrangements, documenting the use
   of funds in Designated Account (including explaining questionable expenditures) and the timing of audited
   report submission. Two irregularities flagged by the audited reports of 2018 and 2019 relating to impropers
   use of project funds and overstatement of some consultancy expenses were resolved by EDL top
   management, once they were flagged to them. Given that the project closing date was March 31, 2021, it
   was decided to extend the period of the 2020 financial report to cover the first quarter of 2021. The
   audited report for this consolidated period is expected to be available during the third quarter of 2021.

   The FM performance rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory at project closing.

   As regards Procurement, the procurement team included some members from EDL’s procurement office,
   with support from an international procurement consultant. All packages under the project were procured
   and procurement performance was rated Highly Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               M&E was adequate to measure
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Substantial               progress under the results
                                                                               framework
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. The Project illustrates the importance of structuring operations on the basis of sound and
well-targeted technical design, supported by adequate institutional capacity building. The
design of the project was relatively straight-forward and well-contained, and supported by adequate
governance structures. The selected district had the highest level of distribution losses in the
country, making it an obvious candidate for project selection. Though improvements could have

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)



been made in sector regulation, this would not have affected the viability or progress of the
operation. The experience gained from the project could subsequently be scaled up and replicated
in other load areas with high losses.

2. The long delay in setting baselines for some key indicators was a reminder that good
project preparation can sometimes take a long time. There can be a tension between the need
to deploy IDA resources quickly and the need to take the time to undertake the up-front work needed
to prepare the project thoroughly. Key M&E issues also need to be flagged to counterparts early
during appraisal to facilitate planned operations.

3. Though it is tempting for multilateral financing institutions to introduce ambitious
financial covenants wth a view to improving the condition of large state-owned utilities, these
can often be challenging to implement in the course of a single investment
operation. Sustained progress is most likely to happen in the context of an on-going and future
involvement, allowing supportive policies sufficient time in which to evolve.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and internally consistent and it provides a fair amount of detail on implementation. The
achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed. Weaknesses in the M&E system and elsewhere are
highlighted and discussed, although the rating of the M&E system is too strict; while some baseline values were
only established three years into the project, the results framework itself was sound and the M&E system was
well set up. Apart from that, the narrative supports the ratings and available evidence. One area which lacked
adequate detail was the discussion of the Bank’s quality of supervision, treatment of which was relatively
cursory.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LA - Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)




                                                                             Page 14 of 14
