     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



                                                                                    Report Number : ICRR0022733

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P149718                                     Kenya Statistics Program for Results

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                       Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57170                                   31-Dec-2020                                          48,776,217.56

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Sep-2015                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          48,776,217.56                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Vandana Chandra             Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, p.9), the Program
   Development Objective (PDO) of the Kenya Statistics Program-For-Results was “to support the Kenya
   National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) to generate better and more accessible data to inform policymakers
   and contribute to strengthening its capacity.”
   This ICRR will assess the following objectives:

     •   PDO1: To support KNBS to generate “better” data to inform policymakers


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



     •   PDO2: To support KNBS to generate “more accessible” data to inform policymakers.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No


c. Components
   To achieve the PDO, the program was structured to deliver results through four sub-components which
   were also the Intermediate Result Areas (IRAs):

     1.  Data gaps filled and capacity strengthened by implementing integrated survey programs: (US$102 in
     the PAD, actual not reported). The program of integrated surveys would fill National Accounts source
     data gaps. Likewise, an integrated household survey program would help close the gap in Kenya’s
     crucial poverty, labor, and socioeconomic data. In addition, both survey programs would improve
     Kenya’s Overall Statistical Capacity Score (SCI).
     2 . Quality of critical official statistical products and processes improved: (US$20.7 in the PAD, actual not
     reported). This component would enable the compilation of the IMF’s Data Quality Assessment
     Framework (DQAF) for five macroeconomic datasets and the achievement of the IMF’s Special Data
     Dissemination Standards (SDDS) requirements.
     3 . Dissemination practices strengthened, and access to data improved: (US$11, actual not
     reported). This component would enable scaling up data coverage and development of the Advanced
     Release Calendar (ARC).
     4 . Management systems strengthened: (US$4.7, actual not reported). This component covered
     implementing the Corruption Risk Assessment (CRA) action plan and strengthening financial
     management, filing, and procurement systems.

   The team built the program around 7 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs).


d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program Cost: The original Program cost at appraisal was Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 35.6 million
   (US$50.00 million equivalent), which comprised 36% of the total Program cost of US$138.4 million. The
   amount disbursed was US$48.78 million.
   Financing: A credit from the International Development Association (IDA) provided Program for Results
   (P4R) financing. The Swedish Development Agency (SIDA) committed to contributing US$3 million (2.2%
   of total Program cost) for technical assistance. The amount disbursed was US$3 million.
   Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$85.4 million (61.7% of the total Program cost).
   The amount disbursed was US$85 million (62.3% of actual total Program cost).
   Dates: The Program was approved on September 10, 2015 and became effective five months later on
   February 10, 2016. The Mid-Term Review occurred on October 18, 2018. Despite delays due to COVID-
   19, the program closed on its original closing date of December 31, 2020.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Rationale
  The PDO was fully aligned with the Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) [Refer to Kenya Vision 2030
  (Page 14; para 2.4).] which placed a strong emphasis on data and statistics in the pursuit of evidence-
  based policymaking for monitoring and evaluating the development impact of policies and programs. For
  example, in 2014, at the time of program preparation, many believed that poverty, unemployment, and
  gender inequality were high. However, the only data available were from 2005-06, measuring extreme
  poverty at 43 percent. Even the most recent baseline data on National Accounts were over a decade old.
  The PDO was critically relevant for the gender analysis in the 2018 Kenya Poverty and Gender Assessment
  and its achievement would inform the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic for Kenya.
  The PDO was central to the government’s agenda, as underscored in the Third Medium Term Plan (MTP-3)
  2018–2022 and Kenya Vision 2030. MTP-3 prioritized strengthening the KNBS to improve data quality by
  conducting several surveys and censuses within the Third Medium Term Plan period and making relevant
  statistics available on time to policymakers and the public. The PDO addressed challenges with the KNBS
  Strategic Plan 2013-2017. The KNBS responded to increasing demand for data by modifying its vital
  business processes, including identifying data to be collected, designing and administering statistical
  surveys, and disseminating data. The program addressed Kenya’s statistical challenges by supporting a
  subset of the KNBS Strategic Plan critical for achieving the PDO. It focused on delivering the core data and
  statistics Kenya needed to inform its policy agenda and monitor the impact of its policies.
  In addition to the CPS and government’s plan, the program was consistent with the Statistics Sweden
  program of technical cooperation between Kenya’s development partner Sweden and the KNBS since
  2014. The PDO addresses challenges in line with the recommendations of the International Monetary
  Fund’s (IMF) Special Data Dissemination Standards criteria and the World Bank’s Statistical Capacity
  Indicators, which were critical for Kenya’s access to international capital markets for more affordable loans.
  The PDO was directly relevant for (i) the Agenda 2030 for the Sustainable Development Goals, which have
  significant data requirements for the assessment and tracking of their 232 global indicators, and (ii) the
  Busan Action Plan for Statistics. [Refer to The Busan Action Plan for Statistics supports the following three
  principal objectives: (i) Fully integrating statistics in decision making; (ii) Promoting open access to
  statistics; and (iii) Increasing resources for statistical systems.][JC1] [VC2]
  The choice of the PforR instrument was appropriate for several reasons. Kenya had previously benefited
  from a Statistical Capacity Building Program (P085414). The associated ICR noted weaknesses related to
  quality, dissemination, procurement, and financial management. The ICR recommended that a results-
  oriented instrument was better suited to supporting statistical development in Kenya. The rationale was as
  follows: (i) the KNBS SP, which this program sought to support was itself a results-oriented program; (ii)
  working through government’s budget, financial management (FM), and procurement systems would
  facilitate implementation and build capacity; (iii) working through Government systems would improve the
  efficiency of expenditures and foster institutional support for statistics; (iv) a PforR would help build the
  institutional capacity to administer the entire official statistics program leading to improvements in quality,

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



       timeliness, and dissemination; (v) it would facilitate potential scalability of the program both by drawing in
       other government agencies and drawing in financing from development partners; and finally (vi) it would
       enhance coordination with development partners supporting statistics in Kenya.




       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     PDO1: To support KNBS to generate “better” data to inform policymakers.

    Rationale
    Improved capacity of the KNBS was a requirement (input) in the production of better and more accessible
    data (intermediate results/outcomes) needed to inform policymakers (outcome). Capacity strengthening is
    therefore implicitly measured by 2 of the 3 PDO-level indicators: if KNBS could produce regular poverty
    statistics and better-quality real sector economic data and make them more accessible, its capacity must
    have strengthened. Moreover, achieving these two PDO-level indicators would demonstrate that the KNBS
    could implement integrated survey programs.
    The objective of strengthening the capacity of the KNBS to generate “better” data involved filling critical
    source data gaps for missing or outdated data and improving the quality of existing data. The program
    sought to fill data gaps through integrated surveys and addressed the quality dimension by introducing
    international standards for vital official statistics. The efficacy of each dimension is discussed separately
    below through the lens of the theory of change.
    A. Filling data gaps to generate “better” data
    Rationale: Before the Program, Kenya’s poverty statistics, socioeconomic indicators, and National Accounts
    were mostly outdated (last produced in 2005/06) or missing. The capacity to monitor poverty at least once
    every three years was insufficient. The program comprised integrated household and economic (enterprise)
    surveys. Through the generation of new data, these surveys (outputs) filled critical source data gaps (IRA1)
    and contributed to the outcome of “better” poverty and National Accounts data. The implementation of
    surveys also strengthened KNBS’s capacity to produce “better” data, which facilitated regular and accurate
    measurement and monitoring of poverty, labor, other socioeconomic indicators, and the general economy.
    A1. Filling poverty data gaps through an integrated program of household surveys
    OUTPUTS

        i.   Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 2015/16 conducted, and a progress report was produced
        and made available online (Target achieved).
        ii . Updated benchmark (2015/16) poverty measures produced and disseminated (Target achieved).
        iii . Poverty monitoring data was collected by Continuous Household Survey (KCHS) (Target achieved).


                                                                                                            Page 4 of 16
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



  iv . KCHS survey poverty estimates produced and disseminated (Target missed). Due to the prolonged
  electioneering period in 2017, the start of the KCHS was delayed. Therefore, although KNBS collected
  poverty monitoring data, they delayed the production and dissemination of the KCHS poverty estimates
  until after the program’s closed. As a result, KNBS only disbursed 80 percent against the corresponding
  DLI.
  v . KNBS started fieldwork for KIHBS 2020/21 but moved the actual survey to after the end of the program
  (target missed).
  vi . KNBS achieved only 3 of the five output targets.


OUTCOME

  i.   Gaps filled in poverty and inequality data.
  ii . Production of regular poverty monitoring data and statistics.
  iii . KNBS’s capacity to implement the household survey program was strengthened.
  iv . Kenya’s Overall Statistical Capacity Score (SCI) improved from 54 in 2015 to 57.80 in 2020. However,
  as the 2020 score did not include the updated score for the rebased CPI completed in 2020, the final SCI
  score must be higher.

A2. Filling National Accounts data gaps through an integrated program of economic surveys
OUTPUT

  i.   KNBS implemented a micro and small enterprises (MSE) survey and produced an online report (target
  achieved).
  ii . KNBS implemented an establishment census and produced an online report (target achieved).
  iii . KNBS implemented an integrated survey of services (ISS) and produced an online report (target
  achieved).
  iv . KNBS implemented the 2018 Survey of Industrial Production (SIP) and produced an online report
  (target achieved).
  v . KNBS achieved all four targets.


OUTCOME

  1.  KNBS filled data gaps in the National Accounts series and updated the National Accounts series
  resulting in “better” National Accounts data for Kenya.
  2 . Kenya’s Overall Statistical Capacity Score (SCI) improved from 54 in 2015 to 57.80 in 2020. However,
  as this score from 2020 does not include the updated score for the rebased CPI completed in 2020, the
  final SCI score must be higher.
  3 . KNBS strengthened its capacity by implementing the integrated program of economic surveys.


B. Improving “quality” of essential official statistical products and processes to generate “better”
data


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



 Rationale: Before the Program, the quality of Kenya’s official statistics for the real and external economic
 sectors was poor. There was insufficient capacity to meet international data quality standards represented by
 the IMF’s SDDS. Kenya also lacked the DQAF for macroeconomic datasets. The program helped the KNBS
 produce better quality real and external sector data (DLI 3) and compile the DQAF for five macroeconomic
 datasets (DLI 4). This improved the quality of critical official statistical products and processes (IRA2) and
 met SDDS requirements in all real and external sector data categories.
 B1. Improving the quality of real and external economic sector data
 OUTPUTS

   i.   Rebased (2009) National Accounts produced and published (Target partially achieved). Yet, its release
   was delayed until after the end of the program.
   ii . KNBS conducted the Foreign Investment Survey, produced the report, and made it available online
   (Target achieved).
   iii . KNBS upgraded and updated the business register (Target achieved).
   iv . KNBS produced the rebased CPI series and made it available online (Target achieved).
   v . KNBS produced the rebased PPI series and made it available online (Target achieved).


 KNBS fully achieved four of the five targets and partially achieved one.
 OUTCOME

   1.  KNBS produced better real and external sector economic data (coverage and quality), meeting the
   IMF’s SDDS standard (IRA2).
   2 . Quality of critical official statistical products and processes improved (IRA2).
   3 . KNBS strengthened its capacity by improving data quality to meet SDDS requirements.


 B2. Improving the quality of macroeconomic datasets
 OUTPUTS

   i.   Compile the IMF DQAF for five macroeconomic datasets (target achieved).

 OUTCOMES

   1.  Improved quality of essential official statistical products and processes (IRA2).
   2 . Produce better real and external sector economic data (coverage and quality).


   1.KNBS strengthened its capacity by improving the quality of official data that met international data
   quality standards.



 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)




PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     PDO2: To support KNBS to generate “more accessible” data to inform policymakers.

    Rationale
    Improve access to official household survey microdata: Before the program, official survey microdata files
    were neither available online nor freely obtainable. According to the ICR of the previous statistics project
    (P085414), the census and surveys conducted by the KNBS were only available in a hardcopy format. The
    lack of electronic access discouraged policymakers from using the official survey microdata, a fundamental
    weakness of the KNBS statistical system (ICR of previous project (P085414). The program led to a
    systematic set of outputs that included revising the survey microdata dissemination policy, its official
    adoption, publication, and timely online availability of official household survey microdata files following
    registration and approval of the KNBS. The result was a successful institutional reform regarding the KNBS’s
    official data dissemination policy, thus achieving the outcome of “more accessible” data for the government
    and public (IRA3). This also reinforced the capacity of the KNBS. Today, launches of KNBS products include
    the same-day uploading of digital copies of reports (ICR).
    Before the program, KNBS did not use an Advanced Release Calendar (ARC) and scale-up data coverage.
    However, with support from the program, all past Economic Survey Reports were digitized and made freely
    available online on the Kenya National Data Archive (KeNADA). In addition, KNBS developed an ARC for 10
    SDDS data categories (DL5). While all targets were fully achieved, thus supporting the outcome/objective of
    making official data “more accessible” (IRA3), KNBS's microdata dissemination policy could be more user-
    friendly with respect to the data portal and approval of data requests.
    Improve access to official survey microdata
    OUTPUTS

        i.   The revised microdata dissemination policy was produced, adopted, and published (target achieved).
        ii . The MSME survey microdata was produced and made available online upon request (target achieved).
        iii . KNBS made KIHBS 2015/16 microdata available online upon request (target achieved).
        iv . KNBS made KCHS 1st and 2nd-year KCHS microdata available online upon request (target achieved).


    KNBS achieved targets for all five outputs.
    OUTCOMES

        1.  Significant improvements in online access to official household and economic survey microdata files.
        2 . Fundamental institutional change in the KNBS microdata dissemination policy (that was a weakness of
        the previous project).
        3 . Strengthened the capacity of the KNBS to generate “more accessible” official data.




    Rating

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                       Rate
                                                                         Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                       Available?
                                                                                                0
            Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                                Not Applicable
                                                                                                0
            ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                                Not Applicable

     * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


     6. Outcome

     The overall relevance of the objective is Substantial, and the efficacy of all objectives is also Substantial. The
     outcome rating is Satisfactory as there were only minor shortcomings in achieving the program’s objectives. The
     relevance of the program’s objectives continues to be high for the government, as evident from the widespread
     use of officially generated statistics in informing and monitoring policies and programs, especially for poverty
     reduction. While there remains room for further improvement, the institutional change related to KNBS’s policy
     on disseminating survey microdata is directly attributable to this program as the previous Bank project could not
     achieve this outcome.




                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



a.   Outcome Rating
     Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

IEG finds the following risks to the development outcome:
Technical: The quantity and quality of human resources necessary for the KNBS to continue to deliver on the
program’s objectives pose a risk as technical demands on KNBS staff will grow. While KNBS had significant
technical expertise, it required substantial TA during Program implementation. Continued capacity building and
TA will be essential for fully realizing and sustaining outcomes. Strengthening KNBS’s human resources was an
explicit objective of the government’s program detailed in the KNBS SP. Still, this program did not support it
because it entailed implementing a new salary structure and Kenya’s Public Service Commission’s involvement.
Given that KNBS’s human resource capacity is a risk to the development outcome, the Program team plans to
address capacity constraints in a follow-up project through planning and continuation of the action plan used in
this PforR. However, the KNBS cannot directly address improvements to the salary structure in the forthcoming
project as they are beyond its control.
Financial: Limited and delayed budgetary allocations for the KNBS pose a significant risk to the sustainability
of the Program outcome and the KNBS SP. Inadequate and uncertain budgetary allocations threaten the data
generation and dissemination activities implemented during the program. The government had planned to
[JC1] [VC2] institutionalize KNBS’s funding by the end of the program, but it did not. Previously,
KNBS relied on support from its development partners to finance critical projects. However, as such support
cannot be guaranteed, it can cause delays in implementing essential activities such as the Demographic and
Health Survey.
Social: The social risks to the Program outcome are low and likely to remain at this level.
Economic: The economic risk related to the sustainability of the program’s outcomes arises from how shocks
can impact budget revenues available for KNBS’s operations. During Program implementation, shocks related
to the general election and exogenous shocks associated with COVID-19 negatively impacted Kenya’s
economy, depressing overall revenues, and squeezing the KNBS budget. The implementation of KNBS’s
statistical activities was also affected. Unrelated to the economic risk, government borrowing on international
capital markets creates an incentive for the government to continue collecting and disseminating quality data in
a timely manner and to some extent, protects KNBS’s budget.
Political: The political risk to the sustainability of program outcome is substantial [JC3] [VC4] as it threatens the
independence of the KNBS to pursue its data dissemination policy. The Statistics Act of 2006 established the
KNBS as a semiautonomous government agency. The Fourth Schedule of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya
stipulated that the KNBS is responsible for, among other things, developing and setting standards for official
government statistics. However, a 2019 Amendment to the Statistics Act of 2006 that allows the executive to
cancel or alter data poses a risk that the KNBS may delay producing reports and posting data online. The 2019
Amendment was introduced late in the deliberation process and towards the end of this program. As it
threatens the sustainability of the development outcome, the Program team plans to mitigate the risk in the
follow-up program with a DLR [JC5] [VC6] program which will disburse against the timely release of data.
Environmental: Environmental risks to development outcomes are low. During Program implementation, KNBS
complied with the National Environment Management Authority’s guidelines on e-waste management and the


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



Environmental Code of Practice prepared for the program. As a result, the KNBS had satisfactory
environmental performance and is likely to maintain its current policies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Bank performance in strengthening quality at entry is Satisfactory. At the time of project appraisal,
  poverty and unemployment were high in Kenya, but the data was outdated, and the most recent data on
  extreme poverty (43 percent) was from 2005-06. Poor data constrained informed policymaking and poverty
  monitoring and reduction. The Program team focused on public sector interventions to improve data
  management systems within the KNBS, which had the mandate to produce quality national statistics. The
  program opportunistically supported the national government’s policy priorities by supporting a subset of
  the government’s program articulated in the KNBS SP (2013-2017). The government recognized the need
  for adequate statistics and demonstrated its commitment by pledging over 60% of the total program costs
  in the multi-year budget plan. The Bank team designed the program drawing on sound background
  analysis. Potential risks and mitigation measures were identified up front and weighed in consultation with
  key MDAs, IMF, and SIDA, while challenges from previous statistical capacity-building projects informed
  the program’s design. A valuable lesson, also validated by the ICCR of the last project, was the need for a
  results-oriented approach. As the KNBS SP already had a well-defined results framework, choosing a
  PforR instrument was appropriate. The program purposefully supported select areas of the KNBS SP with
  the high potential impact. It focused on improving the quality of crucial official statistical products and
  processes, strengthening dissemination, and improving online access to data and statistical products.
  While human resource development was not a discrete component, given the program’s technical
  requirements, the team piggybacked on SIDA’s ongoing TA to strengthen the human resource capacity of
  the KNBS and drew on non-lending TA from the World Bank and IMF to reinforce KNBS’s technical
  capacity. To improve the [JC1] [VC2] predicted impact on the Statistical Capacity Indicator (SCI), the team
  linked several activities to improvement in the SCI despite its being outside the program’s scope.
  Examples include the score for children’s immunizations.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The quality of supervision is Satisfactory. The Bank’s team regularly engaged with KNBS counterparts and
  the MDAs. The majority of the World Bank’s implementation support team was based in the Bank’s Country
  Office in Nairobi. They were available to assist the KNBS over the life of the program. In addition, the
  Bank’s technical and fiduciary teams provided regular support to help maximize the program’s development
  impact.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



  The 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census (KPHC) delayed the release of certain KNBS staff
  needed for Program implementation, which, in turn, delayed the program. To compensate, the task team
  and the KNBS designed an action plan to ensure that it completed the remaining DLRs on time by breaking
  them down into smaller time-bound tasks required for their completion. The task team and KNBS monitored
  progress on a bimonthly basis.
  Toward the end of the program, the COVID-19 pandemic delayed Program activities as in-person meetings
  could not occur. The action plan, designed to ensure that KNBS closely monitored outstanding DLRs and
  completed all sub-tasks, averted the need for a Program extension. The task team conducted regular
  supervision missions to assess progress and coordinate assistance by switching to virtual meetings after
  the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. ISRs and Aide-Memoires were candid and well-targeted. During
  Implementation and Support Missions (ISMs), the task team would receive requests for technical assistance
  and feedback on ongoing assistance. The team coordinated responses to these requests in donor partner
  meetings during ISMs.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Although the Program Appraisal Document (PAD) did not refer explicitly to a Theory of Change (ToC), it did
  articulate a methodology for achieving the PDOs. The ICR used the information in the PAD and the Results
  Framework to present a ToC. The ToC called for the generation of “better” data through a program of
  integrated surveys (of households and enterprises). The microdata produced by the surveys would fill critical
  data gaps and improve the periodicity of poverty monitoring data. The official statistics’ coverage and quality
  dimensions would be ensured by adopting and applying internationally recommended data quality standards
  (SDDS, SCI) and assessment frameworks (DQAF). The KNBS would improve access to official statistics and
  dissemination by posting the microdata and other reports online. The availability of these statistics would inform
  policymakers and key Government of Kenya (GoK) programs and policies (that were also clearly specified).
  The PDO indicators and targets were based on consultations with the key institutions and sector ministries and
  were compatible with the government’s approach and overall economic and policy development agenda. This
  ensured that the M&E framework was practical and could evolve to address new challenges.
  Most indicators for the program were SMART (Specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound). For
  example, one of the PDO-level indicators was to produce regular poverty monitoring data and statistics. As a
  SMART indicator, five target values consisted of milestones toward creating two iterations of poverty statistics
  within the five-year Program period. The PDO-level indicator on producing better real and external sector
  economic data had five targets and had milestones that measured improvement in the quality of
  macroeconomic data (namely the rebased CPI and PPI updated) to reflect changes in expenditure patterns
  over time. The indicator on the proportion of SDDS criteria met also captured real and external sector data

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



  advances. However, the measurement of the first IRA on filling data gaps was not adequately reflected by
  improvements in the SCI, which depended on activities outside the program’s remit.
  The design of the DLIs was appropriate as each emphasized a different aspect of data collection/dissemination.
  For activities such as the 2015/16 KIHBS, separate DL[JC1] [VC2] Rs (disbursement linked results) were used
  to reward the completion of tasks such as conducting fieldwork, producing indicators, and disseminating
  microdata. This allowed periodic progress measures and a consistent flow of funds to reimburse the National
  Treasury.
  The Internal Audit Department of the National Treasury verified most DLRs promptly. However, the verification
  of one DLR, verifying the operationalization of the FMIS, was conducted by the Information and Communication
  Technology (ICT) Authority, and required approximately one year due to an audit undertaken by the authority
  and follow-up meetings with stakeholders. Nevertheless, due to the efficient design of the DLR, scheduling it
  early within the program ensured that disbursements could occur despite a lengthy verification procedure.




b. M&E Implementation
  Until the Covid-19 pandemic, formal ISMs regularly monitored progress and provided extensive support to the
  program. Progress in achieving results was measured during ISM meetings and reflected in Aide Memoires
  and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). These included updates on the SDDS and the SCI. In addition,
  updates toward the completion of DLR 7.0 were measured using the EACC reports resulting from audits
  throughout the program’s life.
  Training provided by the World Bank was vital to the program’s success. KNBS had good-quality staff,
  including trained statisticians and economists with many years of experience, but the program demanded
  more extensive and technically sophisticated resources. The integration of capacity building before significant
  activities ensured KNBS staff had the requisite skills in the latest software to produce high-quality and timely
  outputs. As a part of capacity building, the World Bank trained 21 KNBS staff in 2016 on household survey
  data analysis using STATA. Staff in different areas of the KNBS were trained with technical skills to clean and
  analyze survey data. This shortened the time to prepare data, produce timely indicators and write the three
  reports created using the 2015/16 KIHBS. The World Bank also trained six staff on survey design using the
  Survey Solutions platform in 2018, facilitating KNBS to design the KCHS CAPI instrument. KNBS has since
  developed other tools such as the survey investigating the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 using Survey
  Solutions.
  As part of Technical Assistance (TA) to the KNBS, the World Bank, IMF, and Statistics Sweden each
  provided technical assistance in their respective areas of expertise to produce outputs or peer reviews of draft
  reports from KNBS. For microeconomic activities such as the 2015/16 KIHBS or the 2016 MSME survey, the
  World Bank assisted the KNBS in questionnaire development, data monitoring, and production of indicators.
  Peer-reviewers from local universities or research institutions verified the quality of the outputs KNBS
  produced. Through the East AFRITAC (Regional Technical Assistance Center), the IMF assisted KNBS with
  designing the rebased CPI and assessing steps necessary to meet SDDS criteria. Statistics Sweden assisted
  with producing the updated business register and the rebased PPI. Meetings with development partners and
  KNBS were held annually during ISMs to coordinate technical assistance and receive feedback from KNBS.
  [JC1] [VC2]



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



  KNBS conducted program progress reviews through reports from the Auditor-General’s yearly Financial
  Statements and carried out regular DQAFs. In addition, several reports, including quarterly and
  annual progress reports, and monthly fiscal reports, were used to monitor the program’s outcome and results
  indicators.




c. M&E Utilization
  Relevant data compiled from reports on the achievement of indicators was reviewed and used to inform
  decision-makers on various activities.
  There is demand from the national government for the Bank’s continued engagement in statistics. Since this
  PforR program focused on data within the remit of the KNBS, the involvement, ownership, and commitment
  from other government organizations/stakeholders was limited. However, moving forward, it is crucial to
  involve other actors within the NSS to have their ownership for the longer-term sustainability of the KNBS
  program.
  Follow-up project: Preparation of a regional project is presently underway, which aims to strengthen the
  statistical systems of Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, and Tanzania to harmonize, produce, disseminate, and
  enhance the use of core economic and social statistics. Availability of harmonized statistics will deepen
  understanding of regional dynamics and contribute to regional integration and potentially increasing growth
  and poverty reduction in the region.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  Overall, the task team assessed the environmental and social risks as low since Kenya had an adequate
  legal framework and procedures for managing and mitigating E-waste. The Program Action Plan
  strengthened KNBS’s capacity to manage the E-waste generated by the program by building awareness
  and sensitization and providing staff training on E-waste management practices. All E-waste generated by
  the program was disposed of through a “Take Back Scheme” via an E-waste recycling facility that operated
  in compliance with international environmental standards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The program’s fiduciary systems met Operational Policy 9.00 requirements and performed adequately during
  implementation.


                                                                                                Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



  Financial management: Internal control arrangements were implemented and worked as intended. The
  financial audit for the program was carried out in full compliance with international standards. The auditors
  expressed an unqualified audit opinion indicating that the financial statements gave a true and fair view of the
  transactions and financial position for the program. However, the submission of the audited financial report was
  delayed. At the time of ICR preparation, the task team had not received the audited financial reports for FY
  2018/19 and FY 20219/20 despite assurances from the Office of the Auditor-General and KNBS that they
  would submit the reports on time.
  Procurement: The strengthened KNBS procurement unit had the capacity to implement the program. Through
  the PPRA and its regulations, procuring entities established the requisite administrative procedures which
  KNBS complied with. However, as evidence of adherence to a PPRA audit scheduled as part of the Program
  Action Plan was only provided at the end of the project, the program did not benefit significantly from improved
  procurement practices during the implementation period. Except for this, KNBS completed all procurement as
  per the approved plan. In addition, the program fully utilized the country procurement system and adhered to
  the government’s procurement regulations as set out in the Program’s Operational Manual.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None identified



d. Other
  The surveys implemented in the program facilitated data collection disaggregated by gender and
  other socioeconomic characteristics. The 2015/16 KIHBS conducted with the support of the program
  produced data used for in-depth analysis of gender gaps in the 2018 Kenya Poverty and Gender
  Assessment (KPGA).
  Institutional Strengthening
  The program strengthened the governance of KNBS through the implementation of the Corruption Risk
  Assessment. As part of the Fiduciary Systems Assessment and the integrated risk assessment for the
  program, the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) undertook a CRA of KNBS. The CRA
  recommended 32 actions in financial management, procurement, internal audit, and record management
  systems. The completion of DLR 7.0 constituted the implementation of these actions.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory            Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance               Satisfactory            Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                 Substantial             Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)




12. Lessons

 (1) A PforR instrument can be a game-changer in a problematic country context if it strategically
supports the national government’s policy priorities. The conditions for the Statistics PforR were
challenging from the outset: public sector governance was weak, most official statistics were outdated or
unusable, the last poverty measurements were a decade old, and the recently closed statistical capacity-
building project with similar objectives did not achieve them. The PforR opportunistically supported the national
government’s policy priorities [refer to Vision 2030, Second and Third Medium Term Plans, and the KNBS’s
Strategic Plan 2013-2017] by focusing selectively on a subset of the government’s own program with a clear
results orientation. The PforR objective was to strengthen the capacity of the KNBS to generate “better” and
more accessible data to inform policymaking. The government recognized the need for adequate statistics and
demonstrated its commitment by pledging over 60% of the total program costs in a multi-year budget plan.
While KNBS had good technical capacity, there were areas where it needed support. The task team
collaborated with the IMF and SIDA to ensure a regular flow of technical help to the KNBS to achieve DLI
targets on time. By addressing strategic data gaps, improving data quality, and improving dissemination
practices, the PforR facilitated Kenya’s access to international capital markets and reduced borrowing costs.
Kenya had just attained a lower-middle-income status and needed financing.
(2) Twinning arrangements with development partners can be critical for the success of a statistics
PforR with many technically complex DLIs. At the outset, KNBS’s data was outdated, of poor quality, and
had many gaps. While the KNBS had substantial technical staff resources, they were inadequate to meet the
DLI targets. Capacity building was not a PforR component. The task team twinned with the IMF and Statistics
Sweden (SIDA), which was already assisting the KNBS. This made it possible for the three partners to find the
best way to jointly support KNBS and create leverage with the US$3 million TA provided by SIDA to help the
realization of the DLIs under the Bank-supported program. The integration of capacity building ensured KNBS
staff had the requisite skills and the latest software to produce high-quality and timely outputs. For
microeconomic survey activities and poverty indicators, the World Bank assisted the KNBS. Through the East
AFRITAC (Regional Technical Assistance Center), the IMF helped KNBS rebase CPI and macroeconomic
statistics. The IMF advised and provided TA on critical SDDS related aspects of the program. Statistics Sweden
assisted with producing the updated business register and the rebased PPI. It also assigned two long-term
resident statistical advisors in the KNBS.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the program. The narrative supports the ratings and available
evidence. It is candid, accurate, and aligned to the PDO. The report attempts to triangulate data to reach
conclusions and focuses on results. In particular, the ICR makes a commendable effort to document evidence

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Statistics Program for Results (P149718)



on how the availability of better data informs policymaking (last para of section 4 of this ICRR) and which
results can be attributed to the program. The PAD did not discuss the theory of change, but the ICR
constructed it well from the PAD and the results framework. The quality of evidence and analysis aligns with
the messages outlined in the ICR, though there may be some minor shortcomings in the completeness of data
and information. For example, the program expenditure summary does not explain the minor difference in the
funds committed and disbursed by the Bank program. In addition, it would have been more appropriate for the
ICR to demarcate the five recommendations and 1 lesson instead of presenting them jointly as lessons and
recommendations.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                Page 16 of 16
