     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022844

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P145585                                   Skills development TVET

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55620                                 25-Jan-2020                                          32,577,510.39

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Dec-2014                               25-May-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           35,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            35,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        33,029,525.59                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5), the project's objectives were "to strengthen the Technical and
   Vocational Education and Training (TVET) system and to improve the employability of youth in selected
   priority sectors of the economy."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   1. Improvement in the quality and relevance of training (appraisal: US$ 61 million, of which IDA US$ 28
   million; actual IDA: US$ 28.13 million). This component was to improve the quality and relevance of training
   in Lycées Techniques (LTs), establish clusters of training centers for skills development in priority sectors,
   and create and implement a system for certification of skills.

         For the LTs (which prepare students for continuing education for the University Institute of
          Technology, Diploma of Higher Technician (BTS) degree, or engineering school), the project was to
          upgrade selected LTs to centers of excellence through improvements in infrastructure
          and performance-based contracts to improve the quality of service delivery.
         For the new clusters of training centers, the project was to respond to the needs of the private sector
          by upgrading existing centers and establishing new ones in horticulture, poultry farming, and
          tourism. These three sectors were chosen based on the readiness of the private sector to contribute
          to the training system and the potential for jobs creation. The clustering was to work across sites to
          ensure appropriate training for a range of activities across the value chain, covering all levels from
          the lowest (Certificate of Vocational Aptitude, CAP) to the highest (BTS), with training taking place
          both in the centers and in enterprises. A Board of Directors with private sector representation was to
          be established for each cluster. The project was to finance construction, rehabilitation, and
          equipping of infrastructure for the centers, consultant services for program reform and new program
          design, training of teachers and administrators, and development and implementation of
          management tools. A Unique Fund (see Component 2) was to be established to finance specific
          subprojects undertaken by the clusters.
         For skills certification, the project was to provide short-duration training to youth who were not
          eligible for the first degree of vocational training because they did not meet the minimum admission
          requirements (primary or middle school graduate) or were unable to attend longer-duration
          programs. The courses were to be provided through existing training centers in the areas of
          agriculture, services, industrial manufacturing, information and communication technology, tourism
          and hospitality, construction, power, or fashion. At the completion of the training, each student was
          to be awarded a Certificate of Specialization. The project was to finance the development of training
          standards, vouchers for students to support part of the training fees, consultancies to support the
          development and implementation of the training program, and renovation or small-scale construction
          and equipment of training centers.

   2. Reform of the TVET sector's financial system (appraisal: US$ 6.5 million of which IDA US$ 4.5 million;
   actual IDA: US$ 1.41 million). This component was to streamline and strengthen the funding instruments of
   the government's TVET policy. It was to support: (a) administrative and managerial reforms of
   the Directorate of General Administration and Equipment, which manages most TVET institutions' budgets
   at the central level, and (b) consolidation of existing mechanisms for financing TVET for individuals and
   businesses into a new Unique Fund (Fonds Unique, now known as Fonds de Financement de la Formation
   Professionnelle et Technique, or 3FPT) with a mandate to finance on-the-job training of workers at the
   request of existing businesses that need to upgrade their employees' skills; finance training centers and

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)



   institutions on the basis of performance criteria; finance individual training for youth who are seeking
   qualifications to enter the labor market; and provide quality assurance to include standard setting, program
   accreditation of both public and private providers, quality audits, and the publication of reports.

   3. Support for system management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and project management
   (appraisal: US$ 9 million, of which IDA US$ 2.5 million; actual IDA: US$ 3.49 million). This component was
   to strengthen the capacity of the Directorate of Technical and Vocational Education and key subunits, and
   to support the establishment of an M&E system, fiduciary management, and coordination of project
   activities. It was to finance external evaluations of each performance-based contract under the first
   component, to be used to decision making for financing of subsequent contracts. It was also to develop and
   implement a communication program on sector reforms undertaken by the government.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of $35 million, to
   be supplemented by a government contribution of US$ 25 million and US$ 16.5 million from the French
   Development Agency (AFD), for a total program cost of US$ 76.5 million. The AFD and IDA shared the
   same Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and conducted joint support missions, though AFD and IDA
   funds used a parallel financing mechanism and separate bank accounts. Actual IDA costs were US$ 33.03
   million. The ICR reported that there were approximately US$ 1.71 million equivalent in exchange rate losses
   and US$ 0.26 million in undisbursed funds. The ICR did not provide the actual total program costs or the
   actual contributions for the government or AFD; the project team later clarified that, as the AFD financing
   was parallel rather than co-financing, the project did not track costs other than for the IDA credit.

   The project was approved on December 8, 2014 and became effective on July 14, 2015. A mid-term review
   was conducted in March 2018. A December 19, 2019 restructuring reallocated funds across categories and
   extended the closing date by one year, from January 25, 2020 to January 25, 2021, to allow time for
   completion of activities. A second restructuring, on January 25, 2021, extended the project's closing date for
   another four months to allow for disbursement of remaining funds. The project closed on May 25, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were highly relevant to government strategy, country conditions, and Bank strategy.
The government's strategic plan, Plan Senegal Emergent (Plan for an Emerging Senegal, 2012-2019,
renewed 2019-2024), aimed to reverse low economic growth by focusing on improvements in the business
climate and the development of clusters of services and skills to raise the productivity and capacity of
businesses and the labor force. Under the Plan, efforts were focused on key sectors that have high
potential for adding value, creating employment, and boosting exports: agriculture, mining, fisheries,
clothing, information and communication technology, education and health care services, and tourism. The
highest-priority metric to reduce poverty within this framework was the creation of 300,000 jobs by 2020, in
part by ensuring better linkages between training programs and economic needs. Toward this goal, the
government established an official TVET certification system that provides diplomas by skill level from
lowest to highest, entry qualifications, and normal length of time to complete a given level of qualification,

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Skills development TVET (P145585)



               as well as certifications of course completion for students who have undergone training but not completed
               formal certification exams. The Ministry of Vocational and Technical Training, Apprenticeship and Arts and
               Crafts (MFPAA), established in 2005 as a separate entity from the Ministry of Education, provides pre-
               employment TVET through public and private training institutions offering certificate or diploma programs as
               well as traditional apprenticeship programs.

               Despite this structure of training opportunities, a remarkably large share of the working-age population
               (36%) was neither working nor attending school at the time of project appraisal. This was observed at a
               similar rate among both youth and adults, many of whom were relatively well educated, and both urban and
               rural populations. Multiple weaknesses in the TVET sector were identified as contributing to this lack of
               uptake and effectiveness: weak linkages between TVET, economic sectors, and the development agenda;
               limited diversity of TVET specializations being offered; low-quality TVET courses, equipment, and
               instruction; gender and geographic inequities in training opportunities; and inadequate and
               inefficient financing of the TVET system. The government's strategic plans for the education sector (2001-
               2011, and 2012-2022) responded to these needs by placing TVET second in priority only to primary
               education, with goals to diversify training opportunities, update training programs, establish public-private
               partnerships in the development and delivery of training programs, expand work-study and apprenticeship
               programs, introduce competency-based approaches to training, and provide additional training
               opportunities and incentives for women.

               Prior to the project, the Bank had been the main development partner supporting Senegal's education
               sector, but there had been no interventions in TVET. This project meant that the Bank was involved across
               all levels of education in the country. This approach aligned the project with the Bank's Country Partnership
               Strategy at appraisal (2013-2017), which contained a pillar on ensuring the availability of skills necessary
               for accelerating growth and creating employment. The Bank's 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic noted
               that, in the medium to long term, sustained economic growth and rising living standards can only be
               achieved through increases in productivity gained through strong human capital and innovation. The
               project's objectives remain highly relevant to the current Country Partnership Framework (2020-2024),
               which has a focus area on building human capital to enhance productivity and ignite the demographic
               dividend.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) system

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills development TVET (P145585)



The theory of change for this objective held that creating new TVET funding and governance mechanisms,
improving training institutions through renovation of physical facilities, increasing the quality of training
through performance-based contracts (PBCs) in selected LTs, establishing clusters of training centers,
reforming TVET curricula, improving the expertise of trainers and creating new competencies in three
targeted sectors (horticulture, poultry farming, and tourism), and supporting development of new short-term
skills certification programs would lead to increased TVET outputs: more training clusters in the targeted
sectors, more upgrading of LTs to centers of excellence through the use of PBCs, and more private sector
involvement in TVET institutional governance. Taken together, these improvements would amount to
strengthening of the TVET system.


Outputs

A project steering committee, co-chaired by a representative from the private sector and including at least
50% representation from the private and social sectors, met at least twice annually, as planned.

Three clusters were established and functioning for horticulture, poultry farming, and tourism, as planned.
Each cluster has expanded its training network of satellite centers, with guidance and technical support from
relevant professional associations, and has developed and implemented competency-based curricula.

Nine PBCs were signed with training institutions, meeting the target. Three LTs signed a performance
contract to become a center of excellence, meeting the target. Employment at these three LTs grew by 14%
annually during the project implementation period, and the project invested in teacher training, curriculum
development, equipment purchases, and civil works improvements. Baccalaureate pass rates at all three
centers rose significantly (specific data were provided in the ICR, p. 25). The project supported an
independent evaluation of the PBCs mid-way through project implementation to ensure that institutional
development plans were being implemented as planned. Recommendations emerging from the evaluation
were incorporated by each LT (ICR, p. 22).

Annual sector statistical data were analyzed for decision-making, as planned, and TVET statistical yearbooks
were published annually.



Outcomes

The 3FPT was established and is functional for the financing and quality assurance of training centers as of
November 2021, as planned. 682 institutions benefitted from its funding, far exceeding the target of nine
institutions. The 3FPT created four funding windows that provided financing for individuals (a total of 48,805
men and women), training institutions (98 institutions in total, for development of strategic/institutional
development plans), companies and professional organizations that requested training (42,156
employees/workers in 455 companies, and 28,126 young people from small enterprises), and quality
assurance (a process that accredited 120 training organizations). 91% of financing through the 3FPT was
provided by employer contributions, which led to a significant overachievement of targets for numbers of
beneficiaries and programs supported under the project (see also Outcomes under Objective 2).

From a baseline of zero in 2013, 268 TVET institutions had functioning Boards of Directors in November
2021, far exceeding the target of 15 institutions. All TVET institutions targeted by the project now have a

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills development TVET (P145585)



Board of Directors. Nine of these institutions have a Board chair from the private sector, exceeding the target
of six. According to the ICR (p. 22), private sector representation on the Boards has been essential in
ensuring strong public-private partnerships for the TVET system as a whole, as well as supporting labor
market-responsive program development within TVET institutions.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the employability of youth in selected priority sectors of the economy

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that, in addition to the interventions described under the first
objective, streamlining and reinforcing the TVET funding mechanism by operationalizing the 3FPT would lead
to an increase in the number of TVET institutions benefiting from that Fund, leading to more youth accessing
TVET programming with skills leading to employment.



Outputs

75 short-term programs were offered, almost quadrupling the target of 20 programs. 14,883 trainees were
enrolled in these programs, exceeding the target of 10,000 trainees.

8,846 students were enrolled in renovated science and technical programs in LTs, exceeding the target of
7,000 students. 40% of programs were delivered by a professional trainer in the private sector in targeted
institutions, meeting the target of 40%.



Outcomes

From a baseline of zero in 2013, 6,746 youth graduated from short-term skills development training as of
November 2021, not meeting the target of 7,500. The ICR (p. 23) noted that the shortfall was due to
certifications being suspended in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, that an additional 1,000
students graduated from training centers after the centers re-opened following pandemic-related shutdowns
and were awaiting their certificates of specialization at the time the ICR was prepared, and that 2,000 other
students are currently enrolled, with 29,500 others on waitlists.

From a baseline of zero in 2013, the percentage of youth who graduated from short-term skills development
training and were employed one year after completion of the training reached 36.44% as of November
2021, falling significantly short of the target of 70%. The percentage of females who graduated and were
employed one year after completion reached 26.89%, not reaching the target of 40%. The results cover only
the first cohort of graduates, and the ICR (p. 24) noted that this cohort did not benefit from the full curriculum

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Skills development TVET (P145585)



                            revisions that were supported by the project. A survey of the second cohort of graduates was not possible
                            prior to project closing due to COVID-19. The government is currently conducting additional tracer studies.
                            The project team later confirmed that the funding and terms of reference for a second tracer study have been
                            secured, and the results are expected in 2022.

                            From a baseline of zero, 2,140 youth graduated from training clusters in horticulture (1,375), poultry (460),
                            and tourism (305) as of November 2021, not meeting the overall target of 2,740 graduates, and not meeting
                            the cluster targets of 1,500 for horticulture, 585 for poultry, or 655 for tourism. The ICR did not provide
                            information on the percentage of these graduates who were female, per the indicator. The ICR noted that the
                            results were affected by the pandemic, by slower-than-expected construction of training facilities in the poultry
                            and horticulture sectors, and by a decision (prior to the pandemic) by the MFPAA to limit training in tourism to
                            private training providers.

                            The ICR stated that there were 89,870 direct beneficiaries of the project as of November 2021, of whom 40%
                            were female, exceeding the target of 14,105 beneficiaries, of whom 35% were to be female. The project team
                            later explained that these direct beneficiaries included all trainees enrolled in project-financed programs.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Through its integration of the private sector into TVET governance and functions, the consolidation of TVET
                            financing mechanisms into the 3FPT, and strengthening of training institutions, the project highly achieved its
                            objective to strengthen the TVET system. However, the objective to improve the employability of youth was
                            only modestly achieved. Although many more training programs were created and students enrolled than
                            planned, due to higher-than-envisioned financial contributions from the private sector, employment targets
                            were not reached. This shortfall was partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and it appears likely that the
                            resumption of activities following pandemic-related shutdowns will lead to prompt achievement of some
                            targets, but there were other shortcomings related to slow construction of training facilities and government
                            changes in the parameters of training programs.

                            The PAD (p. 15) cites several other donors active in the area of skills development: Canada (vocational
                            training through apprenticeships, entrepreneurship training, and business plan development); Luxembourg,
                            the International Labour Office, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, and the United
                            Nations Development Program (governance of the TVET system, curriculum reform, and employment for
                            trainees); International Organization of Francophone Countries (pilot programs in mechanical engineering,
                            electronics, and management); AFD (sectoral centers in motorized mechanics and energy management);
                            Islamic Development Bank (youth apprenticeships); Communauté Française de Belgique (coordination and
                            training of trainers at the National Technical and Vocational Education School); and African Development


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Skills development TVET (P145585)



  Bank (two centers for training of trainers). The ICR did not include a discussion of attribution that delineated
  the project's contribution to observed outcomes. The project team later confirmed that there was ongoing
  dialogue with AFD, including joint supervision missions, to ensure that interventions were coordinated and
  that there was no duplicate financing of activities.

  Given High achievement of one objective and Modest achievement of the other, overall efficacy is rated
  Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted for the project's first component (80% of planned Bank
costs), representing investments in the development and delivery of training programs (PAD, pp. 79-88).
Because cost and benefit streams differed by the targeted diploma level, separate calculations were done for
the CAP and BTS levels. Benefits were considered for three cohorts who were to complete training by the end of
the project, with an assumed program completion and employment rate of 90% and reasonable estimates of
earning differentials compared with youth who did not complete any additional education and those who
received a general education of similar duration to the supported TVET programs. For the BTS programs, the
estimated net present value (NPV) was US$50,000 over ten years and US$91,000 over 20 years, with an
internal rate of return (IRR) of 22% and 25%, respectively. For the CAP programs, the NPV was US$25,800 and
US$47,000 over 10 and 20 years, with an IRR of 10% and 15%, respectively. The results remained positive
even under lower assumptions of completion and employment. All results exceeded the opportunity cost of
capital (4%).

The analysis at completion (ICR, pp. 56-68) also covered the first component only (85.2% of actual Bank costs),
noting that the benefits of the second and third components were non-quantifiable. It employed similar
assumptions to those used at appraisal: that LT beneficiaries experienced no foregone opportunity costs, as
they were already enrolled in courses; that opportunity costs for other beneficiaries were equivalent to the
average earnings of individuals who had completed previous levels of education; a 4% discount rate; a 3%
inflation adjustment rate; wage rates based on levels of education and age, drawn from 2018 government
statistics; a retirement age of 60, with project participants remaining in the labor market for up to 35 years
following training; and a 90% graduation and insertion rate. These assumptions were reasonable, though they
overestimated insertion rates. The analysis found an overall cost-benefit ratio (for the entire project) of 5.7 and
IRR of 19.3%, with the highest return (31.3%) under the first component, and an overall NPV of US$174 million.
This result supports the viability of project investments, robust under a sensitivity analysis that varied
employability (to 75% rather than 90% of graduates finding a job), graduation rates (also adjusted from 90% to
75%), opportunity costs (included for LT beneficiaries), and the discount rate (adjusted to 5%).

Implementation arrangements were embedded within the formal structure of the MFPAA, with the Minister
chairing the project's Steering Committee and the Unit for Studies and Planning (CEP) serving as Steering
Committee Secretariat and holding responsibility for day-to-day project coordination and management.
According to the ICR (p. 31), these arrangements functioned smoothly. According to the ICR (p. 37), joint

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Skills development TVET (P145585)



implementation support missions with AFD allowed the government to save time and costs, and ensured that
donors were working together to achieve common goals. There were, however, minor inefficiencies: some
delays in signing of procurement contracts related to the issuance of certificates of existence of funds from the
Ministry of Finance, resolved through the establishment of a coordination unit for procurement and financial
management; some initial delays in civil works for the LTs and satellite centers, addressed through technical
support; and delays in signing of financing agreements with LTs and satellite centers due to quality assurance
requirements of the 3FPT, which took more time than expected due to capacity constraints in the MFPAA,
resolved through creation of an ad hoc committee within the Ministry. The ICR (p. 32) also noted that there were
delays in some civil works and equipment procurement related to the provision of counterpart funds, which was
a challenge across the Bank's portfolio in Senegal because commitments exceeded available resources. The
COVID-19 pandemic also led to closure of training programs in March 2020, requiring a four-month project
extension. Training activities resumed in November 2020.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              19.30
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy at
appraisal and closing. Project-supported institutional development, including the integration of the private sector
into TVET programming and the development of a new TVET funding mechanism, led to high achievement of
the objective to strengthen the TVET system. Shortcomings related to the COVID-19 pandemic and other
factors led to underachievement of targets for employment of graduates of project-supported TVET institutions,
indicating modest achievement of the objective to improve the employability of youth in targeted sectors.
Quantified project benefits exceeded costs, and there was evidence of only minor implementation efficiencies.
These ratings indicate that there were minor shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and
achievement, leading to an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Project activities and innovations have largely been institutionalized. The government has agreed to allocate
the full amount of lump-sum contributions for TVET provided by employers to the 3FPT moving forward, with
private sector representation at the core of 3FPT management. According to the ICR (p. 21), this is the first
fund of its kind in West Africa with such a high level of commitment from the government and business. The
3FPT's governance structure, with 50% private sector representation, solidifies the role of the business
community and ensures that training will remain relevant to labor market needs. There was significant
institutional development throughout the project period that is likely to be sustained, including improved
capacity of the MFPAA to govern the sector, use of PBCs, the role of Boards of Directors at training
institutions, capacity for the CEP to manage training programs, and skills in procurement, budget analysis,
and budget allocation at the Directorate of General Administration and Equipment (DAGE) of the MFPAA.
The ICR (p. 36) noted, however, that challenges with unemployment and underemployment remain, requiring
continued attention to improving the linkages between training and the private sector through robust
internship and/or apprentice programs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's design was based on a comprehensive analysis of the TVET sector conducted in 2013.
  Lessons learned from this study included: the TVET system was serving only a small proportion of the
  eligible cohort; demand for TVET skills was high; the diversity of specializations offered was limited;
  traditional apprenticeships were the most widespread mode of training; the share of resources allocated
  to TVET was inadequate, even though it had grown steadily from 2008-2011; quality assurance was
  missing; and the MFPAA was relatively isolated, with few strong, active connections to other important
  players in training and employment. The project directly addressed the main challenges identified in the
  study, including the limited capacity of the TVET system to absorb eligible youth, the relevance and
  diversity of training offered, the weak governance and financing systems in place, and the need to
  engage the private sector. Project design also learned lessons from prior experience in the education
  sector, including the need to resolve political conflicts on potentially controversial issues (such as
  textbook selection) before implementation; all major texts were adopted before negotiations.

  Financial management arrangements were adequate and included additional strengthening actions
  agreed with the Bank (PAD, p. 35). Risk assessment at appraisal was thorough, with mitigation measures
  clearly specified (PAD, pp. 72-75). Overall implementation risk was rated Substantial, with particular
  focus on implementing agency capacity, delivery monitoring and sustainability, and political economy
  factors. Planned mitigation included institutional strengthening plans, selectivity in choosing reforms, and
  involvement of stakeholders in design of the reform program.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)



  The project was designed using a participative and collaborative process involving public and private
  sector representatives. Working groups to design the tourism, poultry, and horticulture clusters were led
  by business people to ensure alignment with private sector needs. The Bank had played a leading role
  among other donors supporting primary and secondary education in the country, and its leadership in
  education sector policy dialogue and advice continued through preparation of this project. Project
  preparation benefited from close partnership with AFD, taking advantage of AFD's experience in
  supporting policies for training and youth employment through public-private partnerships.

  The project's objectives were straightforward and monitorable. M&E arrangements were well established
  at appraisal, including clearly specified outcome indicators with baselines and targets. Prior Bank-
  financed projects in the education sector used regular directorates and units to implement project
  activities, rather than establishing a separate Project Implementation Unit. This project did the same, with
  an eye toward improving sustainability, ownership, and long-term institutional capacity building.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular and included staff with appropriate expertise. The Bank team was
 consistent across the project's lifetime, facilitating regular interaction with counterparts and smooth
 implementation. When implementation challenges arose, the Bank team worked collaboratively with the
 government to find solutions "that would not compromise the integrity of project design" (ICR, p. 35).
 Supervision teams reported thoroughly and consistently on financial management, procurement, and
 safeguards processes and worked with the Ministry and other agencies to build capacity where necessary.
 The ICR (p. 35) noted that the project's success was largely due to the support and technical expertise of
 the in-country Bank team.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were clearly specified, and their achievement was measured by a logical results
 chain that included six outcome indicators and eleven intermediate outcome indicators. A clear M&E
 framework was in place at the start of project implementation. CEP was responsible for preparing an
 annual general progress report, quarterly implementation reports, and tracer surveys. Each training center


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)



 cluster and LT was to report data through an information system managed and coordinated by CEP. A
 TVET statistical yearbook was to be produced annually.



b. M&E Implementation
  Reporting of data was done regularly throughout the project's lifetime. Performance indicators were
  tracked as planned, and one tracer study was carried out to collect data on student satisfaction and post-
  graduation employment experiences. A planned second tracer study was not completed due to the
  COVID-19 pandemic; it is expected in calendar year 2022. The project signed an agreement with the
  National Statistics and Demography Agency to strengthen the M&E function and data collection.
  The MFPAA also began to pilot the use of the Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision
  (GEMS) Kobo tool to collect data on project interventions and beneficiaries, and the project supported the
  implementation of a geographic information system for TVET that became operational in February 2021.
  DAGE and CEP capacity was improved through the addition of staff.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used to adjust project implementation, produce reports for the MFPAA, and inform a
  report on progress of the TVET Sustainable Development Goals. GEMS data have also been used to
  prepare TVET statistical yearbooks, and to lower costs associated with in-person data gathering
  missions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered three safeguard policies:
   OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12
   Involuntary Resettlement. Primary responsibility for monitoring safeguards compliance sat with the Office
   National de la Formation Professionelle, an autonomous institution under the MFPAA that was in charge of
   managing the construction, rehabilitation, and equipping of facilities. The expected direct negative impacts
   of the project were minor and manageable (temporary nuisances during civil works, safety at work, risk of
   involuntary destruction of covered cultural artifacts). An Environmental and Social Management Framework
   and Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared and disclosed. In 2018, a Grievance Redress
   Mechanism was developed. One complaint, related to the construction of a poultry center, was filed and
   was resolved in February 2018. According to the ICR (p. 34), safeguards were monitored consistently
   during project implementation and reported on in Implementation Status Reports, and there was full
   compliance with safeguard policies.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills development TVET (P145585)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   DAGE had overall procurement and financial management responsibility. The Bank held capacity
   development workshops to help DAGE staff with implementation of financial management requirements.
   Unaudited interim financial reports were regularly submitted on time and were of acceptable quality.
   Required audits were also submitted regularly and on time, and opinions were unqualified. Procurement
   was rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory throughout implementation, with one exception, in
   September 2020, when the Procurement Risk Assessment and Management System assigned a
   moderately unsatisfactory rating due to delays with infrastructure contracts and resignation of the
   procurement specialist. These issues were resolved by project closing. Procurement plans were updated
   during Bank supervision missions to accommodate construction delays at the LTs and satellite centers.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 36-37) provided several key lessons, some of which are elaborated here:

Strong public-private collaboration lies at the core of development and maintenance of
relevant skills training programs. In this project, the involvement of the private sector in Boards of
Directors, delivery of skills training, and financing the 3FPT contributed to design and
implementation of interventions that were responsive to the needs of the economy for skilled
manpower.

Performance-based contracts can be an important mechanism to improve dialogue,
transparency, and monitoring of TVET institutions. The use of PBCs in this project facilitated

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Skills development TVET (P145585)



negotiation of annual budgets of TVET institutions based on targets and results, shifting the
management culture of these institutions from an input-based orientation to one focusing on
outcomes.

Tracer studies are essential for understanding the effectiveness of activities and policies.
This project's design included tracer studies that produced valuable information on student activities
following completion of short-term skills training. The data revealed challenges with insertion rates
that helped inform areas for improvement moving forward.



IEG adds one additional lesson:

Confronting sensitive political economy issues up front can avert potentially costly issues
and delays during implementation. In this case, identification and resolution of possible stumbling
blocks such as textbook selection, as well as deliberate consultation with multiple
stakeholders during project preparation, allowed the project to escape some risks that were
identified at appraisal.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise, candid, and results oriented, with a thorough narrative covering the project's storyline. It
harnessed available data, from the project's M&E system and elsewhere in its analysis of achievement of
objectives. The ICR provided important detail on the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affected
achievement of outcomes. Its lessons were comprehensive and insightful, though some of the lessons added
new information that was not referenced earlier in the document. Given the presence, documented in the PAD,
of multiple development partners in the TVET sector, the ICR could have provided an analysis of the Bank's
specific contribution to observed outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Skills development TVET (P145585)




                                                                  Page 15 of 15
