     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022735

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P125961                                     Afghanistan Rural Access Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                 Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H7920,TF-13093                          31-Mar-2018                                        395,998,233.30

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2012                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              125,000,000.00                               312,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               407,000,000.00                               282,000,000.00

 Actual                                           395,998,233.30                               274,576,225.19




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Vibecke Dixon                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P149597_TBL
 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P149597                                     Additional Financing of ARAP ( P149597 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                  0

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2017

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)




                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                   0.00                                              0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p.7) dated July 22, 2012 and the Emergency Project Paper (EPP,
   p.4), the project objective was “to enable rural communities to benefit from all-season road access to basic
   services and facilities,” where “all-season road access” was defined as a road that is accessible to motorized
   traffic all year round except for an interruption of up to 10 days in any given year.

   At the time of Additional Financing in May 2017, the project objective was revised to accommodate the
   addition of an emergency mechanism to the project scope. The revised project objective was “to enable: (a)
   rural communities to benefit from all-season road access to basic services and facilities, and (b) an early
   emergency response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency.”

   The emergency response mechanism was not triggered during project implementation. Therefore, this review
   will not undertake a split evaluation of the project outcome although the project objective was revised.

   *The achievement of the project development objectives in Afghanistan is assessed following the same
   methodological approach. This applies to all projects closed by June 30, 2021.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-May-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



According to the financing agreement (p.4) the project consisted of three components:

A. Improvement and Maintenance of Secondary Roads. (Appraisal cost: US$186.00 million; after
additional financing: US$291.00 million; actual cost: US$243.00 million)

This component included road investments for the improvement of unpaved secondary roads to paved
standards, upgrading of paved secondary roads to asphalt surface, construction of bridges on secondary
roads, and periodic, routine, and emergency maintenance of paved and unpaved secondary roads. This
component was to support the project implementation unit (PIU) within the Ministry of Public Works (MPW)
in project implementation through capacity strengthening.

B. Improvement and Maintenance of Tertiary Roads. (Appraisal cost: US$128.00 million; after additional
financing: US$168.00 million; actual cost: US$143.00 million)

This component included road investments for the rehabilitation of tertiary roads, construction of bridges on
tertiary roads, and periodic, routine, and emergency maintenance of tertiary roads. This component was to
support the PIU within the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) in project
implementation through capacity strengthening.

C. Program Planning and Development, Institutional Strengthening and Program Coordination
Support. (Appraisal cost: US$18.00 million; after additional financing: US$28.00 million; actual cost:
US$21.00 million)

This component consisted of three sub-components:

    1. Setting up a rural roads planning and management system: This sub-component was to finance
       (a) the establishment of a rural roads network inventory system and the carrying out of the first cycle
       inventory; (b) development of a comprehensive set of rural roads design; and (c) the establishment
       of a network planning, development, and management system, a system for the short, medium, and
       long-term road maintenance, and a system for the preparation of a rolling five-year investment plan
       for rural roads.
    2. Institutional strengthening and capacity building in the rural road sector: This sub-component
       was to finance (a) a study of the laws, regulations, organization structure and the human resource
       capacity of the rural road sector, and a proposal of necessary changes; (b) preparation and
       implementation of a comprehensive capacity development plan for public sector staff responsible for
       National Rural Access Program; (c) provision of six-month on-the-job-training for 50 engineering and
       social science graduates; (d) provision of incentives to the research and practical period of 140
       engineering and social science interns; (e) sponsoring of the master’s degree programs for 20
       program staff; (f) activities to build the capacity of domestic construction industry; and (g) the
       construction of regional functional buildings and material laboratories in eight regions.
    3. Program coordination support: This sub-component was to finance (a) the operating costs of the
       National Coordination Unit; (b) the monitoring and evaluation, baseline and follow-up survey,
       technical support for the mid-term review, technical and financial audits, and fiduciary and safeguard
       control measures for MPW MRRD; (c) preparation and implementation of a public relations program;
       and (d) the establishment of a road agency, study tours, and sector studies.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



  Revised Components

  At the additional financing in May 2017, the scope of the first component increased by up to 100 kilometers
  (km) of asphalt roads and 700 meters (m) of bridges. Similarly, the scope of the second component
  increased by up to 300 km of roads for rehabilitation, 600 m of bridges and 1,800 km of roads for
  maintenance. The main purpose of this increase in the scope of the project through additional financing was
  to fill the secondary road network’s basic connectivity gaps, sustain proper service levels by upgrading
  secondary roads with large traffic volumes, and extend the tertiary road network coverage to isolated
  villages. Additionally, the road designs were revised to include all-weather resilience that increased the
  estimated project costs by US$72 million. Under the third component, an expressway feasibility study and
  local road network planning was added to the first subcomponent, and vocational training and sector reform
  and public-private partnership studies to the second sub-component. An additional US$3 million was also
  added to the third subcomponent to cover the financial loss due to the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) and
  US dollar exchange rate changes. On the other hand, the preparation of a road sector organizational study
  was dropped from project scope because the Afghan government decided to utilize USAID funds to finance
  this study.

  At the additional financing, a zero-dollar contingency emergency response component was added to the
  project to enable a quick response to natural and man-made disasters.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$332.00 million. At the time of additional
  financing in May 2017, the estimated total project cost was revised up to US$487.00 million. In December
  2020, the project closed with a total cost of US$407.00 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the International Development Association (IDA) grant was estimated at US$125
  million (equivalent of 82.8 million Special Drawing Rights-SDR), and the Afghanistan Emergency Trust Fund
  (ARTF) grant at US$207.00 million. In May 2017, an additional IDA grant of US$105.00 million was
  approved to cover the financing gap because of a cost increase of US$69.00 million that resulted from the
  difference between the original cost estimates at the appraisal stage and the revised costs from detailed
  design (including climate resilience measures), US$3.00 million due to the depreciation of SDR against US
  dollar about, and US$83.00 million that was required because of the scaling-up of activities to increase all-
  season road access coverage. According to the information in the restructuring paper dated May 19, 2017,
  while the total financing needs amounted to US$155 million, only US$105 million was available at the time
  of additional financing. Therefore, there was a financing gap of US$50 million that was to be financed later if
  funding became available either through IDA or the ARTF. That funding was contingent on good project
  performance, and clarification from the government on the tertiary road activities of the Citizen’s Charter
  Project—a new agreement between the government and citizens to ensure citizen’s development rights.
  This US$50 million was not approved, because the funds were available to finance the project activities
  under increased project scope because of the depreciation of the local currency of Afghani against the US
  dollar—all contracts were in Afghani.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
  project closing.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



   Restructurings: There were three project restructurings:

         First Restructuring and Additional Financing (Level 1 – May 19, 2017): An additional US$105
          million from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) was approved to cover a financing
          gap (see sub-section Financing above). The closing date of the original ARTF grant was extended
          by 23 and half months from March 31, 2018 to March 15, 2020 to allow time for the completion of
          the works under the new design that included climate resilience and also the works added to the
          project scope. A zero-dollar contingency emergency response component was added to enable a
          quick response to potential major natural and man-made disasters. Hence, the project objective
          was revised to include language for the emergency response goal of the project. The Physical
          Cultural Heritage (OP/BP 4.11) safeguard policy was triggered at this restructuring. Two objective-
          level indicators were revised to include gender disaggregated data, and the target value of the
          beneficiaries was increased because of the increased project scope.
         Second Restructuring (Level 2 – March 4, 2018): The closing date of the original ARTF grant was
          extended by 23 months at the time of the additional financing. In this restructuring, the closing data
          of the original IDA grant was also extended by 23 and half months from March 31, 2018 to March
          15, 2020 to match the revised closing data of the original ARTF grant.
         Third Restructuring (Level 2 – March 6, 2020): The project closing date was extended by nine and
          half months from March 15, 2020 to December 31, 2020 to allow time for the completion of the
          construction of gravel roads under the first component and the rehabilitation of tertiary roads under
          the second component. An uncommitted amount of US$30 million was cancelled from project funds
          that resulted because of the depreciation of the Afghani against the US dollar.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 26, 2012. The Financing Agreement was signed on July 22,
   2012, and the project became effective on August 12, 2012. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in
   September 2015. The original closing date was March 31, 2018. It was extended by two years and nine
   months, and the project closed on December 31, 2020. The reasons for closing date extensions have been
   outlined in the project restructuring entries above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context. Inadequate and poor road infrastructure
was a major barrier for the connectivity of communities to district and provincial centers. The project
objective was in line with the objectives of the National Rural Access Program of the Government of
Afghanistan that focused on provision of year-round rural access to basic social services. Aiming at
improving the rural communities’ access to basic services and facilities through all-season roads, the
project’s objective was outcome-oriented and appropriately pitched for the development status of the
country. While the fragility of the political and security situation in the country and the low capacity in the
construction sector were major risks in the operational context, given the experience of the country in the
development of the rural roads under previous and ongoing World Bank and other donor-funded projects, it
was reasonable to expect that the objective could be achieved.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



               The project objectives were fully aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for Afghanistan, FY2017-20. The project sought to address the development
               problem of insufficient rural road access to basic services and facilities in district and provincial centers,
               such as health services, education, and markets, and connectivity among regions to increase economic
               activities. Hence, the project objective corresponds to the CPF’s (p.22) Objective 2.2 to “support improved
               transport and [information and communication technologies] both within the country and with regional
               neighbors to facilitate communication, trade, and access to services.” The Bank strategy defined the
               rehabilitation of rural roads with a greater focus on their sustainable maintenance as one of the
               interventions the World Bank will finance to achieve this strategic objective.

               The World Bank had been a development partner of Afghanistan in the rehabilitation and maintenance of
               rural roads and the strengthening of institutional capacity since its re-engagement with the country in 2002.
               Under four IDA and ARTF-funded projects, 10,000 km of roads had already been rehabilitated or built, and
               technical assistance was provided to MPW and MRRD to strengthen their institutional capacity in road
               network management. This project was designed to scale up the then on-going IDA and ARTF-funded
               National Emergency Rural Access Project (NERAP) and benefited from the experience gained and lessons
               learned during NERAP’s implementation. Given the World Bank’s prior presence and experience in the
               country and the sector, the outcomes expected form the project was consistent with progress over time,
               and the project objective was adequately challenging.

               Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enable rural communities to benefit from all-season road to access basic services and facilities.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., IDA and ARTF grants, were to be used
                             to finance the civil works for the rehabilitation of secondary and tertiary rural roads and construction of
                             bridges, and routine and periodic maintenance of roads involving local communities. Technical assistance
                             was to be provided to strengthen the technical and institutional capacity of the ministries responsible for road
                             management through the creation of a GIS-based road inventory and a road management system, and
                             provision of training to public sector employees. These activities would be expected to directly lead to the
                             achievement of project outputs of secondary and tertiary roads rehabilitated and upgraded, and bridges
                             constructed with sufficient technical and institutional capacity to manage these roads. In turn, these outputs

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



would be expected to result in the project outcomes of an increase in the percentage of the rural population
with access to all-season roads, reduction in travel times to basic services and facilities located at district and
provincial centers, and sustainable management and maintenance of these roads by relevant government
entities in cooperation with local communities. These would be expected to lead to the achievement of the
project objective to enable rural communities to benefit from all-season road access to basic services and
facilities. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to expected results were valid and direct, and the results
achieved could be attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the project’s theory of change was built on
the critical assumption of the sustainability of political and security situation in the country, which was a major
risk for the achievement and the sustainability of the project development outcomes.

Outputs

The project’s results framework captured the following outputs (the achievements are compared to the target
values at the time of additional financing):

Secondary Roads:

      Km of gravel surfaced secondary roads rehabilitated: The project financed the rehabilitation of
       890 km of gravel surfaced secondary roads, which was lower than the target of 1,000 km.
      Km of asphalt surface secondary roads rehabilitated: The project financed the rehabilitation of
       298 km of asphalt surface secondary roads against the target of 250 km.
      Construction of bridges on secondary roads (meters): The project financed the construction of
       1,480 m of bridges. The target was 1,351 m.
      Km of secondary roads under routine and periodic maintenance: At project closing, the
       maintenance of 2,150 km of roads was contracted out to local communities against the target of 1,870
       km. Additionally, the government concluded 43 emergency and post-disaster maintenance contracts
       to ensure all-weather serviceability of the network.

Tertiary Roads:

      Km of gravel surface tertiary roads rehabilitated: The project financed the rehabilitation of 1,550
       km of gravel surfaced tertiary roads against the target of 1,420 km.
      Construction of bridges on tertiary roads (meters): The project financed the construction of 1,980
       m of bridges. The target was 1,800 m.
      Km of tertiary roads under routine and periodic maintenance: At project closing, the maintenance
       of 5,635 km of roads was contracted out to local communities against the target of 3,750 km.
       Additionally, the government concluded 895 emergency and post-disaster maintenance contracts to
       ensure all-weather serviceability of the network.

Technical Assistance:

      Complete road inventory: At the start of the project implementation, an inventory was available but
       was outdated and did not provide essential information. The target was to update the inventory for 100
       per cent of roads under central government mandate including major highways, secondary roads, and
       tertiary roads under National Rural Access Program. At project closing, 95 percent of the geographic
       information system-based inventory was completed as planned—33 provinces out of 34. The


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



         remaining five percent could not be completed because of deteriorating security situation in certain
         parts of the country.
        Improved network management system in place: The project financed the establishment of an
         improved network management system as planned that did not exist before the project.
        Design standards developed and adopted: The project financed the development and adoption of
         design standards as planned that were incomplete at project appraisal.
        Cost estimation system developed and fully functional: The project financed the development of a
         cost estimation system as planned that did not exist before the project. At project closing, the system
         was functional.
        Financial management system in MRRD and MPW developed and functional: A financial
         management system was developed as planned and was functional at project closing.
        Road sector organizational study prepared: This output was not achieved. The preparation of a
         road sector organizational study was dropped from project scope because the Afghan Government
         decided to work with the USAID on the sector reform.

The ICR also reports that the project financed the training of 500 members of staff of the PIUs and offered
internships to 2,000 fresh graduates including 20 women. The target for internships was defined as 140 in the
financing agreement (FA, p.5). The project also sponsored 11 members of staff for a master’s degree against
the target of 20 (FA, p.5). The project provided training to local contractors on environment and other
safeguard policies, gender, health, and safety (ICR, p.25). However, the ICR does not report the other
activities listed under the third component in the financing agreement: (a) preparation and implementation of a
comprehensive capacity development plan for public sector staff responsible for NRAP; and (b) construction
of regional functional buildings and material laboratories in eight regions, and enhancement of the program
library and archive consolidation.

Outcomes

In the results framework, three indicators were defined to measure the outcomes of the project on increasing
the access of rural population to all-season roads, reducing the travel time on improved roads under the
project, and increasing the frequency of the trips to essential services, such as town markets, schools, and
health facilities.

      Percent of rural population living within 2 km of all-season roads in the project area: The survey
       conducted at the start of the project determined the baseline as 58 percent. The target was set at 65
       percent. At project closing, 89 percent of the rural population in the project area was living within 2 km
       of all-season roads.
      Percent reduction in travel time by a four-wheel drive vehicle along improved roads under the
       project: The target set at appraisal was to reduce the travel time by 30 percent. According to the
       surveys conducted, travel time to a public clinic decreased from 1 hour to 30 minutes (50 percent
       reduction), to a public hospital from 2 hours to 1 hour 24 minutes (30 percent reduction), to district
       centers from 1 hour 48 minutes to 1 hour 24 minutes (22 percent reduction), to provincial centers from
       6 hours 24 minutes to 2 hours 6 minutes (67 percent reduction), and to the closest market from 1 hour
       24 minutes to 1 hour 15 minutes (11 percent reduction). The data show that the project had a major
       impact on reducing long-distance travel time (i.e., to provincial centers) that can be directly attributable
       to the project. The project was also successful in reducing the travel times to health centers and
       hospitals as targeted. However, the project’s impact on reducing travel times to district centers and
       closest markets was lower than estimated.

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)




      Increased frequency of trips to nearest essential services (including town markets, schools,
       and health facilities) connected by the roads improved under the project: At appraisal, the target
       was set as an increase by at least 15 percent. At the time of the additional financing, gender-
       disaggregated baselines were established. The baselines for men were 42 percent of them traveled
       daily to and from village district centers and 39 percent to and from provincial and other locations
       within the province. At project closing, these increased to 63.1 percent and 60.8 percent, respectively,
       which indicate increased trip frequencies of more than 50 percent compared to the target of 15
       percent. On the other hand, the percentage of women who traveled daily to and from village district
       centers dropped from 20 percent to 17.2 percent (a 14 percent reduction), whereas the percentage of
       women who travelled to and from provincial and other locations within the province increased from 16
       percent to 20.6 percent (a 29 percent increase). The project team commented that there was no data
       to explain the drop in the former frequency rate, but worsening security situation and the availability of
       goods closer to houses because of improved goods delivery could have had an impact on the
       decrease in the travel frequency. Although improved road conditions are expected to have an impact
       on increasing the travel frequency, there are other factors that impact the travel frequency. For
       example, the frequency of trips to health centers would be mainly affected by the frequency of
       sickness. Similarly, frequency of trips to town centers would be affected by the necessity to go to the
       town centers more than the road conditions. Even the cost of gas can play a major role in determining
       the frequency of trips to such places. Therefore, although this indicator gives an idea about the
       improved road conditions, it does not fully capture the impact of the project on increasing and
       improving access to basic services and facilities.

The project was mostly successful in achieving the output targets related to the road works and delivering the
main technical assistance outputs, but the ICR does not report whether some technical assistance activities
were implemented or not. The project team later confirmed that all technical assistance activities had been
completed as identified in the Project Appraisal Document, except the road strategy report, and the Financing
Agreement. It should be expected that the establishment of the road inventory and the improved network
management system would contribute to the sustainability of the roads rehabilitated under the project.
Furthermore, the routine and periodic maintenance arrangements were in place at project closing involving
rural communities that were supported by the project through capacity building, community consultations, and
mobilizing rural workforce. However, the timely availability of funds to finance the maintenance of the roads
rehabilitated and bridges conducted under the project was uncertain because of the changing political
environment in Afghanistan (ICR, p.25). As a result of these outputs and arrangements, the project had a
substantial impact on increasing the share of the rural population with access to all-season roads and in
reducing the travel time to health centers and long-distance travel time to provincial centers as targeted, while
the reduction in the travel times to district centers and closest markets was lower than the target. Overall, the
project’s efficacy in enabling rural communities to benefit from all-season road access to basic services and
facilities is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the uncertainty about the availability
funds to maintain roads and bridges after project closing*.

* This review assesses the project’s achievements at the time of the project closing in December 2020 based
on the information in the ICR, incorporating the information provided in the client’s project closure report
dated June 2020. At the time of this review, the impact of the recent political developments in Afghanistan on
the project’s outcomes was not known. Therefore, they are not taken into consideration in assessing the
project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective. The political events of recent months are assessed as a
major risk in the Risk to Development section below.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was substantially successful in achieving the expected project outcomes of increasing rural
                            populations access to all-season roads, reduction in travel times to provincial centers, and basic services and
                            facilities, and sustainable management of these roads by relevant government entities in cooperation with
                            local communities. However, reduction in travel times to district centers and closest markets was lower than
                            the than the target. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to enable rural
                            communities to benefit from all-season road access to basic services and facilities is rated Substantial with
                            moderate shortcomings because of the uncertainty about the availability funds to maintain roads and bridges
                            after project closing (please see the footnote in the previous section about how this review assesses the
                            recent political developments in Afghanistan).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   As the primary purpose of the project was social, i.e., to give the inhabitants of remote villages and communities
   reliable access to essential services as part of recovery from an emergency, a formal cost-benefit analysis was
   not conducted at appraisal for unpaved secondary and paved and unpaved tertiary roads rehabilitated and
   bridges constructed under the project. These roads did not have sufficient motorized traffic to conduct an
   economic analysis (ICR, p.15). Instead, the economic viability, and hence the prioritization, of these investments
   was evaluated based on the cost per beneficiary index (CBI), which is calculated by dividing the estimated cost
   by the estimated number of beneficiaries served. The CBI calculated for unpaved secondary roads at appraisal
   was US$207 and for the paved and unpaved tertiary roads and bridges US$ 94 per beneficiary. At project
   closing, the CBI calculations at U$108 and US$44 per beneficiary, respectively, were much lower than the
   estimates at appraisal. The main reasons for these much lower CBIs were the appreciation of the US dollar
   against the local currency of Afghani (the contracts were made in this currency) and the reduction in costs
   because of lower site requirements (ICR, p.16). There are no well-established criteria for ranking based on CBI,
   but the CBIs calculated for these secondary and tertiary roads were lower than the US$490 per beneficiary set
   as the threshold in a World Bank-funded project in Morocco in 2006 (ICR, p.16).

   For paved secondary roads that would be upgraded to a higher standard and with a traffic volume of at least 300
   vehicles per day, the Highway Development and Management Model was used to evaluate their economic
   viability (AF, p.54). The assumptions used to calculate economic benefits were appropriate: (a) value of time

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



savings; (b) reduction in vehicle operating costs; and (c) reduction in GHG emissions. The calculations were
made for a 15-year period of economic benefits. The cost-benefit analysis, excluding GHG reduction benefits,
resulted in a minimum economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 18.3 percent at appraisal. Using the same
methodology, the minimum EIRR calculated at project closing was 27 percent (ICR, p.16), which was higher
than the hurdle rate of 12 percent set for Afghanistan. The overall reduction in contract costs because of the
depreciation of Afghani against the US dollar was the main reason for higher EIRRs at project closing.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project became effective within three months following the signing of the financing agreement. Because of
the lack of reliable information at appraisal, the project cost was underestimated. An additional financing was
needed to cover the financing gap, and the cost increase due to the design change to include climate resilience
measures and scaling up of the project scope. The project closing date was extended by two years and nine
months mostly because of the increased project scope following the approval of the additional financing. At
project closing, US$30 million of uncommitted funds were cancelled because of the savings as a result of the
depreciation of the local currency of Afghani against the US dollar.

Delays in the finalization of designs and procurement of civil works resulted in delays in project implementation
at the start of the project. The procurement of consultants for the preparation of the feasibility study for the
Kabul-Peshawar expressway could not be finalized resulting in the dropping of this activity from the project
scope. The high turnover of project staff and delays in the appointment of replacements adversely affected the
project implementation units’ performance, which was addressed by capacity development of the staff under the
project. High number of contracts because of the large scope and wide geographic spread of the project
increased the workload of the PIUs in procurement, implementation, and monitoring.



Overall, while there were some moderate shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the
project, taking the political fragility and conflict situation in the country, the project’s efficiency in achieving the
project objective is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                  Rate Available?               Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                            0
 Appraisal                                                      18.30
                                                                                             Not Applicable
                                                                                            0
 ICR Estimate                                                   27.00
                                                                                             Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                            Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)




6. Outcome

The project objective was highly relevant to country context and World Bank’s country strategy. The project was
to address the development problem of insufficient road access of rural communities to basic facilities and
services and lack of regional interconnectivity. While some expected outcomes, such as reduction in travel time
to district centers and markets, fell short of the targets, the project successfully completed the road works and
technical assistance activities that led to the achievement of the outcomes. Hence, the project’s efficacy in
achieving the project objective to enable rural communities to benefit from all-season road access to basic
services and facilities is rated Substantial. While there were some moderate shortcomings in the administrative
and operational efficiency of the project, the project was efficiently implemented with all cost per benefit indices
calculated for different classes of roads being lower than the estimates at appraisal and the economic rates or
return calculated for paved secondary roads being higher than those calculated at appraisal in a politically
fragile and conflict prone environment. Hence, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated
Substantial. Overall, the project’s Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Following the regime change in August 2021, the economic crisis in Afghanistan has worsened. It is
expected that the economy will be faced with a major contraction resulting in macroeconomic instability and
increased poverty because of rapid reduction in international grant support, loss of access to offshore assets,
and disruption to financial linkages (World Bank, Afghanistan Country Context,
worldbank.org/en/country/Afghanistan/overview#1). The population of the country is faced with hunger due to
the collapse of the economic activities and drought that affected agricultural production. The political situation
is severely uncertain. It is unknown whether the MPW and MRRD are operational or have financial means
and sufficiently trained staff to manage the road network in the country. Worsening security and increasing
conflict situation can lead to the destruction of roads rehabilitated and bridges constructed under the project.
Given the rapidly worsening political, economic, and social situation in the country, the risk to the
sustainability of the development outcomes is assessed as high.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was processed under the Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies (OP/BP 8.00) policy of
  the World Bank to provide rapid response to rebuild, restore and expand rural road network in
  Afghanistan, which was a transition country after coming out of a two-decade long conflict (EPP, p.7). At
  project entry, the goal to address “the vulnerability of the rural poor through integrating it to the market
  and other economic opportunities in the adjacent districts, provinces and regions” was in accordance with

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



  national strategies and of high strategic importance (EPP, p.2). The project’s approach to investment
  activities was straightforward. The project was to finance civil works for the rehabilitation of secondary
  and tertiary roads, construction of bridges, and maintenance activities, along with technical assistance to
  strengthen institutional capacity for sustainable management of these roads and bridges. The activities to
  be funded by the project were appropriate to achieve the project objective. The PIUs under the MPW and
  MRRD had experience gained from the implementation of the previous and then ongoing IDA and ARTF-
  funded projects, and the project was to further provide support to the PIUs in project implementation. The
  fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project were adequate. The monitoring and evaluation design
  was sufficient to measure the project’s outputs and expected outcomes but had moderate shortcomings
  in capturing the outcomes expected from technical assistance activities and the sustainability of the
  outcomes. Lessons learned in relevant prior projects in Afghanistan were utilized in the preparation of the
  project, such as a good understanding of the ever-changing situation on the ground, a higher flexibility in
  project implementation in a fragile country context, the challenge caused by the rapid rotation of the staff
  in the PIUs, and simple project design. However, the large project scope, its geographic spread, and
  limitation on contract sizes resulted in hundreds of contracts that increased the workload of the PIUs
  (ICR, p.26). Risks were adequately assessed, and mitigation measures were identified. The mitigation of
  the security risk was correctly identified as “outside the Bank’s scope” (EPP, p.16). While the economic
  aspects of the project were sound and economic analysis was based on appropriate assumptions, the
  project cost was underestimated because of the absence of reliable field data, which was addressed by
  additional financing and project restructuring (ICR, p.24).



  Overall, the World Bank’s performance in identification, preparation, and appraisal of the project to be
  implemented in a conflict and fragile country was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regularly held every six months until the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020 after
 which the project team supervised project implementation based on scanned documents. Supervision of
 fiduciary and procurement aspects of the project was adequate. When there were cases of non-compliance
 with fiduciary and safeguards policies, the project team closely monitored the resolution of those issues
 based on the action plans agreed with the Afghan government (see Section 10. Other Issues below). The
 project team’s focus on project implementation and the development impact of the project was sufficient.
 Despite the project team’s efforts at the government level to ensure the availability of funding for
 maintenance and the sustainability of project outcomes, this issue was unresolved at project closing mostly
 due to the uncertainties in the political environment in the country. The project team was proactive in
 processing an additional financing and restructuring the project to achieve the project objective. While the
 M&E findings were utilized to inform the strategic redirection of project implementation, moderate
 shortcomings in the M&E design in capturing the outcomes of the technical assistance activities and the
 sustainability of project outcomes were not sufficiently corrected during implementation (see Section 9.
 M&E Design, Implementation, and Utilization below).


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



 The quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was outcome-oriented and clearly defined. The project’s theory of change
 documenting how key activities and outputs were expected to lead to outcomes were adequately explained
 and mostly reflected in the results framework. The intermediate results indicators sufficiently captured the
 contribution of the project’s investment activities and outputs towards the achievement of project outcomes.
 However, the casual chain from technical assistance activities to expected outputs and outcomes were not
 adequately captured by the results framework. The objective level indicators, i.e., increased access to rural
 roads and reduction in travel times, sufficiently encompassed the project outcomes of increased access to
 basic services and facilities, but the indicators were insufficient to capture the sustainability of the project
 outcomes. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound. Targets were
 available for all indicators; baselines were to be determined by a survey within the first two years of project
 implementation. The M&E design and arrangements were adequately embedded institutionally. PIUs within
 the MWP and MRRD had the experience and capacity from the implementation of the NERAP and were to
 monitor project progress based on the contractors’ progress reports. A third party monitoring company was
 to be utilized to measure the objective level indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  Baseline data for project objective level indicators were collected via video surveys or user surveys as
  planned. While there were some delays in data collection for the measurement and reporting of the
  indicators in the Results Framework because of the worsening security situation, both PIUs submitted
  project progress reports regularly based on the data collected by the supervision consultants and the
  third party monitoring consultants. At the time of the additional financing, two intermediate indicators were
  added to the Results Framework, i.e., job opportunities created and number of people trained. The first
  indicator was not relevant to capture project outputs or outcomes that would lead to the achievement of
  the project objective. The second indicator was not sufficient to address the Results Framework’s
  weakness in capturing the impact of technical activities on the achievement of the project outcomes and
  objective. The target values of the indicators were revised upward following the scaling up of the project
  scope at additional financing. Two beneficiary satisfaction surveys were conducted, one in January 2015
  and the other in December 2020.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to the government and the World Bank project staff regularly. The
  processing of the additional financing can be fully attributed to the M&E findings that determined the
  financing gap caused by detailed designs and the changes in the project scope (ICR, p.22). The
  strategic decision to shift some secondary road rehabilitation works from the MPW to the MRRD was
  taken by the government officials and the World Bank project team based on the information in the M&E
  reports of the third party monitoring company. It was reported that the MPW would not be able to
  complete those works on time because of the heavy workload of the ministry in implementing other
  projects and the procurement of the contracts through National Competitive Bids, which required a
  minimum six-month processing period (ICR, footnote 49, p.22). As a result of this shift, works on
  secondary roads were completed on time. The M&E findings were adequately used to provide evidence
  of the achievement of the project outcomes. Due to the changing political situation in the country, the
  M&E findings are not expected to lead to subsequent interventions in the near future.



  Overall, while there were moderate shortcomings in the M&E design in capturing the project’s technical
  activities’ impact on the achievement of the project objectives and the sustainability of the outcomes
  after project closing, and in the M&E implementation because of the worsening security situation in the
  country, the M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievement of the
  project objectives and test the links in the results chain, and M&E findings were utilized to inform
  strategic redirection and processing of additional financing. Hence, the project’s M&E quality is rated
  Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and the Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies. At the
   additional financing, the project also triggered the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Because the location of the specific road works and detailed
   designs were not known at appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
   prepared outlining the expected effects of the project activities on environment and local communities and
   potential mitigation measures based on the experience gained at the then ongoing National Emergency
   Rural Access Project. The ESMF was in disclosed in the Dari and Pashto languages in the project areas,
   and the websites of MPW and MMRD. An English version of the ESMF was published on the World Bank’s
   Infoshop. Some potential adverse effects of the project activities on environment were listed as soil erosion,
   clearing of vegetation, landslides, slope instability, contamination of water, air and sound pollution,
   operation of quarries and borrow pits, discharge of sewage and other fluid waste from construction camps,
   and spillage of pollutants. It was also expected that the project could have an adverse impact on traffic
   safety and occupational health and safeguard (OHS) of workers. Environmental and Social Management

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



  Plans (ESMPs) were to be prepared once the project locations were identified after the start of the project
  implementation.

  The PIUs had the capacity and staff to implement the environmental safeguards policy. However, there
  were shortcomings in the occupational health and safety arrangements in project sites, and ESMPs were
  not prepared for some project sites. There were also two fatalities, one because of an insurgent activity and
  another because of the lack of adequate safety measures in one of the project sites. Both incidents were
  formally notified to the World Bank. Upon the training of the members of staff responsible from the
  implementation of safeguard policies, the implementation of the occupational health and safety
  arrangements improved (ICR, p.23).

  Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this policy because of the possibility that road
  widening activities could require acquisition of land and asset. The general guidelines of how this safeguard
  policy was to be implemented were included in the EMSF, such as road works that were to affect more than
  200 people or land acquisition of more than 10 percent of total land holdings were not be financed under the
  project. During implementation, the project switched from the implementation of land donation approach,
  because of its negative socioeconomic impacts, to a community-based compensation approach, under
  which project beneficiaries contributed to the compensation project-affected persons. The project was
  compliant with the requirements of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard policy.

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): This safeguard was triggered because the project was spread over
  different parts of the country and subject to the National Biodiversity Strategy Act 36 of the Afghanistan
  Environmental Law particularly in the Bamyan Valley, one of the project sites. This law was in line with the
  requirements of the Natural Habitats safeguard policy. The ESMF included procedures to mitigate the
  project’s negative impact on biodiversity in the valley. While the ICR does not provide information about how
  this safeguard policy was implemented, the project team stated that the main road construction activity in
  the Bamyan Valley had been designed but not implemented because the engineering design was not
  cleared and approved by UNESCO and the Ministry of Culture in time.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): This policy was triggered at the time of additional financing
  because of the presence of rich cultural heritage resources in the Bamyan Valley, one of the project sites.
  The ESMF was reviewed and revised to include the measures for the implementation of this safeguard
  policy. However, the ICR does not provide information about how this safeguard policy was implemented.
  The project team stated that the road project that had triggered this safeguard policy--the same road project
  that triggered the Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policy-- had not been approved in time by
  UNESCO and the Ministry of Culture; hence, the safeguard policy was not implemented.

  Grievance Redress Mechanism: A grievance redress mechanism was in place. A total of 947 complaints
  were received, mostly about employment issues, late payment of wages, contractor operations, land/asset
  disputes, and design issues. By the time of project closing, all complaints were resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



   At appraisal, the PIUs under the MPW an MRRD had already been implementing the NRAP and had
   capacity and staff to implement financial management. The project supported the financial management
   capacity of both PIUs under the project. PIUs submitted unaudited interim financial reports mostly on time.
   External audit reports of the project did not note any significant issues. However, the audit reports of the
   last three years of project implementation were submitted with an average delay of four months due to
   delays on the part of the government auditors. The internal audit arrangements were not sufficient. There
   were some cases of ineligible expenditures. MPW hired some members of staff without following the
   recruitment processes of the project. Later, MPW refunded the salaries that were paid to these members of
   staff from the project funds. Issues related to ineligible staff allowances and expenditure documentation
   that were reported by the third party monitoring were resolved before project closing. No issues of
   corruption are reported in the ICR. At project financial closing on June 30, 2021, all project funds were
   accounted for.

   Procurement

   The PIUs had capacity and staff to implement procurement under the project. But because of high staff
   turnover, the World Bank project team provided close support to the PIUs and regular trainings to the staff
   in charge of procurement. The other main issues with procurement were absence of proper documentation
   and weak contract management. The procurement workload was heavy with hundreds of contracts
   because of the large project scope, wide geographic spread of the project activities, and limitation on
   contract sizes. Procurement was adversely affected by the delay in the finalization of project designs. The
   preparation of the Kabul-Peshawar expressway feasibility study was dropped from project scope because
   consultants could not be procured (ICR, p.20). MPW’s procurement was through National Competitive
   Bids, which required a minimum of six months to process bids. Coupled with the MPW’s responsibility to
   implement other projects, this increased the ministry’s workload and, consequently, some secondary road
   rehabilitation works had to be transferred to MRRD so that they could be completed on time. At project
   completion, there were no outstanding procurement related issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



Quality of M&E                    Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn two lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Large scope and wide geographic spread of a project can complicate procurement and
contract monitoring in a fragile and conflict country. The project had a simple design consisting
of rehabilitation of secondary and tertiary roads and construction of bridges, along with technical
assistance in capacity strengthening for the sustainability of project outcomes, but the project scope
was large covering all 34 provinces in the country. Coupled with the limitation on contract sizes, this
resulted in hundreds of contracts overwhelming the procurement and contract management capacity
of the PIUs, especially that in the MPW. The ICR (p.26) states that increasing the size of contracts to
the extent possible in a fragile and conflict context by geographic clustering could be considered for
more efficient project management and to optimize resources for monitoring.

In fragile or conflict countries, where project sites cannot be visited due to security
concerns, utilization of third party monitoring (TPM) can improve project monitoring and
evaluation. The project team was not able to visit certain project areas because of worsening
security situation. After the onset of the Covid pandemic, the project team could not visit the country.
The project hired a TPM for conducting visits to project sites to observe and report project
implementation. This TPM helped the project team to carry out effective supervision. The reports of
the TPM company resulted in identifying non-compliant issues with fiduciary and safeguards
policies, and in shifting some road works from MPW to MRRD, due to the heavy workload of the
former, so that those works could be completed on time (see Section 9.c M&E Utilization above).

Involvement of local communities in rural road projects in fragile and conflict countries can
critically affect project outcomes. The rural communities were consulted in the selection of roads
to be rehabilitated under the project. Regular engagement with local communities and elders
ensured successful implementation of project activities in an increasingly unstable political situation.
The project provided technical assistance support to the communities in building local capacity to
maintain the roads after project closure. The capacity built under the project should be sufficient to
maintain the roads to ensure sustained access of rural communities to these roads in the absence of
a functioning government in the country and insufficient funds.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Rural Access Project (P125961)



The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is concise and candid. Including its annexes, the ICR
presents an appropriate base to support the achievements reported. The M&E data are used to provide
evidence of achievement of both outputs and outcomes. The report is focused on what happened as a
consequence of the project. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence. The ICR is internally
consistent; the logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report is sufficient.

However, while the lessons respond to the specific experiences and findings of the project, they are not
sufficiently linked to the narrative of the ICR. The ICR does not report the implementation of the Natural
Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policies.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
