     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022813

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P101745                                    High Priority Reopening & Maintenance

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of              Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57630,IDA-H3590,IDA-H7050,TF-         30-Sep-2013                                        315,782,007.14
 92300,TF-99492

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2008                               30-Jun-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                 119,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           320,691,798.60                                   93,684,092.42

 Actual                                       315,782,007.14                                   93,684,092.42




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman          Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated July 8, 2008
   (schedule 1, page 6) and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17) are similar.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



   " To re-establish lasting road access between provincial capitals, districts and territories in three
   provinces (Province Orientale, Katanga and Sud Kivu) in a way that is sustainable for people and the
   natural environment in the area of influence of the project".

   Two Additional Financing (AF) were approved for the project. The PDO as stated in the first AF approved for
   the project on May 17, 2011 showed that an additional province was added:

   "To re-establish lasting road access between provincial capitals, districts and territories in four
   provinces (Province Orientale, Katanga, Sud Kivu and Equateur) in a way that is sustainable for
   people and the natural environment in the area of influence of the project".

   The PDO as stated in the second AF approved for the project on March 8, 2016 dropped the references to
   specific provinces:

   "To re-establish lasting road access between provincial capitals, districts and territories in the project
   impact area that is sustainable to the natural environment".

   This review is based on the two PDOs as stated in the second AF.

   1. To re-establish lasting road access between provincial capitals, districts and territories in the project impact
   area; and,

   2. To re-establish lasting road in the project impact area that is sustainable to the natural environment.

   The revised PDO dropped the reference to "sustainable for people" and the number of provinces. This review
   is not based on a split rating of objectives for two reasons. One, given the increased number of
   provinces, this represented an expansion of the project scope, and two, the words "sustainable for people" in
   the original PDO was framed in consideration of the preservation of indigenous people in some project areas.
   The specific reference to people was removed and since the words "natural environment" provided for a
   broader definition, this review considers that the revised PDO remained consistent with the original PDO.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 9 - 11).




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



  1. Road Reopening and Maintenance. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$79.5 million. The actual
  cost was US$233.6 million. The original component financed road connections in three provinces (Sud Kivu,
  Katanga and Orientale of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)).

  Activities in this component: (i) reopening about 1,800 kilometer (km) of high priority, national roads,
  including 620 km on the Kisangani - Buta - Bondo - Bonduki axis within the Orientale province which
  connects to the Province de l'Equateor, and about 1,180 km on the Uvira - Kalemie - Kasomeno axis which
  crosses the provinces of Sud Kivu and Katanga; (ii) providing equipment for two road brigades on the
  Kalemie - Kasomeno axis, three bridges and ferry bridges; and (iii) maintenance of
  the activities mentioned above.

  The project scope was expanded to roads in four provinces (Equateur), and the target for reopening roads
  was expanded (to reopen total of 2,176 km and maintain 2,917 km of high priority roads). With the second
  AF, the target was further expanded to 2,762 km.

  2. Institutional Building. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$24.1 million. The actual cost was
  US$51.8 million.

  This component aimed to strengthen the institutional capacities of the Ministry of Infrastructure, Public
  Works and Reconstruction (MIPWR), and other road agencies (the Cellule Infrastructures (CI - the
  Infrastructure Unit Delegated Body of the MIPWR), and the Office des Routes (OdR, the Roads Office).

  Activities in this component comprised: (i) assisting the MIPWR in formulating sector policy, strategy, and
  updating its decentralization framework; (ii) funding the core team of CI; (iii) technical assistance to CI, OdR
  and the Road Management Fund (RMF) under creation; (iv) support to an in-house training program for CI
  and OdR; and (v) support of a program to develop the local road construction industry.

  3. Environmental and Social Program. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$18.7 million. The actual
  cost was US$44.8 million.

  This component aimed to support public institutions such as the Congolese Institute for Nature
  Conservation ( ICCN), and the Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism (MECNT)
  for protecting natural habitats, biodiversity, and forests.

  4. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.7 million. The actual cost
  was US$1.8 million.

  This component planned to support M&E activities in the CI and OdR, and to establish an environmentally
  specific M&E system for monitoring the effect of the project on transporting environmentally sensitive
  products such as logs and bushmeat.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$123.0 million (including contingencies but
  excluding administration and supervision costs). With the AFs, the estimated project cost was US$357.3
  million. The actual project cost was US$315.7 million.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



Project financing. A multi donor Trust Fund (MDTF) of US$123.0 million administered by the World Bank,
financed the project [(including IDA funding of US$50.0 million and US$73.0 million from the Department for
International Development, United Kingdom (DFID)).] An AF of US$63.3 million and a Trust Fund Grant of
US$46.0 million were approved on May 17, 2011. A second AF of US$125.0 million was approved on
January 27,2016. With this the total financing was US$357.3 million. Of this, the Bank disbursed US$315.7
million.

Recipient contribution. A Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. The Recipient, however,
contributed US$55.1 million through the RMF during implementation.

Dates. The project was approved on March 18, 2008, and became effective on October 7, 2008, with a
planned closing date of September 30, 2013. With the two AFs for the project, the project closed on June
30, 2020.

Other changes. The following changes were made through two Level 1 restructurings with the AFs and
four Level 2 restructurings.

The first AF on May 17, 2011, supported the following changes.

      The expected support of US$73.0 million from DFID did not materialize and funding was also
         necessary to cover the financing gap (ICR, paragraph 73).
        The PDO was revised.
        As discussed in section 2d, the project scope was expanded to four provinces, and the targets for
         re-opening roads and maintaining roads were increased. Some intermediate indicators were
         revised.
        The scope of institutional strengthening activities to the MIPWR was expanded.
        Funding was allocated for satellite imagery monitoring of forest and protected areas and providing
         additional support for safeguards compliance.

The second AF on January 27, 2016 supported the following changes.

      The PDO was further revised.
      As discussed in section 2d, the project scope and the target for reopening roads was expanded.
       One indicator - the number of people with access to health care facilities - in the project intervened
       areas was dropped.
      The AF was to cover a financing gap due to a combination of factors, including withdrawal of DFID
       funding in 2014, foreign exchange losses due to exchange rate changes between the Special
       Drawing Rights (SDRs) and US$, and cost overruns of some planned road works.

The Bank supported the following changes through the first Level 2 restructuring on September 27,
2013.

      The closing date for the project was extended by 20 months from September 30, 2013, to June 30,
         2016, to coincide with the closing date for the first AF.
      Funding was reallocated between disbursement categories.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



   The Bank supported the following changes through the second Level 2 restructuring on March 1,
   2018.

         The closing date for the AF1 project was extended by a year from February 18, 2018 to February 18,
          2019, for completing ongoing activities that had been delayed following the Inspection Panel
          Investigation Report. On November 27, 2017, the Bank suspended its disbursements for road
          works due to the Borrower's noncompliance with environmental and social standards,
          and managing gender-based violence. The suspension of IDA disbursements was lifted
          on December 10, 2018, following a review that the agreed conditions set were met for resuming
          activities.
         The ongoing efforts to mitigate the spread of the Ebola virus were supported through strengthening
          works on the road between Kasindi and Beni (the main area affected by the virus).

   The Bank supported the following changes through a third Level 2 restructuring on February 28,
   2019.

         The closing date for AF2 project was extended by a year from February 28, 2019, to February 29,
          2020 for completing the ongoing activities and for completing the measures identified in the
          Inspection Panel Report.

   The Bank supported the following changes through the fourth Level 2 restructuring on February 22,
   2020.

         The closing date was extended by four months from February 28, 2020, to June 30, 2020, for
          completion of the remaining works and for completing the required safeguards actions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. DRC is one of the poorest countries in the world, with a Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) per capita of US$120 prior to appraisal in 2005. It was impacted by war and prolonged
conflicts so that for a decade the World Bank Group suspended activities (ICR, paragraph 3). In 2001, the
Bank began to reengage with limited emergency assistance and budgetary support operations, but the
country remained fragile with poor institutional capacity.

Due to many years of neglect, mismanagement and the civil war, most of DRC's physical infrastructure was
in a poor state. In a country as large as the Eastern Europe, only 1.8% of the road network was paved, and
only one provincial capital was connected by road to the capital Kinshasa, and almost all provincial capitals
lacked connection to their hinterlands. The majority of the roads was impassable even during the dry
season. The collapse of the transport system in DRC was the combined result of the deterioration
of physical infrastructure and the weak performance of the technical institutions in charge of
road management and maintenance.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



This project addressed two related development challenges facing DRC: One, to reestablish lasting road
access between provincial capitals, districts and territories in provinces; and two, because the reopening
roads was likely to increase access for extractive industries, the forests and other natural economic
systems, it was necessary to combine post-conflict recovery with protection of the country's ecosystems
and pygmy populations.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Government's strategy, articulated in the
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) of 2006. The PRSP underscored the need for
road investments to sustain economic growth, protecting the environment, and rebuilding economic
integration in the country. The government at appraisal had identified 15,800 km of the total road
network as the high priority network. In 2007, the Government presented to the National Assembly a bill for
establishing a RMF to ensure a secure basis of funding for road maintenance activities. This legislation
became effective in March 2008.

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the World Bank strategy at appraisal. The Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) of 2007, underscored the need for rehabilitating roads for achieving
sustained growth through the revival of the agricultural sector. The CAS also highlighted the need for
coupling road infrastructure investments with policy and institutional reforms to ensure maintenance of
the infrastructure rebuilt under the first-generation emergency reconstruction projects financed by the World
Bank in DRC (discussed below). The CAS also set targets for improving forest management, protection of
biodiversity and consistent land use planning. The Bank strategy was to attract other financial institutions
and accordingly a Trust Fund was established. DFID intended to contribute to this project through the Trust
Fund. However, in the end no other institution joined the Bank in their endeavor.

The PDO continues to be well-aligned with the two focus areas of the current Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for the 2020 - 2024 period. The first focus area articulated the need for strengthening
economic management and creating an improved climate for private sector led growth through among other
things, improving road infrastructure. The second focus area underscored the need for building human
capital and sustaining growth through improving quality and access to health and education services and
improving sustainable management of natural systems (CPF, paragraphs 60, pages 20 - 22).

Prior Bank experience. The World Bank has financed rehabilitating road infrastructure as part of the first-
generation emergency reconstruction projects (The Emergency Multisector Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction project, the Emergency Economic and Social Reunification Project, and the Emergency
Living Conditions project). These projects were designed to meet emergency situations and did not address
institutional issues in the road sector.

Unlike the previous Bank-financed projects, this project focused exclusively on the road sector. The project
design combined road rehabilitation activities with reforms in road maintenance, and environmental, social
and fiduciary safeguard mechanisms. Given that the outputs of the project activities were expected to aid in
the development outcome of sustainability of the road network for the people and the natural environment,
the project reach was appropriate. Consequently, the relevance of the revised PDO is assessed as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To reestablish lasting road access between provincial capital, district and territories in the project impact area.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The outputs such as rehabilitating the high priority national road network, annual
               maintenance of roads, technical assistance (TA) to the road agencies (MIPWR, OdR and CI), operationalizing
               the RMF and support for the local construction industry, were expected to reestablish lasting road
               access between provincial capital, districts and territories, and strengthen the capacities of the road agencies
               to manage the roads. The causal links between the activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical. The
               intended outcomes were monitorable. The outcomes were expected to contribute to the long term
               development outcome of physical reunification, thereby contributing to economic growth and poverty
               reduction.

               Outputs (ICR, pages 15 - 16).

                     2,752 km of roads were reopened at project closure, slightly short of the target of 2,762 km.
                        The activities included, levelling unpaved and earth roads, building drainage canals and restoring 41
                        metallic bridges and 56 concrete bridges.
                       3,335 km of roads were maintained in total, slightly short of the target of 3,345 km.
                       55% of the high priority national road network was reported to be in good and fair condition when the
                        project closed, as compared to 16% at the baseline. This exceeded the original target of 39% but was
                        well short of the revised target of 91%.
                       TA was provided as targeted for establishing the Road Management Fund (RMF) for funding road
                        maintenance activities. The RMF was operational in 2009 and its resources increased from US$60
                        million in 2009 to US$120 million in 2014. Resources mobilized by the RMF were allocated for
                        funding maintenance activities according to a multiannual program implemented by OdR. The ICR
                        (paragraph 36) however acknowledges that there is still not a proper maintenance schedule and
                        transparent budgeting for funds raised by the RMF.
                       TA was provided for establishing the Infrastructure Unit (CI) in the MIPWR. CI was established
                        through competitive recruitment of staff from the private sector. When the project closed, CI had
                        seventy staff and was preparing the new Transport and Connectivity Project to be financed by the
                        World Bank.
                       The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) deployed resources for implementing activities to address
                        gender-based violence (GBV), which emerged as a critical issue in the wake of the finding of the
                        Inspection Panel Report in 2017 (discussed in section 10). The CI conducted a survey in 2019 and
                        based on these results, implemented sensitization campaigns along reopened roads, trained
                        communities and individuals, provided medical and other support to victims of GBV, and ensured that
                        the affected people were adequately compensated.
                       The road transport strategy was completed as targeted.


                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)




      The OdR was provided with monitoring and surveillance equipment as targeted (upgrading their
       equipment with new technologies for road condition survey and mapping tools (Mapillary).
      4,400 direct jobs were created for the private sector.
      The local construction staff were trained as targeted through educational workshops, on-site training,
       information meetings and exchanges with small and medium enterprises (SMEs).

Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to lead to the outcomes of increasing the number of people with access to an all-
season road, reducing the number of traffic disruptions, and increasing attendance in primary schools when
the project closed.

      Five million people had access to an all-season road when the project closed as compared to 125,000
         at the baseline. This exceeded both the original and revised targets of three and 4.9
         million respectively.
        15.9% of the rural population had access to an all-season road when the project closed in June 30,
         2020, as compared to 1.4% at the baseline. This exceeded both the original and revised targets of
         10% and 13.5% respectively.
        At the baseline, most of the road sections were not accessible to motor vehicles (4 x 2 vehicles)
         throughout the year. The target was to reduce the incidence of traffic interruptions (measured in
         days) for motor vehicles to below the range of 15 to 30 days per year. This outcome was mostly
         achieved except in three sections: Kisangani - Beni (672 km), Kisangani - Bunduki ( 620 km), and
         Uvira - Kasomeno (1,150 km), due to the topography and climatic conditions.
        Based on the household surveys undertaken by the Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs), the
         school attendance in primary schools increased for boys and girls in the communities along the
         reopened roads. The attendance for boys increased from 50% to 70% for boys and for girls from 20%
         to 50% for girls in Province Orientale. The corresponding figures were increase from 30% 40% for
         boys and from 20% to 30% for girls in Province Katanga, from 20% to 30% for boys and from 20% to
         28% for girls in Province Equateur, and from 30% to 40% for boys and from 20% to 30% for girls in
         Province Sud Kivu. While access to an all-season road throughout the year could be expected to the
         increase in attendance in primary schools in the project-intervened areas, the ICR does not discuss
         other factors that could have contributed to the increase in attendance in primary schools (for
         example, better security, government subsidies).
        4,640,735 people benefitted from project activities. The beneficiaries included people with access to
         all season road as access to economic opportunities and social services.

In sum, given that most of the outcomes were realized, efficacy of this objective is assessed as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To re-establish lasting road in the project impact area that is sustainable to the natural environment.

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)




Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as technical assistance to the Ministry of Environment,
Nature Conservation and Tourism (MECNT), and the Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation (ICCN),
participation of communities in resource management, support for implementing the Resettlement Action
Plan, the Indigenous peoples Plan (IPS), monitoring and evaluation, and building checkpoints to control illegal
logging and trafficking in protected species, were expected to minimize the adverse impacts of reopening the
high priority national roads on the natural environment. The intended outcomes were expected to aid in the
long-term development outcome of ensuring that re-establishing road connections between the provincial
capital, districts and territories was not at the expense of the unique economic systems of the DRC. The
causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were
monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 17- 18 and pages 37 - 38 and pages 43 - 46).

      570 MECNT and ICCN staff were trained, exceeding the original and revised targets of 200 and 450
         respectively.
        TA was provided for preparing the safeguards instruments (The Environmental and Social
         Management Plan (ESMP), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Indigenous Peoples
         Plan (IPP). Equipment was provided for the MECNT in forest protection. A Non-Governmental
         Organization (BEGES) was recruited to monitor and supervise safeguards.
        In addition to road improvement, the project helped to acquire more than 5,000 hectares of land for
         the Batwa indigenous people, through negotiations with the local Bantu community.
        The project distributed 2,496,034 condoms along the project areas. This exceeded both the original
         and revised targets of 1,518,000 and 2,100,000 respectively.
        Eleven checkpoints were installed for preventing trading in illegal timber and protected species like
         bushmeat (four in province Orientale, three in Sud Kivu, three is Sub Ubangi, and one in Haut
         Katanga). MIPWR Staff were trained, and unscheduled controls were carried out at markets, river
         crossing points and forests and protected areas along the project roads. The checkpoints are still
         operational at the time of the preparation of the ICR.

Outcomes.

The outputs of the activities were expected to increase the preservation of the protected species, to reduce
trading in illegal timbers, and control deforestation.

The percentages of protected species in the monthly count of bushmeat checked at the selected border
points were as follows:

      On the Akula - Gemena - Zongo border points the percentage of bushmeat checked increased from
         78% at the baseline to 81% exceeding the original and revised targets of 75% and 70%.
      On the Kisangani - Dulia - Bondo border point, the percentage increased to 92.85%, exceeding the
         original and revised targets of 90% and 85%.
        On the Komanda - Bulia - Bondo border point, the percentage increased to 100% as targeted.
        On the Kisangani - Beni border point, the percentage increased to 95% as targeted.
        On the Beni - Kasindi border point, the percentage increased to 95% as targeted.
        On the Bukavu - Goma border point, the percentage increased to 95% as targeted.

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)




                                  On the Kasomeno - Uvira border point, the percentage increased to 33%, far short of the original and
                                     revised targets of 74% and 65%.

                            In summary, the targets for the preservation of protected species were either realized or exceeded in the
                            selected border points.

                            The percentages of illegal timber checked at the selected border points were as follows:

                                  On the Kalemie - Uvira border point, the percentage increased to 100%, exceeding the target of 80%.
                                  On the Komanda - Bunia - Goli border point, the percentage increased to 100%, exceeding the target
                                     of 95%.
                                    On the Bukavu - Goma border point, the percentage increased to 100%, exceeding the target of 95%.
                                    On the Akula - Gemena - Zongo border points the percentage of illegal timber checked increased to
                                     11.51% far short of the original and revised targets of 90% and 85% respectively.
                                    On the Kisangani - Bunduki border point, the percentage increased to 0.34%, far short of the original
                                     and revised targets of 95% and 70%.
                                    On the Kisangani - Beni border point, the percentage increased to 85%, short of the original and
                                     revised targets of 100% and 90%.

                            In summary, the targets for checking illegal timber were realized, although with wide variations across the
                            selected border points.

                                  There is no evidence that the project directly contributed to increasing deforestation. The PDO
                                     indicator "deforestation rate in bandwidth of 10 km along the reopened roads" was used to monitor this
                                     risk. The indicator was calculated by measuring the hectares of deforestation due to agriculture and
                                     logging activities along the project roads using satellite imagery combined with field surveys. A
                                     satellite imagery analysis carried out once in 2016- 2017 provided evidence of the control of
                                     deforestation along four of the five road sections. The values achieved at closure was unknown, due
                                     to the costs of such satellite imagery.

                            In sum, efficacy of this objective is assessed as substantial, although there were some shortcomings in the
                            choice of indicators.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is assessed as substantial. Efficacy of the first PDO were realized. Efficacy for the second
                            PDO were also realized, although there were some issues with the choice of indicators to measure outcomes.



                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for selected road segments using the Highway
Design and Maintenance Standard Model (HDM - III). The ICR does not provide information why the latest
version of the HDM (HDM-IV) was not used for the economic analysis. This component accounted for 65% of
the appraisal estimate and 70% of the actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from a reduction
in vehicle operating costs and travel time savings for road users. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) was 27.8%, as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 24%, using a 12% discount rate (ICR, paragraph 47).
The key reason for the robust EIRR was that the baseline traffic was essentially composed of two wheelers
because of the poor condition of the road network. The road opening generated substantial amount of traffic and
encouraged a modal shift to motorized vehicles.

Administrative and Operational Issues. There were significant delays in commencing the institutional
strengthening activities in the initial years due to the poor capacity of the respective road sector agencies, and
procurement delays in preparing bid documents for the road works. The delays were exacerbated by the
suspension-related delay of about a year (from November 2017 to December 2018), due to the Inspection Panel
Report (discussed in section 10). These factors resulted in overall delay of 28 months.

Value for money. The project did not demonstrate good value for money. The actual cost of the institutional
component of the project was 18 times higher than estimated at appraisal (from US$2.95 million at appraisal to
US$51.80 million). The ICR (paragraph 49) notes that this component costs were not detailed at appraisal. The
most significant contribution to the cost increase of this component was the support deemed necessary to
facilitate the achievement of results such as capacity building and mobilization of international experts.

In sum, efficiency is assessed as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     65.00
 Appraisal                                                 20.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     70.00
 ICR Estimate                                              27.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and World Bank strategies is assessed as High. Efficacy of the
two PDO's are assessed as substantial. Efficiency is modest. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome
is assessed as moderately satisfactory, reflecting moderate shortcomings in the project's achievements in
efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is high risk to development outcome as it is not clear whether adequate
resources would be allocated for maintenance of the roads reopened under this project, given the continuing
fragility of the country and its economy. Although the Road Management Fund (RMF) has been established
to secure funding for road maintenance activities, the ICR (paragraph 56) acknowledges that to date, the
financing of the road maintenance program and its monitoring remains an opaque process, and there is still
no clear process for fund sharing for road maintenance activities among the central government agencies,
provinces and local governments. Likewise, it is not clear whether the institutions in charge of environmental
management and conservation will continue to be allocated adequate funding to monitor illegal trade,
bushmeat trade and community development along the high priority road network (ICR, paragraph 44).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the Bank financed first-generation
  emergency response projects (discussed in section 3). Lessons incorporated at design included: (i)
  Unlike in the previous emergency projects which relied on an institutional setup featuring standalone
  agencies, the Ministry of Infrastructure, Public Works and Reconstruction (MIPWR), was responsible for
  implementing the project: (ii) The project activities included funding for road maintenance to
  ensure sustainability of the reopened roads. (iii) Given that a recent Inspection Panel Report highlighted
  that mitigation measures to protect indigenous peoples, forests and protected areas were inadequate,
  this project included measures such as allocating financial resources (15% of the budget) to strengthen
  the capacities of the local institutions in charge of forests and protected areas through third party
  monitoring, and contractual partnerships with NGOs (PAD, paragraph 36).

  The implementation arrangements proved to be appropriate. The MIPWR in charge of implementing the
  project, was to be assisted by two state-owned enterprises - , the OdR (the Roads Office, an autonomous

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



  public enterprise which was responsible for managing the national road network), and the CI ( the
  infrastructure unit delegated to the MIPWR and the agency which was currently managing a portfolio of
  projects funded by other development partners (PAD, pages 14 - 15). At design, a force account was
  retained to simplify the procurement of the works because of the good performance of OdR in past
  projects. Under the force account arrangement, the OdR was contracted by the CI, under a performance
  contract defining annual objectives and measurable indicators (km of reopened roads). The force account
  was framed by appropriate fiduciary safeguard mechanisms designed to consider the risks associated
  with the force account activities. This scheme was successful for the original and AF1 project. However,
  given the extent of works and delays for AF1, the design shifted to a competitive procurement scheme
  (ICR, paragraph 66).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal including high and substantial risks with political commitment
  and security, the risk that the RMF might not become operational, fiduciary risks, weak implementation
  capacity, and environmental and social risks. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included
  operationalization of the RMF as a condition for project effectiveness, endorsement of an anti-corruption
  plan, recruitment of OdR and CI staff on a competitive basis and implementation of environmental and
  social safeguards plan (discussed in section 10). Even with mitigation measures, the project risk was
  rated as High at appraisal (PAD, page 23). The arrangements made at design for fiduciary compliance
  were appropriate (discussed in sections 9 and 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the geographical coverage was ambitious,
  although prompted by a conscious decision to "reopen as much as possible" (ICR, paragraph 63).
  However, the geographical coverage was challenging as most of the project-intervened areas could not
  be visited before the start of the works and later, the geographical coverage also posed issues for
  supervision. Two, there were M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 9); and three, the
  arrangements for environmental and social safeguards were inadequate at appraisal (discussed in
  section 10a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted twenty three supervision missions, over the project lifetime of twelve years (implying
 twice a year on average supervision missions). The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10b). According to the clarifications provided by the team, there were four
 task team leaders during the lifetime of the project.

 However, there were significant shortcomings in supervision. The ICR (paragraph 94) notes that the
 Inspection Panel Report reported serious shortcomings in Bank supervision. For instance, the 2018
 investigation report, noted the absence of Bank supervision missions to Road Number 2 from the time of
 Board Approval in February 2016, until receipt of the request in August 2017. While there was a Mid-Term
 Review of the project in June 2017 to assess progress, this mission took place in Kinshasa and did not
 involve a field visit. The Inspection Panel Report noted "the lack of systematic follow-up on issues,
 including Management follow-up", and that "the absence of relevant Bank policy on security arrangements
 that may have contributed to harm". The report also noted that "had the management undertaken a robust

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



 risk analysis of the security situation in eastern DRC at the outset and kept itself informed about the
 situation on the ground field-based supervision, harm relating to use of violence or intimation could have
 been uncovered and mitigated earlier". The supervision team also underestimated the security risk for AF2.

 In the wake of the Inspection Panel Report, the supervision team guided the Government and CI
 in preparing documents and evaluation reports, engaging consultants and contractors, and providing
 feedback on the plans. This aided in resolving the environmental and safeguard issues. The World Bank
 team commissioned the environmental and social audit of the implementation status of safeguard
 instruments in the Road Number two area after allegations of non compliance with the World Bank
 safeguard policies. Following a supervision of the safeguard aspects after 2018, the team helped
 in correcting the shortcomings in the application of safeguard requirements.

 In sum, Bank supervision was assessed as moderately unsatisfactory, given the significant shortcomings in
 supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original results framework was ambitious with nine PDO level indicators and eleven intermediary
 indicators (with some indicators broken down by road segments or provinces (ICR, paragraph 73). This
 was particularly so, given the difficulties of absence of land connections and the carrying out of field
 surveys at appraisal. It is not clear how the targets were set, in the absence of field surveys at appraisal.
 The first comprehensive table of all indicators were prepared by the CI only in 2016. While the indicators
 for monitoring PDO 1 were appropriate, given the challenge of measuring deforestation, the relevance of
 this indicator was at best, modest.

 The CI was to build on the existing M&E system (the Geographic Information System (GIS) transferred
 from a United Nations sponsored project to CI (PAD, paragraph 53). The project also envisioned
 implementing a Household Income and Expenditure Survey in selected sites both before the start of road
 works and after completion of road works (paragraphs 53 and 54).



b. M&E Implementation
  Although the indicators were simplified with the restructurings of the project, there was lack of indicators
  for adequately capturing the preservation of the natural environment. The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that
  collecting data for monitoring was difficult, due to insufficient coordination between MIPWR, OdR, CI and
  other agencies. Despite these challenges, the major appropriate indicators were collected and available

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



  for timely review. The ICR also notes that from 2016, the M&E reports were prepared and included
  changes introduced under AF1 and AF2. This included additional indicators for monitoring Gender-Based
  Violence and HIV/AIDS. The project conducted a Household Income and Expenditure Survey in selected
  sites both before the start of road works and after completion of road works as envisioned at design.

  The project rolled out a road imagery application - Mapillary - for monitoring interventions relating to
  rehabilitation and maintenance of the road network. The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that this imagery has
  become a source of technical information and decision-making tool for MIPWR, providing outputs such as
  maps, graphs and statistics across the country and forming a comprehensive road database. The project
  allocated resources for contracting two additional experts (international and local) for strengthening the
  capacity of the CI. The ICR notes that the baseline data for monitoring were collected by the time of AF1,
  and arrangements were made for remaining data collection during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that the quarterly progress reports included in Aide Memoires, were
  shared with the Bank in acceptable format and the quality of the reports improved based on feedback
  from the Bank. The data was used to assess project progress and identify critical issues during
  implementation.

  Overall, M&E is assessed as modest, especially in view of the shortcomings in M&E design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project, triggering six safeguard policies at
   appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Physical Cultural Property (OP 4.11); Natural Habitats
   (OP 4.04); Forests (OP 4.36); Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12); and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10).

   Environmental Assessment, Physical Cultural Property, Natural Habitats and Forests. The PAD
   (paragraph 100) notes that the project intervened areas included high biodiversity rainforests and highlands.
   Prior to the reopening of roads, these areas were relatively isolated. The reopening of roads was expected
   to facilitate access to these areas, and thereby contribute to legal and illegal logging and commercial
   poaching. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly-
   disclosed to address these issues (PAD, paragraph 106). The civil works contracts would include clauses
   regarding a "chance find procedure", in case physical cultural resources were discovered during the
   opening of the roads (PAD, paragraph 102). As per the World Bank requirements for a Category A project,
   an independent, environmental/biodiversity specialist advised the Bank and the government on the content
   of the environmental and social management component at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 107).




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



  About 15% of the total cost of road works was allocated for activities pertaining to preventing illegal logging
  and hunting. protecting natural resources and protected areas and indigenous peoples institutions (ICR,
  paragraph 42). The costs of this component increased from US$14.8 million at appraisal to US$44.8 million
  at closure because of the expansion of the project and gender-based violence (GBV) issues that emerged
  requiring an extensive work program.

  The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that a significant number of safeguards instruments was implemented
  without major issues. More than twenty Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
  were implemented by contractors and OdR's road crews during implementation. According to the
  clarifications provided by the team, there was compliance with the safeguards on physical cultural property,
  forests and natural habitats.

  Involuntary Resettlement. An Involuntary Resettlement Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-
  disclosed at appraisal, to address issues pertaining to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement during
  implementation (PAD, paragraph 108).

  The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that 3,887 project affected persons were compensated. A total of 2,891
  claims were made in the 157 local Grievance Redressal Mechanisms (GRMs). A total of 1,416 of these
  claims were found to be legitimate and adjudicated to the satisfaction of the affected parties.

  Indigenous Peoples. An Indigenous People Plan (IDP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to
  address issues pertaining to indigenous peoples during implementation (PAD, paragraph 108). There were
  issues with with respect to indigenous people during implementation (discussed below).

  The Inspection Panel Report. The ICR (paragraph 84) notes that on August 3, 2017, there was a request
  to the Inspection Panel from two individuals living in a location of project-intervened areas. The individuals
  were connected to a quarry exploited by the contractor. The request included allegations regarding negative
  impacts on livelihoods through: (i) occupation by the contractor of a quarry that the requestors operated; (ii)
  excessive use of force by the military personnel deployed to provide security to the contractor; (iii) violence
  against the community, including Gender-Based Violence (GBV); (iv) employment of young boys as day
  laborers: and (e) harm to property of indigenous communities.

  In the investigation report, the panel found the World Bank to be in non-compliance with its policies on
  Environmental Assessment, Involuntary Resettlement, and Investment Project Financing in regard to
  aspects such as project preparation, consultation and disclosure of information, Grievance Redress
  Mechanism, impacts on agriculture, community health and safety, working conditions and occupational
  health and safety, gender-based violence and Bank supervision. In the light of the complaint, the Bank
  suspended operations and the Bank Management proposed a Management Action Plan (MAP), approved
  by the Board. The MAP proposed actions to correct instances of noncompliance. Following the completion
  of the MAP, the Bank resumed operations. The completion of the MAP was presented by the Bank team to
  local civil society organizations and the affected communities in 2020. The participants expressed their
  satisfaction that the MAP had been completed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial assessment of the CI (Infrastructure Unit of the
   MIPWR at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 84). The assessment revealed weaknesses in terms of staffing
   arrangements and accounting systems. The overall financial risk was rated as high at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 84). The mitigation measures incorporated at design, included recruitment of a dedicated
   financial management expert and preparation of a financial management plan.

   The ICR (paragraph 89) notes that financial management was satisfactory throughout the project, and
   there were no significant financial issues during implementation. The quarterly reports, disbursement
   claims, and internal and external audit reports were submitted in a timely fashion. The ICR also notes that
   there was compliance with the terms of the Financing Agreements. The team clarified that the audits
   were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of CI at appraisal. Although CI had
   executed projects financed by other donors, it had no experience with Bank-financed projects (PAD, page
   107). The procurement risk was assessed as high at appraisal. Mitigation measures incorporated at
   design, included preparation of a procurement plan (PAD, page 108).

   The ICR (paragraph 89) observes that procurement management was assessed as moderately
   satisfactory for most of the project lifetime. There were no significant procurement issues, except for
   some delays in preparing procurement documents. These delays were rectified and procurement improved
   in the last phase of implementation after the end of the suspension of disbursement in 2018. The ICR
   reports no case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



The ICR draws the following four lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Community-based Grievance Redressal Mechanisms (GRMs) should be established at an
early stage of implementation. This project had an under- resourced GRM in place before the
suspension of the loan. A key lesson from this project is that simple, realistic and community-based
GRMs should be in place and operational before the start of works, especially for projects in large
areas of intervention in rural areas or with security issues.

2. Specific training is required while using military staff for the protection of project staff and
worksites. The use of military personnel to ensure security of project staff in this project highlighted
the need to develop a formalized partnership with MONUSCO (the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the DRC. The partnership with MONUSCO aided in training the military
personnel assigned to protect the road worksites based on humanitarian law, with training funded by
the project.

3. Capacity building activities needs to a core project component in post-conflict and fragile
environments. Given the country context at appraisal with post-conflict period and governance
issues, this project eventually completed most of its planned activities. This was mainly due to the
relatively simple design, identifying weaknesses in institutional arrangements, and providing a large
component substantially funded with technical assistance activities aimed at building capacity of the
respective road agencies.

4. Strengthening the local construction industry is important in post-conflict settings. This
project at an early stage identified the need for strengthening the local construction industry, which
had been devastated due to the many years of conflict. The project included several technical
assistance activities for the Small and Medium sized enterprises through workshops, hands-on-
training and worksite visits that benefitted the project, as well as another project in the urban sector.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. The quality of evidence provided in the ICR summarizes the salient points and clearly links
evidence to finding. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly elucidates the logical links between the
project activities, their outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR candidly discusses the issues linked to
project preparation and supervision which clearly led to the Inspection Panel Report. The ICR draws reasonably
good lessons from the experience of implementing this project. The ICR adheres to the guidelines.

However there were some issues. While access to an all-season road could be expected to increase
attendance in primary schools in the project-intervened areas, the ICR does not discuss other factors that could
have contributed to this outcome (such as, better security, government subsidies). Likewise, the ICR does not
explain why the latest model of the HDM (No.4) was not used for the economic analysis. The ICR does not

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     High Priority Reopening & Maintenance (P101745)



explicitly state whether there was compliance with all the safeguards, whether the audits were unqualified, and
whether there was continuity of Bank project leadership. The length of the ICR (at approximately 30 pages is
about twice the recommended length of 15 - 20 pages). The ICR would have benefitted from better editing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
