     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022754

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P122540                                  LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Lebanon                                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18030                                 30-Jun-2020                                            2,538,894.55

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Nov-2014                              31-Mar-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           2,538,900.00                                     2,538,900.00

 Revised Commitment                            2,538,894.55                                     2,538,894.55

 Actual                                        2,538,894.55                                     2,538,894.55




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. iv) and the Financing Agreement of February 16, 2015
   (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to dispose of high risk Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCBs) and improve
   the inventory management of transformers in the power sector in an environmentally sound manner”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Inventory of PCB contaminated transformers (appraisal estimate US$0.79 million,
   actual US$1.0 million): This component was to finance a countrywide inventory of the PCB contaminated
   transformers in the country’s power sector. At the country level, the inventory was to identify the
   contaminated transformers and their level of contamination in each site, to provide a clear picture of the
   extent of PCB contamination in the power sector. At the local level (Bauchrieh), the inventory was to result
   in good engineering practices, particularly in terms of health and safety protocols, sampling, testing and
   labeling of PCB oil.

   The inventory of PCB contaminated transformers was to be based on four steps: i) desk review of the
   Electricity of Lebanon (EDL) database to identify the number of transformers potentially contaminated; ii)
   sampling of oil from each transformer; iii) on-site testing of PCB, which was to identify the PCB-free
   transformers by testing the samples through a rapid method (Clor-N-Oil technique); and iv) lab testing of
   PCB, which was to identify the PCB contaminated transformers and their contamination level by testing the
   samples through an accurate laboratory method (Gas Chromatography analysis, GC).

   Component 2: Disposal of high content PCB equipment and contaminated oil (appraisal estimate
   US$1.10 million, actual US$0.75 million): This component was to finance the disposal of high content
   PCB equipment owned by the EDL and potentially by the private sector, and of the PCB contaminated oil
   from Bauchrieh.

   This component included two sub-components:

   Component 2.1 Disposal of out-of-service high content PCB equipment: This sub-component was to
   finance the disposal of about 44 tons of high-content PCB equipment and 10 tons of contaminated soil and
   concrete.

   Component 2.2 Disposal of in-service high content PCB equipment and contaminated oil: This sub-
   component was to finance the disposal of in-service high content PCB equipment in Jieh, capacitors in the
   private sector, and contaminated oil in Bauchrieh.

   Component 3: Capacity building and project management (appraisal estimate US$0.65 million,
   actual US$0.79 million): This component was to finance: i) establishment of a Project Management Unit
   (PMU) within MOE; ii) monitoring of indicators and reporting on project performance; iii) training and
   capacity building of MOE, EDL and other stakeholders on sustainable management of PCB equipment and
   storage sites.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$2.54 million, which was also the actual project cost.

   Financing: The project was financed through a World Bank Trust Fund in the amount of US$2.54 million,
   which was completely disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government made no contributions to the project’s cost.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

         On June 10, 2020 the project was restructured to extend the loan closing date from June 30, 2020 to
          December 31, 2020 to allow for the completion of some project activities which were delayed due to
          October 2019 political protests and the COVID-19 pandemic.
         On December 16, 2020 the project was restructured to extend the loan closing date from December
          31, 2020 to March 31, 2021 to allow for the completion of all project activities to overcome delays
          caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the August 2020 Port of Beirut explosion.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context. At the time this project was appraised in 2013 Lebanon was an upper-middle income
country. Average Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was US$9,750 per capita. Lebanon faced major
environmental problems including water and air pollution, as well as lack of proper solid waste management
as a result of industrial activity. Lebanon ranked 90th among 163 countries on the Environmental
Performance index at the time of appraisal and still used Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) in industry
and agriculture. POPs are chemical substances that persist in the environment and bio-accumulate through
the food web. Especially one group of POPs, Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) are proven to cause cancer
in humans and animals when exposed at a high concentration.

In 2001, as part of the UN Stockholm Convention, PCBs were globally banned. However, stockpiles of
PCBs are still used in some industries, especially in the power sector as dielectric fluids in older
transformers. In Lebanon, the Electricity of Lebanon (an autonomous state-owned entity under the Ministry
of Energy and Water (MOEW)) owned most PCB-containing equipment in the country.

Government Strategy. The government of Lebanon joined the Stockholm Convention in 2003 and banned
imports and exports of PCBs, enacted laws to preserve the environment against pollution from hazardous
waste and PCBs, and increased safety conditions for workers dealing with chemical products.

According to the ICR (paragraph 24) the project supported the government’s National Economic Vision
2025, which aims to reform the power sector to improve its efficiency and sustainability. In particular, the
strategy aims to reduce dependence on liquid fuel for power generation. Furthermore, the project’s
objective was in line with the government’s 2009 Progress and Development Program, which aims to
improve the quality of life through better safeguarding the environment.

World Bank Strategy. The project’s objective was also in line with the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY17-22), particularly with respect to focus area 1, which aims to

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



               expand access to and quality of service delivery including investments in the environment sector to reduce
               industrial, hazardous, and wastewater pollution.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Dispose of high-risk PCBs:

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as draining,
                             packaging, exporting of PCB equipment to be destroyed abroad through a competitively determined contract
                             would result in the project’s expected output of disposing of contaminated equipment (both, out-of-service and
                             in-service). This output would result in achieving Objective 1, namely disposing of high-risk PCBs.

                             As indicated in the theory of change in Figure 1 in the ICR, the project assumed that the government would
                             finance the replacement of in-service equipment. While the PAD did not define “high-risk”, it stated
                             (paragraph 88) that the persistent and toxic nature of PCBs at a concentration of more than 50 ppm by weight
                             poses high risks to human health, including being a potential carcinogen and having possible damaging
                             developmental impacts. According to the PAD (paragraph 20) during project preparation, a rapid inventory of
                             PCB equipment and contaminated sites in Lebanon was conducted. However, it was only possible to provide
                             a rough estimate of the number of PCB contaminated transformers, without clearly identifying the
                             contaminated transformers and their level of contamination in each site. Hence the provision that all
                             transformers in Lebanon would be "visited, surveyed, sampled, analyzed, labelled, and properly inventoried"
                             in the theory of change.

                             Outputs:

                                        Two contracts were signed during project implementation, surpassing the target of one contract. The
                                         first contract covered visitation, surveying, sampling, screening, testing, analyzing, labelling, and
                                         inventorying the entire stock of operational transformers in the power sector. The second contract was
                                         signed to inventory 424 irreparable transformers stored at Bauchrieh intended to be sold as scrap
                                         metal. According to the ICR “the PMU/MOE informed EDL that sampling and testing had to be carried
                                         out before any sale of the assets could be initiated since if the transformers turned out to be PCB-
                                         contaminated, they would be considered hazardous waste and this needed to be safeguarded
                                         properly” (Annex 1, A2). Analysis showed that 251 of the 424 transformers were PCB-contaminated.
                                        There were two exports of PCB-contaminated material. The first was for 91 metric tons and the
                                         second (in three separate shipments) was for 298 metric tons (ICR, Table 2).


                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



Outcomes:

        A total of 389 metric tons of PCB contaminated material were exported to France and securely
         destroyed in accordance with the requirements of the Basel Convention for environmentally
         sustainable elimination of PCB material. The project disposed of: (i) 254 metric tons of EDL out-of-
         service transformers; (ii) 35 metric tons of capacitors; (iii) 86 metric tons of contaminated oil; and (iv)
         14 tons of contaminated soil and waste. Disposal of the target of 300 metric tons established at
         appraisal as the estimated weight of PCB-contaminated material was achieved.

Based on the evidence in the ICR the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated "high".



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the inventory management of transformers in the power sector in an environmentally sound manner:

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as conducting a
country-wide inventory of the PCB contaminated transformers in the power sector would result in all
transformers in Lebanon being visited, surveyed, sampled, analyzed, labelled, and properly inventoried. Also,
project activities including providing capacity building of stakeholder institutions on sustainable management
of PCB equipment and storage sites would result in capacity being built in safety protocols and effective
management according to international guidelines. These outputs were expected to result in achieving
Objective 2, namely "improving the inventory management of transformers in the power sector in an
environmentally sound manner".

Outputs:

        The contract for establishing an inventory of all transformers in Lebanon was signed and
         implemented.

The ICR did not provide any information on the management of the inventory of transformers but the Bank
team (January 21, 2022) provided the following information.

        Improvement of inventory management of transformers included four key areas:
        A new national database of transformers, building on an existing inventory housed in EDL, was
         established through the project with additional entries critical for allowing proper tracking of
         transformers and PCBs. These include i) weight of transformers; ii) amount of liquid; iii) type of liquid
         filling; and iv) presence of PCB. The PCB inventory created under the project was recorded in the new
         national database. Two EDL employees (one in HQ office and the other one in Bauchrieh) were
         assigned to be in charge of maintaining and updating the database and the PCB inventory by working
         with Service Providers. Through the inventory exercise, daily safe handling and management of PCB-


                                                                                                        Page 5 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



                                     contaminated transformers following UNEP technical guidelines “PCB Transformers and Capacitors
                                     from Management to Reclassification and Disposal (2002)” was introduced.
                                    A process and procedure manual was developed to outline proper procedures of inventory
                                     management. The manual included a set of guidelines on how to keep the inventory up-to-date and on
                                     how to properly handle contaminated transformers, both in storage depots and on the grid. The
                                     manual was distributed to relevant divisions through the Director General and Head of EDL
                                     departments and has being used daily by EDL in collaboration with other equipment owners.
                                    45 client days of training were provided to local workers, administrative staff, and equipment owners in
                                     both classroom sessions and in the field to build the human and institutional capacity to ensure the
                                     proper application of the manual, surpassing the target of 40 training days. 15 client days training for
                                     female beneficiaries were provided, surpassing the target of eight client days provided to female
                                     beneficiaries.
                                    MoE and EDL acquired the technical skills and hardware to identify contaminated equipment, which
                                     allowed them to manage their assets in accordance with the environmentally sound management
                                     outlined in UNEP’s technical guidelines. As explained earlier, hiring a national consultant by UNEP
                                     serves the purpose of program continuity and coordination with the MoE as the program focal agency.

                            Outcomes:

                                    As a prerequisite for improving inventory management of transformers in an environmentally sound
                                     manner 22,983 EDL transformers were recorded in the inventory, surpassing the target of 21,000 EDL
                                     transformers. The indicator was defined based on the number of transformers in the electrical
                                     network, others used in power plants, and some in storage at Bauchrieh scheduled for repair or for
                                     sale as scrap material. The inventory exercise was compliant with the PCB inventory guidelines
                                     established by UNEP in 2003, which outlines the proper classification and reclassification of PCB
                                     contaminated equipment. The remaining transformers will be inventoried by the UNEP Mediterranean
                                     (MED) Programme in line with the agreement between the Ministry of Environment (MoE) and UNEP
                                     during the program inception in 2021.

                            Based on the additional evidence provided by the Bank project team ,which substantially supplemented the
                            information in the ICR, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated "high".




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



  The extent to which the project achieved objective 1, namely safely disposing of 389 metric tons of PCB-
  contaminated waste in accordance with the Basel Convention was rated “High”. Also, the extent to which the
  project achieved objective 2, to improve the inventory management of transformers in an environmentally
  sound manner resulting was rated "High".



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency:

The PAD did not include a traditional cost-benefit analysis due to the lack of sufficient baseline data and the
difficulty to identify the dose-response effect between exposure to PCBs and health outcomes. Instead, the
project described the expected project impact, the justification for public sector action; the Bank’s value added,
and results of cost-effectiveness analyses carried out for the disposal of PCB equipment.

The ICR (paragraph 42) conducted a basic cost-benefit analysis, which demonstrated that quantifying just one
dimension of potential project benefits, the elimination of the productivity loss linked to the reduction in excess
mortality in the local community and in workers in direct contact with PCBs, results in large net positive
economic and social benefits. The analysis assumed a mortality rate of 0.7 percent among all
project beneficiaries, and that benefits accruing from reductions in excess mortality begin 10 years after project
closure. The analysis applied a discount rate of six percent and 12 percent per annum to estimate net present
values.

The analysis calculated an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 20.9 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of
US$19.3 million with a discount rate of six percent indicating that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Cost-Effectiveness

According to the ICR (paragraph 43 and Table 4) an ex-post cost-effectiveness analysis of PCB disposal
showed that for all categories, the project’s actual cost per type of PCB-contaminated material disposed of
PCBs was lower than the appraised value which was based on experience and evidence in other countries. For
example, for transformers the actual cost was US$1,780 per ton while the cost at appraisal was US$2,800 (36
percent higher). For contaminated oil, the appraisal cost of US$2,900 per ton was 31 percent higher than the
actual cost of US$2,009 per ton. For soil, capacitors, and waste, the actual cost was eight percent lower
(US$2,586) than the appraisal estimate of US$2,800.

Disposal costs also compared favorably to costs in other similar Bank-financed projects such as the Moldova
POPs Stockpiles Management and Destruction Project (US$4,200 per ton of PCB elimination), and the China
PCB Management and Disposal Demonstration Project (US$4,100 per ton of PCB elimination) compared with
US$1,932 per ton of PCB in this project (ICR, Annex 4, page 64 and US$1,932 based on Table 18).

Operational Efficiency:


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



According to the ICR (paragraph 45) the project was able to eliminate an additional 89 tons of PCB at an overall
lower cost per component than estimated at appraisal. Furthermore, the project was able to take advantage of
economies of scale and a beneficial development of the exchange rate with only 68 percent of appraised costs
of component 2. On the other hand, actual cost of component 1 was 127 percent of the appraised estimate due
to higher number of transformers included in the inventory, and actual cost of component 3 was 120 percent of
the appraisal estimate due to the project gap filling activities such as the drafting of a decree to improve
regulation on PCB management (ICR, paragraph 46).

The ICR also noted (paragraph 66) that the project's implementation experienced several challenges beyond its
control. The 2019-2020 mass protests resulted in the resignation of the Prime Minister and left the country
without a stable government in the last one and a half years of project implementation. In October 2019 the
economy went into a financial crisis resulting in a sudden stop in capital flows and in March 2020 the
government defaulted on the repayment of a US$1.2 billion Eurobond, Lebanon’s first sovereign default. Also,
the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to delays at the final stage of implementation and the Beirut port explosion
in August 2020 resulted in a need to extend the project’s closing date twice by a total of nine months.

Furthermore, project implementation experienced delays as a result of delays in the transfer of funds from the
MoF to MOE caused by early procurement and implementation delay.

Taking account of all the evidence, this review assessed the project’s overall efficiency as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the Bank’s most recent CPF (FY17-22),
particularly with focus area 1, which aims to expand access to and quality of service delivery including
investments in the environment sector to reduce industrial, hazardous, and wastewater pollution. The efficacy
of both objective was rated High because there were no shortcomings in the project's achievements. Efficiency
was rated substantial because of only minor shortcomings. Since there were no shortcomings in either the



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



project's relevance, and efficacy and only minor shortcomings in efficiency, the project's overall outcome is rated
Highly Satisfactory..


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (paragraph 84) the project delivered evidence of the safe disposal of 389 tons of high-
risk PCB-contaminated material from the Lebanese power sector. Therefore, there is no risk to the
achievement of the first project objective. However, it will be critical for Lebanon to go ahead and eliminate
all remaining PCBs. The Bank will continue this effort through a new project [Reduction of UPOPs through
Waste Management in a Circular Economy (P172770)], with financing in the amount of US$8.8 million). The
project aims to reduce UPOPs emission through improving management of waste disposal sites.

While this project was able to build capacity in managing PCBs, the ICR (paragraph 85) noted several risks
that might materialize. First, the inventory may not be kept up to date through timely reporting when
transformers change status. Second, the government’s commitment to implement the Action Plan and safely
dispose the remaining PCBs could weaken. Third, the process to obtain the draft decree to provide the legal
basis for regulating the management of PCBs such as the maintenance of the PCB database established
under the project could be delayed. And fourth, while the project supported the disposal of PCB-
contaminated transformers from the Bauchrieh storage site, activities such as an assessment and
remediation of the site including an on-location well were not included in this project. The implementation of
these activities is important and still need to be assured.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (paragraph 40) the project design was built on lessons learned, which had been
  implemented or were undergoing implementation in various countries such as China, Moldova, Belarus,
  and Egypt. These lessons included: i) keeping project design simple; ii) ensuring stakeholder
  commitment; iii) prioritizing actions based on risk assessment study; iv) conducting a PCB inventory
  before taking actions; v) conducting a thorough assessment of alternative technologies; and vi) disposing
  PCB-contaminated equipment in accordance with well-established regulations. The ICR mentions similar
  issues in paragraph 56.

  The Bank team identified relevant risks with the overall implementation risk being assessed as
  Substantial due to the implementing agency’s limited capacity, social and environmental risks, and the
  project’s design which was to require skills and techniques not extensively available in
  Lebanon. According to the PAD (paragraph 56) the Bank team proposed a strategy to mitigate these
  risks by using International Competitive Bidding (ICB) contracts for the two major operations, and
  therefore "drawing on international expertise with proven results". According to the PAD the capacity of

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



  the MOE and EDL would be strengthened in critical areas including technical, procurement, safeguards,
  and financial management.

  The Bank team did not, however, identify the risk of the flow of funds from the MOF to the MOE being
  delayed, which resulted in procurement and implementation delays. The additional risks of not obtaining
  committed counterpart financing and the government’s restrictive financial management procedures,
  which resulted in delays, were also not identified.

  The project’s M&E arrangements and Results Framework were adequate (see section 9a for more
  details).

  Despite some shortcomings in judgments about some implementation risks the project's quality at entry
  was rated as Satisfactory by this review.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (paragraph 81) the Bank conducted supervision missions on a bi-annual basis. Even
 though the project had four different Task Team Leaders during its implementation, the Bank team was
 able to address implementation challenges quickly through actions such as providing safeguard training
 and capacity building for staff members at the implementing agencies. Also, the Bank team was able to
 ensure that the government addressed delays related to the flow of funds from the MOF to MOE.

 The Bank team extended the closing date twice to allow for the completion of some project activities which
 were delayed due to the October 2019 protests, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the August 2020 Beirut port
 explosion.

 The ICR (paragraph 81) stated that the Bank team’s reporting in the Implementation Status Reports (ISRs)
 was candid and adequate. Also, the Bank worked closely with the government to ensure a smooth
 transition to a Bank follow-up project (“Reduction of Unintentional POPs through Waste Management in a
 Circular Economy”).

 The Bank's supervision performance was assessed as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 How key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes were sound and adequately reflected
 in the project’s theory of change. Also, the objective of the project was clearly specified, and the PDO
 indicators included in the Results Framework encompassed all outcomes of the PDO. Furthermore, the
 selected indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable, and adequate to measure the contribution of the
 project’s activities and outputs towards achieving the project’s objective. However, all indicators
 lacked baselines and the outcome indicators measured outputs rather than the outcome although it is
 acknowledged that measuring the outcome of reducing the risk of PCB pollution due to the disposal of
 high-risk PCB-contaminated materials was difficult, if not impossible,

 According to the PAD (paragraph 50) the PMU within the MOE was to be responsible for the project’s M&E
 and was to report on implementation progress and achievement towards the targets on a half-yearly basis.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data to monitor implementation progress were collected and reported to the PMU with daily, weekly, and
  monthly progress reports on environmental, safety, and data management (ICR, paragraph 70). The
  PMU implemented a comprehensive quality assurance and control of M&E data points and collected data
  from contractors. First, the PMU hired a field supervisor to monitor the compliance of contractors against
  contractual commitments as well as international and national rules and regulations. The training of the
  field supervisor was able to build capacity for the management of hazardous waste. Second, the PMU
  assessed and verified the daily, weekly, and monthly reports, which were submitted by contractors and
  the field supervisor. Third, the PMU conducted spot visits and site investigations to confirm M&E data
  points. Finally, the PMU conducted meetings with contractors and equipment owners to ensure that all
  stakeholders were included in the M&E process.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 73) the project’s M&E data were regularly used to inform project
  management and decision-making by the PMU. For example, M&E data were used to alert the MOE of
  an emergency caused by an in-service PCB contaminated transmission transformer leaking and causing
  soil contamination at a sub-station outside of the project sites. Due to the M&E system in place the MOE
  was able to respond quickly and address the emergency appropriately. Also, the M&E data showed that
  the initial number of 21,000 transformers was underestimated. As a result, the inventory contract was
  modified. The M&E data were used to ensure that only samples needing further analysis were sent to
  the laboratory and therefore positively impacting the project’s efficiency.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as category A and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
  (Environmental Assessment). According to the ICR (paragraph 76), the project developed a comprehensive
  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which would also address the management of PCB-
  contaminated material in the future. Furthermore, the project complied with all safeguard and risk mitigation
  measures and safeguard ratings were continuously Satisfactory in ISRs throughout implementation.

  In June 2017, the safeguard rating in the ISR was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory. According to
  information provided by the Bank team to IEG (November 12, 2021) the project faced two issues: (i) health
  and safety provisions regarding electric shocks during inventorying, and (ii) waste management practices at
  the Bauchrieh storage site. The issues were resolved by the contractor undertaking the inventory agreeing
  to further steps to train the surveyors on the risks of electric shocks in order for them not to rely only on EDL
  staff accompanying them. Also, the PMU arranged for 40 additional UN certified drums for waste collection.
  To support better M&E arrangements, the PMU contracted a field supervisor to do weekly verifications of
  compliance with environment, health and safety safeguards during the period of surveying and sampling.

  The project established a grievance redress mechanism and communicated with project stakeholders.
  However, no complaints were submitted.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (paragraph 78) the PMU submitted adequate quarterly Interim Financial Reports
  (IFRs) on a timely basis. Also, the external auditor’s annual audit reports, which complied with international
  standards, were submitted with unqualified clean opinions. In spring 2016 the financial management rating
  was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory due to challenges in obtaining committed counterpart
  financing and delays resulting from the government’s restrictive financial management procedures.
  According to the Bank team's advice to IEG (November 12, 2021) the rating was upgraded in September
  2016 after a project Financial Officer with substantial experience working with Bank-financed projects had
  been appointed. After significant delays, the hurdles surrounding the transfer of funds were resolved
  which ensured the smooth flow of funds from MOF to MOE.

  Procurement:

  As noted already, at the beginning the project implementation there were delays in the transfer of funds
  from the MoF to the MoE, which resulted in procurement and implementation delays (ICR, paragraph 60).

  According to the ICR (paragraph 79) the project’s procurement plans were updated on a regular basis to
  develop the budget. Also, the procurement plans were submitted in a timely manner to the Bank. After the
  initial procurement delays, the project did not encounter any procurement related issues throughout
  implementation. The procurement rating in ISRs was consistently Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    High                  High

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p.27-28) included several lessons learned:

        Even small grants can can be catalytic in achieving policy, institutional, and
         investment change. Even though the external financing for this project was only US$2.5
         million, this project was able to achieve results beyond its original scope by contracting
         international expertise and was therefore able to deliver outcomes that were fundamental to
         eliminating a serious environmental threat in the country and also fulfilling the obligations of
         an international convention to eliminate dangerous carcinogenic chemicals.
        When designing a project, government financial regulations, though different from
         World Bank preferred procedures, can be accommodated but may cause delays in the
         disbursement of funds. For example, procurement procedures practiced by Lebanon
         differ from the Bank’s procedures. In this project the grant proceeds were integrated into the
         national purse and therefore the implementing agency needed to access the grant money
         through an “Emergency Advance Decision” adding layers of bureaucracy and delaying
         disbursement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: PCB Mgmt in the Power Sector CLOSED (P122540)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation and pointed out events impacting
project's implementation. Also, the ICR was internally consistent and concise, complied with OPCS guidelines
and was sufficiently outcome driven. Furthermore, the ICR provided an adequate analysis for the achievement
of the first objective. However, the ICR did not provide adequate evidence for the achievement of improved
inventory management of transformers in the power sector not allowing for an appropriate assessment of the
project's achievements. The Bank project team provided a considerable amount of evidence to IEG on the
achievements on inventory management. The ICR included moderately useful lessons learned based on
evidence in the ICR. Taking everything together, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but only marginally
so due to the lack of evidence in the ICR on the achievements of Objective 2.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
