     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022632

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150148                                    DRC - Statistics Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of              Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0880                                  31-Dec-2020                                          23,965,424.53

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Aug-2015                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            45,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         24,325,954.53                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia         Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project appraisal document (PAD) stated the objective as: “to strengthen the capacity of the National
   Statistical System to produce and disseminate core economic and social statistics” (par. 15).

   For this Review, the objectives of the project are assessed as follows:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



   PDO 1: Strengthen capacity of the National Statistical System (NSS) to produce core economic and social
   statistics.

   PDO 2: Strengthen capacity of the NSS to disseminate core economic and social statistics.

   The objectives of the project remained unchanged, but some outcome indicators were revised at
   restructurings. This Review will therefore perform a split rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Data Production, Dissemination, and Use

   The component was to finance activities aimed at improving statistical infrastructure, the quality and
   timeliness of national accounts statistics, agriculture statistics, and poverty and inequality statistics
   produced by the NSS. It also was to support the dissemination and use of statistical information.

          1.1: Cartography of the population and housing census (original amount: US$14 million; actual
             amount not reported). The grant would help close the financing gap for the census cartography and
             the technical assistance to the National Statistical Institute (INS) and the Census Agency for
             analysis of the results. It would be disbursed after the WBG received the program of activities for the
             cartography of the population census issued by the Census Bureau and the Bureau had
             demonstrated that it had secured the total budget for those activities.
            1.2: System of surveys on household living conditions (original amount US$8.25 million; actual
             amount: not reported). The grant would help the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) design and
             implement a coherent and financially sustainable system of household surveys to monitor household
             living conditions with a multi-topic questionnaire.
            1.3: Agriculture census and survey (original amount: US$9.8 million; actual amount not reported).
             The grant would finance the implementation of a system for collecting, processing, and updating
             agricultural statistics.
            1.4: National Accounts Statistics (original amount: US$1.8 million; actual amount: not reported). The
             grant would finance technical assistance on national accounts and the production and analysis of
             complementary data on businesses to update key macroeconomic aggregates.
            1.5: Information Technology and Equipment for Data Production and Diffusion (original amount:
             US$1.25 million; actual amount: not reported). The grant would finance the upgrading of the NSS
             and the information technology (IT) infrastructure and data management systems for the data
             production activities the project supported.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



Two sub-components were added after the first restructuring, but the total cost and financing of the project
remained unchanged. The two components were:

      1.6 Enterprise census (original amount: US$6 million: actual amount: not reported)
      1.7 Improving public finance statistics (original amount: US$2 million; actual amount, not reported)

Further changes were conducted during the second and third restructurings. These changes are
summarized after Component 2.

Component 2: Human Resources Development and Management

The component was to support the INS in attracting and retaining qualified statisticians through an effective
system of human resources development and management. The component had five subcomponents:

      2.1 Staffing and human resources policies (original amount US$0.5 million; actual amount: not
         reported). The activity was to support establishing a strategic staffing plan to enable INS to attract
         and retain qualified statisticians and provide the necessary support to statistics departments in line
         ministries. To achieve that goal the grant was to finance technical assistance in six activities:
         establishing the skill needs of the INS; drafting an operation manual for INS; developing a 3-year
         staffing plan; developing an end-of-career framework; developing internal procedures, collective
         labor agreements and a new salary scale; and workshop activities in support of the strengthening
         capacity plan.
        2.2 Development of the National Statistics Schools (original amount US$3.0 million; actual amount:
         not reported). The activity was to support assessing the local statistics schools, reviewing the
         statistical training curricula, drafting of syllabi, and training materials for teaching applied statistics
         and demography, hiring and remunerating professors to deliver specific courses and train local
         trainers, and acquire material as needed to support students in statistics training programs.
        2.3 Scholarship program for training at regional and national statistics and demographic schools and
         short-term training related to statistics (original amount US$1.1 million; actual amount: not reported).
         The activity was to support formal pre-service training to prepare Congolese for competitive
         examinations for admission to regional statistical and demographic schools.
        2.4 Young Professional Program (original amount: US$2 million; actual amount: not reported). The
         grant would support the hiring and remuneration of “Young Professionals” on qualified assignments
         in the NSS through a government-owned “Young Professionals Program.” The support was
         contingent on the success of the activities outlined in sub-component 2.1.
        2.5 Project management (original amount US$3.3 million; actual amount: not reported). The sub-
         subcomponent was to support activities that fostered the coordination of statistical operations and
         strengthening the capacity of the project coordination unit (PCU) located in the National Institute of
         Statistics.

Restructuring

The project had three restructurings. The first one added two sub-components (1.6 and 1.7) to Component
1, reallocated funds from sub-component 1.1 (housing and population census) to sub-components 1.6 and
1.7, and removed sub-component 2.4 (Young Professionals program) and reallocated those funds to sub-
components 2.1 and 2.3. The second restructuring reallocated funds within Component 2 and reduced to
US$8.8 million the funds allocated to it. The third restructuring reduced the grant amount to US$30 million,
and cut the funds allocated to Component 1 from US$35.1 million to US$21.2 million and reallocated. The

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



   names of the components changed in the first restructuring. The table below presents the financing by
   components for the original and restructured components and their actual value.

   Financing by components (US$ million)
   Component                                              PAD         R#1        R#2        R#3         Actual
   1. Data Production, Dissemination and Use              35.1        35.1       21.2       19.5        16.6
   1.1 TA to the population and housing census            14.0        2.1        2.5        n.a.        n.a.
   1.2 Household surveys                                  8.3         10.0       3.45       n.a.        n.a.
   1.3: Agriculture census and survey                     9.8         10.0       0.75       n.a.        n.a.
   1.4 Economic Statistics                                1.8         2.7        5.00       n.a.        n.a.
   1.5 Improving IT, Equipment and Dissemination          1.3         2.4        1.50       n.a.        n.a.
   1.6 Enterprise census                                              6.0        7.70       n.a.        n.a.
   1.7 Improving public finance statistics                            2.0        0.30       n.a.        n.a.
   2. Human Resource Development and
                                                          9.90        9.90       8.8        5.5         7.7
   Management
   2.1 Staffing and policies                              0.50        1.50       1.00       n.a.        n.a.
   2.2 Support for the development of the National
                                                          3.00        3.00       1.40       n.a.        n.a.
   Statistics Schools
   2.3 Scholarship program for training                   1.10        2.10       2.10       n.a.        n.a.
   2.4 Young Professional Program                         2.00        0.00       0.00       n.a.        n.a.
   2.5 Project Management                                 3.30        3.30       4.30       n.a.        n.a.
   Total financing                                        45.00       45.00      30.00      25.00       24.3

e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on August 28, 2015, became effective on June 20, 2016, and closed on
   December 31, 2020, as planned. The government requested restructuring the project on February 28, 2019,
   September 1, 2020, and December 15, 2020. The WBG approved the requests on April 4, 2019, December
   15, 2020, and March 9, 2021 after the project closed. The restructurings were level 2.

   The original project cost was SDR 32 million (US$45 million equivalent). Of this amount, US$15 million was
   cancelled in the second restructuring and a further US$5 million in the third, for a total cost of US$25 million
   after the restructurings. The third restructuring allocated US$19.5 million to Component 1 (Data Production,
   Dissemination and Use) and US$5.5 million to Component 2 (Human Resources Development and
   Management). Actual project cost was US$24.3 million, split into US$16.6 million for Component 1 and
   US$7.7 million for Component 2. The cost refers to the WBG’s contribution.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



               Despite its immense natural resources wealth, the DRC lacks infrastructure and social services, is unstable
               and fragile, and ranks among the poorest countries in the world, a result of bad governance and decades of
               conflict. Since 2009, political and economic reforms have led to faster economic growth , and its Human
               Development Index rose from 0.44 in 2016 to about 0.57 in 2019. In 2006 the country started implementing
               a poverty reduction strategy, which was renewed in 2012; the strategy required continuous monitoring and
               evaluation and timely statistical information that the country’s statistical system could not provide. The
               existing system could not meet users’ needs for data, and its overall capacity was weak.

               The World Bank’s Country Statistical Performance Indicators (50 indicators in five data dimensions—use,
               services, products, sources and infrastructure) showed that the DRC’s statistical system had improved by
               2014, after making available highly demanded data such as poverty indicators (and gender and primary
               school data. Still, its score on performance was low and below the average for countries in Sub-Saharan
               Africa. The system did not produce quality data in a timely manner, in part because of its limited resources
               which, after paying salaries, left little money to collect data. The poor conditions of the statistical system
               persuaded the government to improve the country’s statistical capacity. The effort started in 2009 by
               establishing the INS, giving it technical independence to conduct its activities. In 2012 the
               government approved a National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS). The INS lacked
               qualified staff to produce and publish statistics meeting international standards, and the statistical
               infrastructure lacked basic information, such as a population census, making it difficult to set policies where
               population information was essential (e.g., schooling, GDP per capita).

               The WBG’s recent Systematic Country Diagnostic (FY18) for the DRC identified five priorities for the
               country to achieve growth with shared prosperity. Two would help address the problems of the statistical
               system: priority area 2, building inclusive institutions and strengthening governance; and priority area 4,
               building human capital. The project would contribute to these areas by supporting the development of INS
               human resources and the basic infrastructure for statistical operations (cartography of population census,
               household surveys) to ensure statistics meet international standards. By improving the ability to produce
               relevant data in a timely manner, the project was aligned with the FY2013-FY2016 Country Assistance
               Strategy's first objective of “increasing state effectiveness and improving good governance."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen capacity of the NSS to produce core economic and social statistics

                             Rationale



                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



The project objectives remained unchanged, but project outputs and outcomes as well as the outcome targets
were revised during its execution through three restructurings approved on April 4, 2019, December 15, 2020
(15 days before closing), and March 9, 2021 (two months after closing).

Theory of change

The PAD did not present a theory of change, but the ICR reconstructs it from information in the PAD and
supervision reports. The ICR presents two theories of change, one at project appraisal and other after
restructuring. The two results chain have common elements, though the one reconstructed after restructuring
was simpler and more direct. The review uses the simple and direct theory of change to summarize the logic
behind the program.

The ICR’s theory of change presents a valid results chain between project activities, outputs, and outcomes.
The project’s higher-level expected outcome was to improve evidence-based decision making in DRC, which
was to be achieved by achieving the project’s two objectives of strengthening capacity of the INS to (a)
produce core economic and social statistics and (b) disseminate these statistics.

To assess achievement of these objectives, the ICR divides the inputs into group 1—data production,
dissemination, and use— and group 2—human resources development and management. The inputs in
group 1 contribute to the outputs and the outcome in objective 1. Inputs in group 2 and inputs in group 1
contribute to the outputs and the outcome in objective 2; for example, improving IT and equipment (including
the INS building) would contribute to delivering routine statistical publications available in the INS website,
thereby contributing to the production of statistics in objective 1 and to their dissemination in objective 2.

The theory of change identifies four elements of the result chain: (a) major activities; (b) outputs (i.e., inputs);
(c) mid-level outputs (outcomes in IEG terminology); and (d) PDO/outcome.

Major activities and inputs

At appraisal, the activities encompassed: (i) supporting cartography (i.e., drawing a map) of population
census and housing census; (ii) designing and implementing a system of household surveys; (iii) conducting
agricultural census and surveys; (iv) supporting national accounts statistics; and (v) improving IT and
equipment for data protection and diffusion.

The activities after project restructuring narrowed to: (i) providing technical assistance to the population and
housing census, and supporting (ii) household surveys, (iii) agricultural census and surveys, (iv) economic
statistics; (v) enterprise census, (vi) public finance statistics, and (vii) improving IT and equipment for data
production and diffusion. During the restructurings, the population and housing census cartography was
removed, affecting the results of other activities, and reducing the potential impact of the project.

Outputs

At project closing the activities were expected to deliver 14 outputs, of which 10 were on data production,
dissemination, and use and four were on human resources development and management.

      Before restructuring, none of the eight outputs were achieved.
      After restructuring, six outputs were achieved and three were not achieved. The outputs achieved
       included: number of statistical publications (25), LSMS-ISA survey for Kinshasa, price indices,

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



        finalizing 2 out of 3 technical tools for the agricultural census, and certification of the E-QUIBB
        database (QUIBB is the French acronym for the Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire Survey -
        CWIQ-, designed to gather information related to poverty such as housing conditions, water and
        sanitation, education, health, income, and assets). The project did not produce the planned
        development guide of the Government Financial Operations Table (TOFE), the registry for enterprise
        statistics or the plan to implement the data dissemination policy.

Outcomes

The expected outcome was the number of statistical products completed and published by the INS following
international standards (baseline value: 0; original target 5; revised target 4). The PAD listed eight statistical
products that INS was expected to produce during the project’s life, of which 5 were to be completed and
published at project closing as follows: one per year in 2016 and 2017, two in 2018, and one in 2019. After
the first restructuring in April 2019, the target was set at 4 products. INS completed and published the
consumer price index and the statistical yearbook, which followed international standards. Among the
products either not completed were the agricultural census, the household survey, the national accounts, and
GDP and input-output tables.

The original and the revised outcome targets were partially achieved, at 40 and 50 percent, respectively.
Because achievement is modest under both the original and revised targets, there is no need to split the
rating. The overall outcome achievement for the first objective, under both the original and revised outcome
targets, is modest.

 In sum, achievement of the objective of strengthening capacity of the INS to produce core economic and
social statistics was modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen capacity of the NSS to disseminate core economic and social statistics (original outcome targets)

Rationale
The text for objective 1 is valid for objective 2.

Major activities and inputs

The activities at appraisal and at closing aimed to strengthen the capacity of staff and students to disseminate
core economic and social statistics. The activities included: (i) establishing INS staffing plans and policies; (ii)
supporting the development of national statistics schools; (iii) providing scholarships and training to
Congolese students; and (iv) establishing and implementing a Young Professionals program. In addition, five
activities in group 1 supported the outputs for objective 2; they were: developing a master sample frame from
the census cartography, implementing the Living Standards Measurement Study Integrated Survey on


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



Agriculture, updating to a base year the national accounts and the consumer price index, and making the
datasets available in INS website.

At appraisal, it was expected that the activities would help to:

      develop and validate technical training courses in the national schools of statistics;
      graduate statisticians or equivalent from national and regional statistics or demographic schools; and
      recruit and finance young professionals.

Outputs

      Before restructuring, none of the expected three outputs listed in the PAD under component 2 were
       achieved.
      After restructuring, the four outputs were either achieved or substantially achieved. They were:
            o improved curriculum of the statistical schools in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, and Goma with
               teachers receiving on the job training (Target: Yes);
            o 40 scholarships funded by the project (Target: 45);
            o 33 young graduates supported by the project (Target: 30);
            o 147 statistics technicians trained in national statistical schools (Target: 180)

Outcomes

The expected results were the number of: (a) statistical outputs with data readily available to users through
the INS data portal and (b) qualified staff working for the NSS (including the INS and the statistical
departments of the Ministries of Education, Health, Agriculture, and Finances).

      Number of statistical outputs with data readily available to users through INS data portal (Baseline
       value: 0; original target 6). At closing, the actual number was 3, meeting 50 percent of the original
       target. Modest.
      Number of qualified staff working for the NSS, including the INS and the statistical departments of the
       Ministries of Education, Health, Agriculture and Finances. The indicator was dropped in the first
       restructuring because it was considered an intermediate indicator. Not rated.

Achievement of the objectives of the project under the original outcome target is Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen capacity of the NSS to disseminate core economic and social statistics (revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



                              The theory of change and inputs did not change, but one outcome indicator was removed and the target for
                              the remaining outcome indicator was revised downward.

                              Outcomes

                              After the first restructuring one outcome indicator was left for this objective: the number of statistical outputs
                              with data readily available to users through the INS data portal (Baseline value: 0; target, 3). The ICR reports
                              that the target of 3 statistical outputs in the portal was met. The statistical outputs in the INS portal were the
                              data on the consumer price index and the data on households and enterprises obtained through the high
                              frequency phone survey. The data can be found in Publications | Institut National de la Statistique
                              [https://www.ins.cd/publication]; the most recent consumer price index information is for December 2020.

                              Achievement of this objective under the revised outcome targets is therefore rated Substantial



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original outcome targets, achievement of both objectives was modest, for an overall modest
                            efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Under the revised outcome targets, achievement of the first objective was modest, and achievement of the
                            second objective was substantial, for an overall substantial efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency



                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



Slow project execution prevented the implementation of activities essential for success. The population and
housing census failed to take off on time and was removed in the first restructuring, about 43 months after the
project was approved and about 20 months before it closed. The lack of population and housing census data led
to delays in executing other components like the agricultural census, forcing the parties to develop an alternative
methodology to advance the task. By April 4, 2019, when the first restructuring was approved, none of the
expected outputs and some intermediate results had been achieved, but about 60 percent of actual project costs
had been disbursed.

Deficiencies in project management (e.g., lack of knowledge of WBG procedures, poor staffing of the PCU,
delays in appointing a project manager) and in supervision caused the delays that resulted in severe
shortcomings in implementation efficiency across the first two-thirds of the project’s life (43 out of 64 months).
The three bodies in charge of implementing and monitoring the project were not fully functional because the
Project Steering Committee and the focal points did not have sufficient budget to operate the project; when
funds became available, the Committee never met. The project implementation unit did not recruit key members
on time, the financial management specialist conducted multiple incompatible tasks, and the monitoring and
evaluation specialist did not fulfill his tasks. Last, the internal auditor contract was cancelled because of issues
with a previous contract with the World Bank.

Cost per unit of product delivered gives a sense –albeit imperfect– of how well the funds were used. At Board
approval the expected results for the two objectives were 12 products, later revised to 7. Each original expected
result would cost US$3.75 million at appraisal and US$3.6 million if the revised targets had been met, but that
did not happen. Only 5 of the final 7 products were delivered, at a cost of US5 million, 33 and 40 percent higher
than the expected cost per product at appraisal and after restructuring. Because the consumer price index is
counted twice as an output (as statistical output and as product completed and published), it should be counted
once to measure cost. In this case, the unit cost rises to US$6.75 million, 75 percent over the expected revised
cost. While this gross value cannot substitute for a proper cost-benefit analysis of the project, it helps to answer
the question of whether the project was implemented at least cost. Answer: No.

This Review rates overall efficiency as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were relevant over its entire lifetime. Efficacy was modest under the original outcome
targets and substantial under the revised outcome targets. Efficiency was modest. The project's main
achievements were to complete and publish two statistical products -- the Statistical Yearbook and the
Consumer Price Index -- and have three statistical outputs with data readily available to users through the INS
data portal (the Consumer Price Index and data for households and enterprises gathered through a high
frequency telephone survey).

The table below summarizes the project’s ratings and the calculations for the overall outcome rating. With the
large majority of the project's disbursements having occurred prior to the restructuring that revised the outcome
targets, the overall Outcome rating is driven by achievement under the original outcome targets.

                                    Original outcome            Revised outcome
Rating Dimension
                                    targets                     targets
Relevance of Objectives             Substantial
Efficacy                            Modest                      Substantial
Efficiency                          Modest
Outcome Rating                      Moderately Unsatisfactory Moderately Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                3                           4
Amount Disbursed at second
                                    23.77                       0.56
restructuring (US$ million)
Disbursement (%)                    97.7%                   2.3%
Weight Value                        2.93                    0.092
Total sum of weights                3.022
Overall Outcome Rating              Moderately Unsatisfactory (3.0)
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk arises from the government’s lack of commitment to conduct institutional reforms by
establishing the INS Scientific Council and the National Council for Statistics. The second risk comes from
the uncertainty about the future availability of funds to finance first the statistical work needed to validate the
data for the enterprise census and the household surveys and then to publish their reports. The third risk
comes from the low capacity of human resources, but ; a small step has been taken to reduce this risk by
training people in the statistical schools, but for that to matter, the INS or other organizations of the national
statistical system must use them. These problems are already affecting one result of the project: the
government has not hired yet the 33 young professionals that the project hired to support the INS; soon, the
163 upcoming graduates studying statistics and related fields will face the same problem.




                                                                                                        Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank designed a project whose objectives had substantial relevance and ambitious scope but
  this was inconsistent with a realistic assessment of the country’s capacity and its institutional setting. The
  Bank designed the project based on the needs established in the NSDS, which lack of funds and
  technical capacity. The main executing agency, INS, had low capacity and insufficient human resources
  to conduct surveys. The World Bank underestimated the risks from shortcomings in institutional capacity
  and arrangements. The three main bodies in charge of executing and monitoring the project were not
  functional: the Project Steering Committee in charge of coordinating and supervising the project; the
  Project Implementation Unit in the INS managing the project and its fiduciary aspects; and the focal
  points in the INS and other NSS members providing technical inputs. Last, several project activities
  depended on outputs from the population and housing census cartography.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted seven supervision missions, the last one in late 2019, one year before the project
 closed. The ICR notes that the “World Bank’s supervisory role was to facilitate effective project
 implementation and ensure value for money, transparency and accountability” (par. 167). The results of the
 project and the problems it faced during execution indicated that the Bank could have done better in
 providing training to government staff on Bank procedures, especially fiduciary and procurement aspects.
 The ICR reports that “in addition to the TTLs, a statistician/economist was assigned in the country shortly
 before the project’s first restructuring” (par. 168), about 43 months after project approval and 22 months
 before closing, too late to advance the project to its original goals. The ICR also reports that country office
 experts provided constant training and advice to the client, but judging by the project’s results, the support
 was still less than was needed to deliver the results expected. Last, with negligible results before the first
 restructuring, the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) rated generously the various
 categories rated, incorrectly reflecting the reality of the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



a. M&E Design
 The PAD defined clear objectives and indicators that captured the contributions of the components and
 outputs to the project’s outcomes. The indicators were relevant, measurable, time bound, and had defined
 baseline and target values; with hindsight, the targets turned out to be overly ambitious. To assess
 progress every six months, a workshop was held in which all parties involved in executing the project,
 stakeholders, and beneficiaries participated. This Review agrees with the ICR’s assessment that the design
 could have considered imposing more rigorous implementation requirements, such as hiring key personnel
 earlier on and make sure the Project Steering Committee was operational.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank monitored the project through regular missions as agreed with the government, producing aide
  memoires, ISRs, and financial, audit, and mid-term review reports although this was curtailed after
  COVID-19 arrived . This effort permitted the Bank to collect data on the indicators and report them in
  ISRs. The effort was insufficient to deal with the project’s implementation problems, such as not having
  an operational Project Steering Committee, the Project Implementation Unit being without a manager for
  extended periods, fiduciary problems, and delays in reporting results; these shortcomings delayed
  executing the project and contributed to delays in gathering data on the associated outcome and
  intermediate indicators. The last report was archived on February 12, 2020 and disclosed on the following
  day.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Bank and stakeholders knew of the project’s challenges despite overly optimistic ISRs, but
  information on outcomes and intermediate results was not used in a timely manner to restructure the
  project and address the problems plaguing it, as attested by two subsequent restructurings approved
  two weeks before and 10 weeks after its closing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project fell in category C of safeguards and did not trigger any social or environmental safeguard
   Operational Policy.

   Two occupational health and safety incidents happened during the enterprise census activities, one severe
   and the other serious. Both were accounted for through the World Bank’s Safeguards Incident Response
   Toolkit.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management was weak during the project’s life. For a time, the project lacked a financial
   management specialist and an external auditor of accounts. Project activities were not properly accounted
   for, and the Bank discovered the shortcomings in financial management because of: (a) complaints from
   the field that enumerators for the enterprise census were not being paid; (b) the government's failure to
   provide a detailed report on expenditures, information on payments made, and balance to be paid to
   census enumerators; and (c) an overrun of funds allocated to the enterprise census over the allocated
   budget. After the problem with enumerators appeared, the Bank conducted a review of the project’s
   financial management; the review led to an increase in the amount allocated to the enterprise census and
   discovery of US$4.8 million of questionable or ineligible expenditures, which turned out to be US$6.0
   million after further revisions. These problems arose from weaknesses in internal controls; an accountant
   performing as cashier, treasurer, and accountant; weak asset management; and no inventories of fixed
   assets, among other factors.

   The procurement assistant lacked knowledge of procedures, and had to frequently conduct the
   procurement work without qualified oversight during implementation for about 11 and 19 months. The
   quality of procurement records was variable; for some contracts it was impossible to know the criteria used
   to assess bids.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   The ICR notes that the project included gender indicators under its statistical operations, but not gender
   results indicators.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  The Bank designed a project to
                                                                                  meet the country's needs, but
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  overlooked its low capacity and
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  acted late to correct
                                                                                  implementation problems
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offers the following lessons, with which IEG agrees, with adaptation:

        When supervision reports overrate outcomes and underrate fiduciary, management, and
         implementation risks, the odds are low for correcting the problems promptly and high for
         achieving unsatisfactory results. Therefore, supervision missions should identify and flag
         risks early and rate projects fairly.
        When the government uses differential salaries and bonuses to reward staff with the same
         qualifications in the implementing agencies, the odds are high that the project will experience
         implementation problems.
        To prevent failure in a context where there is low capacity and high statistical needs, the
         WBG needs to: (a) assess what needs can realistically be satisfied with existing capacity,
         and (b) ensure that, soon after grant or credit approval, key positions are filled and the staff
         in charge of managing the project receive proper training in basic management skills and
         Bank procedures (e.g., fiduciary, procurement, etc.).
        When in a country like DRC the project design pays insufficient attention to implementation
         requirements, the project is likely to deliver unsatisfactory results. Therefore, to raise the
         odds of success, the design must consider imposing more rigorous implementation
         requirements, such as hiring key personnel and ensuring funds are set aside to pay the
         members of the project steering committee.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR analyzes well the project's design and implementation issues and presents good information about
project developments and results. It should be noted that the ICR reconstructed a credible theory of change,
which neither the PAD nor the Restructuring Papers had developed.

The review notes two areas where the ICR faltered. First, its discussion of achievement of results (efficacy) is
convoluted: it covers different types of activities and phases in the implementation, making it difficult to
understand what the project achieved in terms of outputs and outcomes; for example, each of paragraphs 63-
70 informs about project activities conducted and not conducted, intermediate inputs, outputs, and outcomes.
The reader must go to Annexes 1, 7, and 8 to find out the indicators and what was achieved; it would have
helped the reader if the ICR had indicated which outputs would contribute to producing and to disseminating the
products and statistical outputs of the project. Second, the ICR’s criteria of weak project management as a



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC - Statistics Development Project (P150148)



reason for its modest rating for efficiency does not address the question of how economically resources and
inputs are converted to results.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
