     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022776

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P129640                                     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                     Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16083,TF-18119                           30-Jun-2020                                           36,786,063.91

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Jul-2014                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             45,500,000.00                                     45,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              45,500,000.00                                     36,786,063.91

 Actual                                          36,878,925.37                                     36,786,063.91




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Richard Anson               J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (Loan Agreement and Grant
   Agreement, 2014) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2014), was to: “support the implementation of
   the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience in Bolivia by: (a) strengthening the institutional capacity to define
   the new integrated river basin management approach to climate change adaptation; and (b) supporting its
   implementation in three pilot sub-basins in the Rio Grande river basin.



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



   For the purpose of assessing the achievements of this project in Section 4 of this review the PDO has been
   parsed into two separate objectives, namely Objectives 1 and 2 as follows

   Objective 1: to support the implementation of the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience in Bolivia by
   strengthening the institutional capacity to define the new integrated river basin management approach to
   Climate Change Adaptation; and

   Objective 2: to support the implementation of the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience in Bolivia by
   supporting its implementation in three pilot sub-basins in the Rio Grande river basin.

   This approach is consistent with that adopted in the ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   A. Strengthening national capacity for climate change adaptation: (Original allocation: US$5.25 million;
   Actual: US$4.60 million). This component included 4 inter-connected sub-components: (1) the design and
   establishment of a National Climate and Water Information System in relevant government agencies; (2)
   support for national hydro-meteorological and climate change related studies; (3) updating national
   guidelines on river basin planning and management, and on water sector related pre-investment studies,
   and integration of climate change adaptation aspects in its National Development Plan; (4) provision of
   training on the use of the developed National Climate and Water Information System and updated
   guidelines (ICR,para. 11); and (5) support to the Project Implementation Units (PIU) in terms of
   coordinating, monitoring and evaluating the project, and disseminating related findings and lessons
   learned.

   B. Strengthening capacity for adaptation to climate change in the Rio Grande River Basin: (Original
   allocation: US$5.15 million; Actual: US$1.15 million). This component included 5 sub-components: (1)
   strengthening institutional capacity of the SEARPI and the Departmental River Basin Service (Servicio
   Departamental de Cuencas - SDC) of Cochabamba for an integrated, participatory, basin-scale, climate
   resilient planning and management in their respective Pilot Sub-basins; (2) establishing mechanisms to
   facilitate stakeholders participation in river basin planning; and (3) formulating integrated, multi-sectorial,
   participatory, climate resilient River Basin Master Plans (Planes Directores de Cuenca - PDCs) in the three
   Pilot Sub-basins; (4) strengthening the SNICA in the pilot sub-basins by updating the hydro-meteorological
   observation networks; and (5) establishing and/or strengthening the data processing centers and early
   warning systems for flood and droughts.

   C. Design and implementation of subprojects that improve climate resilience in the Rio Grande
   River Basin: (Original allocation: US$61 million; Actual: US$31.13 million). This component included: (1)

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



  the design and implementation of pre-investment studies (including the environmental and social aspects)
  for Infrastructure and Integrated River Basin Management (IRBM) Subprojects; (2) based on said studies,
  implementation of those subprojects; (3) provision of training to eligible beneficiaries for the operation and
  maintenance (O&M) of the sub-projects; (4) for the infrastructure subprojects, the project would finance the
  operating costs for the implementation, supervision and auditing of the activities, led by the National Fund
  for Productive and Social Investment (Fondo Nacional de Inversión Productiva y Social - FPS); and (5) For
  the IRBM Subprojects, the project would provide support to the SEARPI and the SDC for the
  implementation and supervision of the activities under their respective territorial jurisdiction. The ICR and
  other available project documentation (Aide Memoires/ISRs do not show the proportion of project funds
  allocated to the sub-project’s implementation.

  The above summary description of the three components reflects the relevant adjustments made during the
  project’s two restructurings, as presented in the ICR.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (a) Project Cost: The total project cost at approval was US$71.4 million (including an assumed counterpart
  contribution from Government of US$25.9 million). The actual project cost at closing was US$36.88 million
  (or 51.65% of estimated total project cost at appraisal). The difference between the original and actual costs
  was due to zero counterpart funds and delayed implementation. (ICR, Annex 3).

  (b) Financing: At approval, two trust funds executed by the World Bank provided a total US$45.5 million
  (Climate Investment Fund/CIF – Credit and Grant Agreements, for US$36.0 million and US$9.5 million,
  respectively). At appraisal the Government committed counterpart funding of US$25.9 million. Due to fiscal
  constraints, as part of the project’s re-structuring in 2018 and the Government’s severe fiscal constraints,
  the Government withdrew its commitment to provide counterpart funding. By the project’s closing date,
  disbursements from the Bank totaled US$36.88 million (or 51.65% of the total original costs and financing).

  (c) Borrower/Recipient Contribution: At approval, the local counterpart contribution from the Government
  was US$25.9 million. During implementation, as noted above this contribution was decreased to zero
  (TBC), due to the Government’s severe fiscal constraints.

  (d) Dates: The project was approved on July 25, 2014, became effective on May 7, 2015. A mid-term
  review was carried out in November, 2018. The original closing date was June 30, 2020, with the actual
  closing date being December 31, 2020 (i.e., an extension of 6 months).

  (e) Restructurings and Significant Changes During Implementation: The project had two Level II
  restructurings. While the PDO was not revised, there were some revisions to components 1 - 3, several
  result indicators and some of their targets, and to counterpart funding contributions. The main revisions and
  rationales for the two restructurings were as follows (ICR, paras. 15 – 24):

  Restructuring 1: (approved on December 7, 2017): This restructuring included changes in counterpart
  financing, one PDO indicator/target and adjustments to components. By the latter part of 2017, the project
  had: disbursed only 6% of the loan proceeds (US$2.27 million) and 9% of the grant proceeds (US$0.83
  million; and had been rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in ISRs for poor implementation progress and for
  slow progress towards achievement of the PDO. Restructuring 1 included the following adjustments.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



(i) Excluding the Pirai sub-basin, in response to the Department of Santa Cruz decision to withdraw from the
project

(ii) Adding an alternative sub-basin – Arque- Tapacari, using the funds reallocated from the Pirai sub-basin

(iii) Revising downwards one of the PDO indicator target: direct project beneficiaries, was reduced from an
original end target of 3,000 to 1,875 individuals

(iv) Adding a sub-component to Component A: Following the severe drought of 2016, the scope of the
project was expanded to include the establishment of a national drought monitor and strengthening
forecasting capabilities at the national level. Accordingly, US$1.2 million of the loan proceeds, originally
allocated to project activities in Santa Cruz, were reallocated to this sub-component (under Component A)

(v) reducing the Government counterpart funds from US$25.9 million to US$6.74 million, and by project
closing, counterpart funds became zero, due to severe fiscal constraints

(vi) introducing flexibility by reducing the requirements for counterpart funding to accelerate project
implementation, including: a lower counterpart funding requirement of 50 percent and 30 percent for
infrastructure subprojects and IBRM sub-projects, respectively, to be borne by each municipality; with the
fiscal crisis in 2017, there was a further lowering of counterpart funds to 20 percent for infrastructure sub-
projects and 15 percent for IRBM subprojects, and allowing further flexibility of counterpart funds in 2018
and 2019 (ICR, para. 21 for details)

(vii) with the withdrawal of the Department of Santa Cruz from the Project, no investments in IRBM
subprojects were financed in Santa Cruz sub-basin, while financing infrastructure sub-projects in the three
sub-basins, through their corresponding municipal governments (ICR, para. 22).

Restructuring 2: (approved on June 1, 2020): This restructuring included:

(i) An extension of the project closing date by six months (until December 31, 2020), mainly due to the
various implementation delays

(ii) Changes to several result indicators. By mid-2020, the project had disbursed 43% of the loan proceeds
(US$15.5 million) and 51% of the grant proceeds ($4.8 million). In the ISR (mid-2020), the overall
implementation progress and progress toward achievement of the PDO were rated Moderately Satisfactory,
while retaining this improved rating until project closure. The main reason for the extension was to facilitate
the achievement of the PDO, given the delays arising from the disruptions due to COVID-19.

There were 3 PDO indicators which were changed to capture more realistic and clearer
results:

(a) “Number of tools developed by the PPCR for CC adaptation, used by Government institutions”, with a
new end target of 4 tools (vis-à-vis original target of 2 tools, including: irrigation guides/trainings; IRBP
methodologies; forest baselines; ABRO software operationalized);

(b) A change in the unit of measure of project beneficiaries, from individual to family, with new end target of
3,500 families (vis-à-vis original target of 3,000 beneficiaries), due to using the same unit used to monitor
beneficiaries by key government entities in the same project area (ICR, para. 18), although it is not clear in


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



   the ICR why this change was made 6 months prior to project closure;
   and

   (c) The female beneficiary indicator (of 50%) was eliminated due to change of unit of measure of
   beneficiaries, from the individual to family.

   In summary, the main changes during the two restructurings included (ICR, paras. 15-24): (i) reduction in
   counterpart funding requirements; (ii) reduction in target number of direct beneficiaries, followed by a
   subsequent increase in the target, and change of the unit of measurement, from individuals to families; (iii)
   substitution in one of the sub-basins for sub-projects; (iv) adding a national drought monitoring system; (v)
   the number of climate change adaptation tools were increased; (vi) project closing was extended one time,
   for only six months. Accordingly, because these changes did not involve changes in the PDOs, but
   involved increases in the performance targets, which were achieved/exceeded, there was no need to
   undertake a split rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly relevant to addressing the country’s key developmental challenges and
priorities, as well as contributing to the country’s developmental strategies, especially the implementation of
the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR).

Context and Government Strategies: The project contributed to various climate change resilience
commitments and initiatives involving the Government’s strategies and commitments,
including:

(a) Bolivia’s first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Climate Agreement, to include
specific project actions which was intended to promote adaptation to climate
change;

(b) Government’s higher objective of reducing the country’s vulnerability to climate change as stated in its
Patriotic Agenda of 2025 (especially Pillar 9, “Environmental Sovereignty with Integral Development,
Respecting the Right of Mother
Earth”); and

(c) The National Basin Plan, which would: incorporate the improved Integrated River Basin Management
(IRBM) methodology developed by this project; and use the experiences and lessons from this project to
share with farmers and authorities from other river basins in the country, including basins which are
experiencing downstream contamination from Bolivia’s vast mining operations.

Bank Strategy: The project also was and remained highly relevant and aligned with several Bank framework
documents and initiatives, including (based on the ICR, paras. 26-28):

(a) World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (2016 – 2020);


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



               (b) Performance and Learning Review (PLR) completed in 2018, including contributing to: PLR Objective 5
               (“Strengthen Capacity to Manage Climate Change and Reduce Vulnerability to Natural Disasters”); and to
               Pillar 2: Support Environmental Sustainability and Resilience to Climate Change”; contributing to reduced
               poverty by reducing vulnerability to climate change induced economic shocks;

               (c) The on-going (to be completed in FY22) Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Bolivia, which is
               placing emphasis on climate change, and taking an integrated and multi-sectoral approach similar to the
               IRBM approaches promoted by this project and the SPCR; and

               (d) The on-going Bank-wide initiative, “Water Matters: Resilient, Inclusive and Green Growth through Water
               Security in Latin America”.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the implementation of the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience in Bolivia by strengthening the
                             institutional capacity to define the new Integrated River Basin Management (IRBM) approach to climate
                             change adaptation.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. While the project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal
                             Document (PAD), it did not include a theory of change/TOC (and associated results chain) because it was not
                             required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR reconstructed a ToC for the project which highlighted the
                             rationale and strategy for addressing the main constraints to, and core elements of, an integrated river basin
                             management (IRBM) approach to promoting adaptation to climate change (ICR, paras. 31 – 40).

                             The ToC in Figure 1 presents a broad framework based on overall strategies, reflected in associated
                             prioritized project-financed activities/inputs, which would generate outputs/intermediate results leading to the
                             achievement of Objective 1, namely strengthened institutional capacity; in summary, this logic aims to define
                             an enhanced IRBM approach to adaptation to climate change.

                             The prioritized project activities/inputs included: (a) developing a national climate and water information
                             system, supported with the needed studies; (b) integrating adaptation to climate change into the National
                             Development Plan (NDP) and National Guidelines; (c) strengthening capacity/training activities for basin-
                             scale climate resilient planning and management; (d) developing climate resilient river basin management
                             plans; (e) establishing and strengthening the early warning systems for floods and droughts; and (f) updating
                             the hydro-meteorological observation networks. These inputs would generate corresponding outputs and
                             intermediate outcomes, namely: (a) National Climate and Water Information System; (b) NDP, which reflects

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



the coherent integration of adaptation strategies to climate change and prioritized interventions; and (c)
completed climate resilient river basin management plans. These outputs and intermediate results were
expected to generate the core outcome of strengthened institutional capacity to define and operationalize the
new IRBM approach to adaptation to climate change, which would contribute to reduced social, economic and
environmental vulnerability to climate change.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1: original and revised targets during restructurings are
outlined below):

      Key institutions (MPD, MMAyA and SDC) demonstrate a better capacity to understand and take into
         account climate change impacts, through a capacity assessment: Base Line/BL: none; original
         target: yes; actual: yes; actual as % of target: 100%;
        Installed capacities for the operation of the National Climate Change and Water Information System
         and of National Drought Monitoring System: baseline: none; original target: yes; actual: yes; actual as
         % of target: 100%;
        Number of protocols that establish and define the coordination and continuous interchange of hydro-
         meteorological information between the identified relevant institutions: baseline: 0; original target: 3;
         actual: 5; actual as % of target: 167%;
        Website for dissemination of centralized hydro-meteorological data is operational: baseline: none;
         original target: yes; actual: no; actual as % of target: 0%; due to procurement delays;
        Number of IRBM participation mechanisms established: baseline: 0; original target: 2; actual: 2; actual
         as % of target: 100%;
        Number of new rehabilitated hydro-meteorological monitoring stations: baseline: 0; original target: 30;
         revised target (2020): 45; actual: 55; actual as % of revised target: 122%;
        Number of rehabilitated hydro-meteorological monitoring stations: baseline: 0; original target: 20;
         revised target (2020): 5; actual: 5; actual as % of revised target: 100%;
        Number of Operating Drought and Flood Early Warning Systems: baseline: 0; original target: 2;
         revised target (2020)*: yes; actual *: yes; actual as % of revised target: 100%+;
        *Updated the Hydro-meteorological Monitoring System of Reservoirs of Bolivia, the Drought
         Monitoring System, and the System of Seasonal Climate Change Forecasts;
        No. of integrated river basin management plans elaborated with integrated river basin planning
         methodology adopted: baseline: 0; original target: 2; actual: 2; actual as % target: 100%;

Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1: original and revised targets during restructurings are below):

      Adoption by Government (Ministerial Resolution) of Integrated River Basin planning methodology that
       considers climate change scenarios: BL: no; original target: yes; actual: yes; actual as % of target:
       100%;
      Number of tools developed by the Pilot Program for Climate Resistance (PPCR) for climate change
       adaptation, used by Government Institutions: baseline: 0; original target: 2; revised target (2020); 4;
       actual: 4; actual as % of revised target:100%;
      Availability and adequacy of timely and reliable hydrometeorological data, forecasts and climate
       change related studies (measured the increase in target users’ satisfaction: baseline: 0; original
       target: 30; actual: 20.8; actual as % of target: 69%.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



Conclusion: The efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated Substantial because the targets of
the key outputs (and intermediate outcomes) and outcomes were achieved or exceeded, in most of the target
indicators (i.e., 67% of the outcomes; 89% of the key outputs).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the implementation of the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience in Bolivia by supporting its
implementation in three pilot subbasins in the Rio Grande river basin.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Similar to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is reflected in the project’s original
design and in the Theory of Change/TOC reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1). The ToC presents a broad
framework based on overall strategies, reflected in associated project-financed activities, to generate the
outputs/intermediate results, leading to the above objective 2. The prioritized activities/inputs would include:
(a) designing and implementing infrastructure sub-projects in the 3 targeted sub-basins; and (b) designing
and implementing watershed management sub-projects in the 3 target sub-basins. The resulting outputs (and
intermediate outcomes) were expected to include: (a) implemented and completed infrastructure sub-projects
in the target sub-basins; and (b) implemented and completed watershed management sub-projects in the 3
target sub-basins. The resulting outcome was the IRBM approach adopted and implemented in three pilot
sub-basins, which contributed to reduced social, economic and environmental vulnerability to climate change.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1: original and revised targets during restructurings are below):

      Area provided with irrigation and drainage services (ha.): baseline: 0; original target: 3,000; actual:
       3,581; actual as % of target: 119%;
      Additional area protected from erosion (ha): baseline: 0; original target: 20,000; revised target (2020):
       2,300; actual: 2,238; actual as % of revised target: 97%;
      Length of waterways (meters) equipped with new or rehabilitated defensive flood protection
       infrastructure or natural bank stabilization (meters): baseline: 0; original target: 50,000; 1st revised
       target:15,000; 2nd revised target: 1,700; actual: 28,697; actual as % of 2nd revised target: +1,688 %;
      Number of water basin management sub-projects within the pilot river basins financed by
       PPCR: baseline: 0; original target: 40; revised target (2020): 17; Actual: 17; actual as % of revised
       target: 100%;

Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1):

      Number of pilot sub-basins where an Integrated River Basin Management system focused on
       improving climate resilience is operational: baseline: 0; original target: 2; actual: 2; actual as % of
       target: 100% + (also, other development partners applied the new IRBM methodology in other sub-
       basins);



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)




                                   Direct project beneficiaries: baseline: 0; original target: 3,000 (individuals); 1st restructuring target:
                                    1,875 (families); 2nd restructuring target: 3,500 (families); actual: 15,041 (families); actual as % of 2nd
                                    revised target: +430%.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the extent to which the original objectives (which remained the same), and their original
                            and revised targets (arising from the 2 restructurings, including actual estimated direct beneficiaries) were
                            achieved is rated Substantial, for each objective and hence for the project overall. The targets for the
                            main outputs (and associated intermediate outcomes) and outcomes for both objectives were met or
                            exceeded in almost all cases (i.e., 4 of the 5 PDO/outcome indicators and 11 of the 13 output/intermediate
                            result indicators). The ICR provides additional narrative that supports a conclusion of substantial progress
                            toward meeting each of the two objectives with respect to the implementation of the Strategic Program for
                            Climate Resilience, in terms of strengthening institutional capacities of key entities, and achieving climate
                            resilience in three pilot sub-basins. At the same time, there were some significant changes in the definition of
                            the number of direct beneficiaries (3,000 individuals vs. 15,041 families), due largely to the original
                            conservative estimates and the estimated number of direct beneficiaries arising from the expanded irrigation
                            works, which were located near highly populated peri-urban areas.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Overall, the project’s implementation performance and results demonstrated an efficiency rating of Modest,
   based on the following factors/evidence involving economic and administrative efficiency.

   Economic Efficiency: Although there was no ex-ante financial and economic analyses at project appraisal, there
   was a reasonable ex-post internal economic rate of return (IERR) of 12.4% (with IERRs ranging from 12.26 to
   13.01 for the 3 components) based on an unclear methodology and without a sensitivity analysis. According to
   the ICR the average EIRR compared favorably with a national discount rate of 8.4% (ICR, Annex 4). It also
   states that the rate is comparable with “other satisfactory projects in the sector” but without evidence (para.
   55). The ICR noted four institutional-related “complex dynamics” contributed to implementation delays and
   lower use of available funds, namely: (a) multiple Project Implementation Units (PIUs) involving 4 national and
   various regional entities, which added coordination challenges; (b) initial counterpart fund requirements, which
   added administrative and procurement procedures, thereby contributing to completion delays of sub-projects,

                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



and the resulting need to the extend project closing date; (c) high turnover of project staff, resulting from national
and subnational elections and shifts in government priorities and decisions; and (d) local regulations and
restrictions arising from COVID-19, thereby delaying various procurement/bidding activities, and contributing to
a low disbursement rate (US$36.9 million out of US$45.5 million, or 81%).

Administrative Efficiency: According to the ICR, notwithstanding the above-cited implementation challenges,
project management (with Bank support) enabled the project to adapt with “administrative efficiency” (para.
53). Key adaptive interventions mentioned in the ICR included: (a) with the withdrawal of the Department of
Santa Cruz, the project reallocated funds to support a strategic need (i.e., establishing a national drought
monitoring and forecasting system) and substituted the target Pirai sub-basin with the Arque-Tapacari sub-
basin; (b) reducing substantially the counterpart financing requirements and contributions from Government, due
to unforeseen fiscal constraints affecting the participating municipalities and the national government; (c)
managing project activities in the midst of disruptions caused by the pandemic; and (d) a modest extension of
the project, of only an additional 6 months. Nevertheless, the ICR did not provide quantitative evidence of
achieving “administrative efficiency” (e.g., proportion of project cost used for administrative overhead to
implement the project) in the ICR's analysis of efficiency. To the contrary, as noted above, there were
significant inefficiencies in financial management (including delays in counterpart funding) and in procurement,
which together resulted in implementation delays; in addition, a number of activities were not completed before
the project closed (ICR, paras 52, 53 and 54)..

Given these shortcomings, but in particular the complete absence of any information on the
project's administrative costs in the ICR, the project's efficiency is rated modest..


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                12.36
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating is based on the assessment of the 3 dimensions as summarized above, namely:

(a) High Rating for Relevance of Objectives: This rating is reflected by the project’s strong alignment (at
design and during implementation) with: (a) Government’s national and regional policies and strategies to
promote climate resilience and adaptation in specific ways, especially through its strategic sub-basins, which

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



are also contributing to reducing poverty, especially of the rural-based populations relying on the sustainability
of their natural resources; and with the World Bank’s (and other development partners) country partnership
strategies and priorities to address Bolivia’s complex and intensifying climate change challenges;

(b) Substantial Rating for Efficacy: This rating reflects the achievement of most of the performance targets of
the project’s two complementary PDOs, with many targets being exceeded. The ICR provided additional
evidence of other associated benefits; and

(c) Modest Rating for Efficiency: This “modest” rating reflects the various implementation challenges and
resulting delays, and a lack of evidence on the administrative efficiency of the project.

To summarize, in light of the project's minor shortcoming in efficacy, but moderate shortcomings in efficiency,
the project has moderate shortcomings and its overall outcome is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Overall, there is a “Moderate” risk to sustaining the project’s outcomes, based on the following assessment
presented in the ICR (paras. 112 – 114):

(a) the main risk depends largely on the likelihood of sustaining the strengthened capacities of the relevant
entities (national, regional and municipal) and beneficiary community groups. This sustainability will depend
on various factors which are largely within the control of the Government entities and relevant stakeholders,
and which can be “nourished”/reinforced with modest follow-up activities, including: sustaining the results of
the new climate-informed River Basin Plans on drought and flood protection; continued entity support for
implementing and updating periodically the new IRBM approach, and relevant enhanced technologies for
monitoring, predicting and responding to future extreme climate change events;

(b) the ICR correctly highlights the need for sustained actions by relevant entities over the “longer term”,
including the need for: refining/updating periodically the IRBM guidelines; ensuring relevant entities (at
various levels) and their staff provide the needed training, funding and technical services, together with
involving community beneficiary groups, to provide adequate O&M and periodic rehabilitation of: the
infrastructure and watershed management subprojects; hydrometeorological stations; and

(c) encouraging other development partners to continue to adopt, apply and support the new IRBM approach
and PPCR tools, which can provide reinforcing messages and support to the relevant entities and beneficiary
groups.

In summary, based on evidence from the ICR and the follow-up discussion with the Bank’s TTL/ICR author, it
appears that the likelihood of sustaining the project achievements is “moderate”.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The quality-at-entry of this project is rated “Moderately Satisfactory”, based on assessing the following
  six factors and relevant good practices for this type of climate change projects (ICR, paras. 102 – 106):

  (i) The Bank identified climate change as a significant strategic challenge Bolivia’s developmental
  priorities, and placed strategic importance on enhancing climate resilience through supporting the
  implementation of the Government’s Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) (ICR, paras. 3-5);

  (ii) The Bank team, working closely with the Government team, adopted a sound approach to project
  design, including the following good practice principles: integrated, multi-sectoral, participatory basin-
  scale approach including strong multi-stakeholder engagement and coordination. However, these
  arrangements were complex, and their achievement contributed to project implementation delays;

  (iii) The Project’s Results Framework was strongly aligned with the relevant developmental objectives,
  appropriate indicators and targets. During implementation, a few indicators and targets were revised,
  generally upwards, to become clearer and more realistic, including dropping the gender indicator (to
  reflect “family” as the relevant beneficiary measure), (ICR, para. 67);

  (iv) The Bank identified substantial risks for project implementation, and together with Government,
  included adequate measures to mitigate these risks. Despite these mitigation actions, as mentioned in
  Section 4 above, project implementation was slow and delayed for various reasons explained in the ICR
  (para. 69);

  (v) The design of the project's M&E system was poor, for reasons stated in Section 9, and where the
  Bank could have played a more positive role; and

  (vi) The project's readiness to undertake effective and timely financial management and procurement
  activities was weak (with further details cited under Section 10 (b)).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was rated Moderately Satisfactory, based on candid evidence presented in the
 ICR (paras. 107 – 110), other relevant project documentation (including ISRs, MTR report, project
 evaluation study, and IEG evaluator’s discussion with the Project’s TTL/ICR main author. There are 4
 aspects to highlight:

 (i) According to the ICR the World Bank project team provided adequate supervision inputs for the
 achievement of development outcomes and stable implementation performance, including: (a) appropriate
 and timely advice to project counterparts, addressing issues involving compliance with the Bank’s
 procurement and financial management requirements, associated delays with disbursements and

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



 strengthening the project’s M&E system (paragraphs 54, 108 – 110); (b) guidance during two project
 restructurings, to enable achievement of project outcomes and improved performance, including actions to
 improve disbursements. At the same time, Bank supervision cost was lower than the preparation cost,
 suggesting that the World Bank team could have spent more time providing relevant implementation
 advice/assistance (ICR, para. 107).

 (ii) According to the ICR, the World Bank team provided adequate support to counterparts on
 compliance/fiduciary issues during project implementation, including compliance with World Bank policies
 on procurement and financial management (ICR, para. 88); candid project ratings, including moderately
 unsatisfactory” for almost two years; provision of adequate details and agreed recommended actions
 outlined in the regular mission Aide Memoires; engagement of Bank management and senior level
 Government officials, as needed (ICR, para. 66).

 (iii) The World Bank team conducted regular supervision mission about every six months, prior to travel
 restrictions introduced with COVID-19. After early 2020 virtual meetings were conducted on a bi-weekly
 and monthly basis to ensure timely assessments and implementation assistance by multi-disciplinary Bank
 teams, to provide appropriate, quality and timely implementation support, and project documentation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PPCR Program Coordinating Unit (UCP-PPCR) was designated in the PAD to have overall
 responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation (para 40). The M&E system experienced various
 challenges because of design issues:

 The project had five PDO indicators. Three for institutional strengthening to define the new IRBM approach
 and two for implementation of the new IRBM approach in pilot sub-basins. The ICR comments that the
 results framework provided no baselines or zero baselines for these indicators, reaching the conclusion
 that this would not allow for "an attributable evaluation" of the project's achievements, However for most of
 the PDO indicators no baseline or a zero baseline was appropriate. For example, for river basins where
 the IRBM approach had not been introduced the baseline was zero. For most of the PDO indicators there
 were output and intermediate outcome indicators which in line with the theory of change established an
 expected results chain toward the achievement of the PDO as measured by the PDO indicators.

 For one of the PDO indicators ("direct project beneficiaries") the initial definition of beneficiaries (i.e.
 individuals) was not suitable for practical monitoring, requiring a change in the unit of measure. The




                                                                                                         Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



 change from “count of individuals” to “count of families” was introduced at the first restructuring which also
 meant that the sub-indicator "count of women beneficiaries" had to be dropped.

 Five additional Pilot Program for Climate Resistance (PPCR) indicators were included at the project design
 stage. Two of them, namely "Degree of integration of climate change into national planning" and the
 "Evidence of strengthened government capacity and coordination mechanism to mainstream climate
 resilience" enabled the measurement of progressive improvement in the inclusion of climate change in
 national planning and strengthening of government capacities and coordination mechanisms, to
 achieve enhanced resilience to climate change. According to the ICR additional indicators assessed the
 emerging impacts of the implementation of the PPCR project based on the review of the project, monitoring
 reports, and interviews conducted with key stakeholders. This additional information on the project's
 results supplemented the PDO indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR asserted that the Project’s monitoring data were collected and analyzed in a sound manner
  (para 85). The UCP-PPCR, responsible for data collection, mostly followed the methodology and the
  frequency of data collection as specified in the PAD, but altered reporting frequency for several
  indicators. When the monitoring methodology was not followed, it affected the project’s ability to compare
  results indicators during implementation. This reflected a weakness in the design and implementation of
  the project's M&E system.



c. M&E Utilization
  The monitoring data on performance and results progress was used to inform project management and
  decision making. Using the Project's monitoring network, the validation methods used for collected data
  as well as the feedback mechanisms, project management could identify the major issues, including: (i)
  the initially slow roll-out of IRBM subprojects reflected in low disbursement rates; (ii) replacement of the
  Piraí sub-basin due to the exit of Santa Cruz; (iii) changes in the project implementation timeline
  reflected in the six months extension of the closing date, due largely to the COVID-19 pandemic; (iv)
  alignment of the targets of the result indicators; almost all of them were achieved upon completion at or
  above the original targets. Overall, the PDO and intermediate result indicators were changed to more
  realistic target levels, although the basis for revising the direct beneficiary target was not clear in the
  ICR, nor was it clearly explained by the Bank project team in an exchange with IEG.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



The project was classified as an environmental category “B” project (partial assessment), and triggered the
following Bank safeguard policies (ICR, paras. 95 – 101; information provided below where available):

(i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Component 3 included small-scale infrastructure subprojects
that improved climate resilience in the Rio Grande River Basin with potential short-term, limited, localized,
manageable, and reversible negative environmental impacts, such as soil erosion, water and soil pollution,
loss of vegetation, generation of waste (plastic), pesticide poisoning, and pesticide residues in the food
chain;

(ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04);

(iii) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09);

(iv) Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10): It was triggered because about 40% of the 1.7 million people living in the
sub-basins of Mizque and Pirai identify themselves as indigenous. Accordingly, an Indigenous People
Planning Framework was prepared. No sub-projects were implemented in indigenous territories, mainly
because interventions were prioritized in basins where there were several degraded areas. Therefore, there
was no need to prepare specific Indigenous People Plans.

(v) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11);

(vi) The Involuntary Resettlement operational policy (OP/BP 4.12) WAS (??) was triggered because some
of the subprojects of Component 3 may require the use of land, but no physical displacement was expected
due to the nature and very limited scope of these subprojects;

(vii) Forest (OP/BP 4.36);

(viii) Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37);

(ix) The International Waterways Safeguard (O.P. 7.50) was triggered because the Project was going to
finance irrigation and flood protection infrastructure subprojects in tributary basins of the Mamoré River, an
international watercourse that flows from Bolivia to Brazil. However, the notification of other riparian States
was waived because the proposed subprojects would not adversely change the quality or quantity of water
flows to other riparians, they would not cause harm to other riparians; and the water use by the other
riparians would not be adversely affected.

During project preparation, the implementing agency, UCP-PPCR, prepared an Environmental Management
Framework (EMF), as the specific subprojects were not identified. The EMF defines and provides tools to
manage potential environmental impacts in compliance with safeguards, and includes provisions for key
implementation entities (SDC and FPS) to manage environmental aspects in sub-projects. The EMF was
used to conduct local consultations, which were publicly disclosed (August 2013). During a mission in
March 2019, the need to harmonize environmental management instruments between FPS and SDC was
identified. In July 2020, the UCP-PPCR updated the FPS environmental management worksheets in the
EMF that were implemented since 2017.

The UCP-PPCR included an environmental specialist in the project team to coordinate and consolidate the
work of and reports from the environmental specialists from SDS and FPS, who had one environmental
specialist each.


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



  The grievance and redress mechanism (GRM) was effective during the project lifetime. The Communal
  Book, a local open record of ongoing development activities, was the main mechanism used to receive
  complaints, suggestions, and questions from project-affected people in the implementation of infrastructure
  subprojects. In addition, the project implementing agencies provided their phone numbers to the
  communities, providing a good option during the COVID period.

  Overall, the ICR provides evidence that the project was in compliance with the Bank’s environmental
  safeguard policies/guidelines, and with the EMF (ICR, para. 99).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management: The Project demonstrated adequate financial management/FM arrangements,
  which provided reasonable assurance that grant and loan proceeds were used for the intended purposes
  and whereby FM requirements were fulfilled throughout most of the implementation period. The
  arrangements provided reliability in the financial statements, as well as the effectiveness of internal control
  by management, as well as internal and external audits. Other supporting evidence included:

  - there were two project agencies (MMAyA and FPS) which executed the financial management
  tasks/outputs, including their Integrated Financial Management System and reconciliation of the project
  accounts and individual audit reports;

  - FM qualification was mostly “moderately satisfactory” as reported in the Bank’s ISRs, and the FM risk
  was rated between modest and substantial during project implementation (for further details, see ICR,
  para. 90);

  - The high turnover of MMAyA’s financial management staff, the project’s complex institutional processes
  and the low capacity of executing agencies hindered the timely preparation of financial information. As a
  result, delays occurred in the process of decision making of the Project activities;

  - At the time of finalizing the Project’s ICR, the submission of one final audit report and the return to the
  Bank of non-executed funds remain pending.

  (ii) Procurement: Based on evidence presented in the ICR (and the project’s ISRs), procurement for the
  project was carried out in line with the provisions stipulated in the Loan and Grant Agreements, and the
  various procurement guidelines of the Bank. Overall, procurement responsibilities were handled in a
  satisfactory manner; during implementation, ISR ratings for procurement fluctuated from “satisfactory” to
  “moderately satisfactory”. Various procurement-related challenges arising during implementation included
  (ICR, para. 94):

  - There were some delays in procurement processes due to legal review requirements based on national
  procedures;

  - There was limited capacity in contract management. The Bank team made efforts to train the staff of the
  implementation agencies, with respect to strengthen their capacities to manage procurement procedures;



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



  - The use of the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) improved over the last period
  of project implementation;

  - The implementation agencies’ procurement teams managed hard and digital document files;

  - The contract execution records were only partially included in the STEP;

  - During the implementation, Procurement Post Review was carried out, and no ineligible contracts nor
  serious issues were found that would be considered fraud or corruption; and

  - A major issue in Procurement during implementation was the high turnover of agencies’ staff.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR highlighted 3 main unintended positive impacts of the projects, as follows (ICR, paras. 60 – 62):

  (i) Enhanced coordination between local governments (para. 60): The project-based agreements with local
  governments helped to establish new coordination and exchange platforms to delegate the maintenance of
  the hydrometeorological stations. Additionally, the technical stakeholder platforms of each subbasin helped
  to generate buy-in and ownership across local governments for the new IRBM approach. This will enhance
  the prospects for ensuring adequate O&M of the various investments and project activities;

  (ii) Wide adoption of the IRBM approach and enhanced development partner coordination (para. 61): The
  participatory, climate-informed IRBM approach has been applied in other river basins in Bolivia, supported
  by development partners such as the German Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ), the
  Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and the Swiss Agency for Development
  and Cooperation (COSUDE). Further, Japan’s International Cooperation Agency (JICA) helped with
  activities related to water quality control in the Rocha Basin. Again, this support will contribute to enhanced
  sustainability; and

  (iii) Opportunities for synergies were utilized (para. 62): COSUDE, through HELVETAS, an independent
  Swiss development organization, designed the first version of ARI (Investment Resilience Analysis); the
  project, based on this model, developed a specific instrument for irrigation considering infrastructure and
  production aspects. Based on this improvement, HELVETAS in agreement with the Government,
  developed specific instruments for other sectors like transport.



d. Other
  The ICR highlighted 3 other positive aspects contributed by the project: gender, institutional strengthening
  and coordination, and poverty reduction/shared prosperity. While recognizing some attribution challenges
  with respect to the precise role and contributions of this project to these broad topics, the nature/scope of
  these “other” benefits are summarized below, based on evidence presented in the ICR (paras. 57 – 62):

  (i) Gender (ICR, para. 57): A major conclusion is that rural women have benefitted from the project
  activities. Rural women rely more than rural men on ecosystem services for their energy needs, livelihoods,
  and food security, as they are often heavily involved in agricultural production and the management of

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



   natural resources (based on various cross-country empirical studies, including from FAO sources). Climate
   change causes more frequent extreme weather events, such as floods and droughts, leading to crop failure
   and degradation of natural resources. Since the project activities improved adaptive capacity to climate
   change at the national and local level, an outcome is improved adaptive capacity of rural women. While the
   gender-specific beneficiary sub-indicator was removed due to monitoring constraints, the project continued
   to focus on women beneficiaries of the subprojects. Using the female proportion from 2012 census data
   (50.14 percent), FPS estimated 1,827 women beneficiaries of 62 completed irrigation and drainage projects.
   Likewise, SDC estimated 4,729 women beneficiaries of the IRBM subprojects in the Department of
   Cochabamba;

   (ii) Institutional Strengthening and Enhanced Coordination (ICR, para. 58): One of the main conclusions of
   the ICR is that the project strengthened institutional capacities of key entities to adapt to climate change. As
   defined in the PDO, the project strengthened institutional capacity to define and implement an integrated,
   climate-resilient, river basin management approach. The setup of inter-agency coordination mechanisms,
   the improvement of the hydrometeorological information system, and the use of PPCR tools and knowledge
   enhanced Bolivia’s institutional capacity to comprehend and appropriately respond to the increasingly
   relevant climate change challenges. For example, the project established five interoperability protocols
   between SENAMHI and relevant institutions, leading to strengthened coordination and continued exchange
   of hydro-meteorological data, which is critical for climate-informed river basin management. The ICR also
   adds that the country’s capacity to adapt to climate change was evaluated through specific project-
   supported workshops to capture information from stakeholder representatives. The IEG evaluator
   discussion with the Bank’s team confirmed the usefulness of these workshops, which provide reliable
   evidence, mostly of a qualitative nature (TBC in the forthcoming discussion); and

   (iii) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (ICR, para. 59): The project contributed to reducing extreme
   poverty and promoting shared prosperity for the following reasons: (a) the poor and vulnerable groups, such
   as women, children and the elderly are the most vulnerable to climate change impacts, which were
   addressed by the project activities; (b) project beneficiaries of the infrastructure and watershed
   management subprojects are primarily part of the rural population, which has almost twice the poverty rate
   than the urban population in Bolivia; and (c) the subprojects have helped the beneficiaries to develop
   adaptive capacities to the adverse impacts of climate change.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)




The ICR presents five lessons arising from this project (ICR, paras. 115 – 119). This review
highlights the two most relevant lessons, which could be applicable to other countries/similar type of
projects.

Lesson 1: Importance of establishing and strengthening strategic alliances among key
stakeholders, especially for complex projects (ICR, para. 117): At the time of preparation and
early stages of implementation, the project used only a few alliance-building instruments. During
implementation, the project developed and used additional formal and informal alliances, with
different stakeholders, which contributed to project performance. Para. 117 provides 3 positive
examples of effective alliances, together with their tangible results. The lesson from this project
is: "Work out and ensure strong alliances at the project design stage with relevant stakeholders (and
not only Government actors), and to “nourish” these alliances during implementation, using various
project activities".

Lesson 2: Relevance of formulating and implementing a clear strategy to achieve sustainable
project results (ICR, para. 118): This project, especially involving a strong capacity-building
orientation, illustrates the importance of ensuring a clear and sound strategy for achieving the
proposed strategic PDOs and project sustainability, from the project design stage, and throughout
project implementation, notwithstanding some shortcomings in the PDOs for this project. The ICR
shares a positive example of how the project-supported network of installed hydrometeorological
stations was sustained through shared responsibilities among the relevant entities. In this instance,
SENAMHI used its expertise in the design of the network and selection of stations, whereas the
participating municipal governments committed to the maintenance of the network. These shared
arrangements ensured that: (i) quality data are accessible and shared between participating entities;
and (ii) the stations are in continuous operation. Accordingly, this project highlights the lesson of the
importance of ensuring appropriate collaborative arrangements and supportive mechanisms for the
sustainability of O&M requirements of relevant project activities (e.g., in this project, the
arrangements for various monitoring activities and the extensive investments in infrastructure for
IRBM sub-projects).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This review rates the quality of the ICR as Modest. The ICR is: reasonably concise; structured clearly,
consistent with the ICR guidelines; and provides a reconstructed Theory of Change/ToC, albeit with some
shortcomings. The ICR also included a detailed description of the institution building and the development of
plans for improved river basin management. While the quality of evidence on the project's physical
achievements appear to be sound, the ICR's basis for the estimated internal rate of return for the project in
Annex 4 is not clear. In addition, the evidence on the number of beneficiaries from integrated river basin
management in the three pilot river basins (arguably the project's most important outcome indicator) was


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)



inconsistent in the ICR because the unit for the measurement of beneficiaries was changed substantially during
project implementation, and with unclear explanation (see below).

The following six aspects weakened the clarity and quality of the ICR:

(i) The Theory of Change (ToC) did not include explicit outputs, showing only “intermediate results". Making a
clear distinction between these two levels of results (as was done in Annex 1B of the ICR) would
have improved and added clarity to the TOC (Figure 1). A concise narrative on the TOC, to highlight the key
aspects and inter-linkages in the results chain would have been a useful complement to Figure 1;

(ii) The derivation of the project’s estimated economic rate of return was unclear and without a sensitivity
analysis. In addition, there was no quantitative evidence on how “the project was able to adapt with
administrative efficiency” (ICR, para. 53 and Annex 4);

(iii) The project made a significant change in one of the key PDO indicators regarding the number of “direct
project beneficiaries” within six months of the project’s closing date. The change was from an original target of
3,000 individuals, to a revised target of 3,500 families, without providing a clear and convincing explanation for
this late change (ICR, para. 18). In the event the final number of families was recorded as 15,041, a four-fold
increase above the target set only six months before the project closed. Following questions from IEG, the
Bank’s project team provided an explanation (cited in Section 9c of this review), but with a tenuous rationale;

(iv) Inadequate explicit and clear information on the priority actions to address the project’s main risks (ICR,
paras. 112-114), especially with respect to the lack of information on the Government’s commitments and
funding for ensuring sustainability of project activities and benefits (e.g., the O&M of various monitoring
instruments and of the infrastructure and IRMB sub-projects funded by this operation);

(v) There was a lack of clarity in the articulation of lessons from the project that could provide a rationale
for effective and sustainable scaling-up of the project’s activities in Bolivia for other river basins, or for similar
projects in other countries (ICR, para. 115-119). The main shortcomings were that the text for many ”lessons”
focused on problems rather than lessons on how to address those problems.

(vi) Incomplete assessment of the project’s compliance with the various environmental and social safeguard
policies triggered for this project. While the Environmental Management Framework and several other
safeguards were in compliance, the compliance of another five safeguards was not assessed in the ICR (paras.
95 – 101).

While some strengths in the ICR are recognized, in light of the shortcomings mentioned above this review rates
the quality of the ICR as "modest".



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                         Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BO PPCR Phase 2 - Basin Management (P129640)




                                                                            Page 21 of 21
