     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022836

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P151442                                      LS-Social Assistance Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Lesotho                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58340,IDA-59320                          30-May-2020                                        39,850,325.01

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2016                                  30-Jun-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             20,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          39,929,132.68                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                            Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5), the objective was "to support the Recipient in improving the
   efficiency and equity of selected Social Assistance Programs."

   At a 2016 restructuring and Additional Financing (AF), the objective was revised to: "support the Government
   of Lesotho in improving the efficiency, equity, and shock responsive function of selected Social Assistance
   Programs and, in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



   said Eligible Crisis or Emergency." This ICR Review will therefore perform a spilt rating. At the time of the
   restructuring, US$1.49 million, or 3.7% of total Bank financing, had been disbursed.

   Several outcome targets were revised at other restructurings, but as they were overall adjusted upward, no
   additional split rating is required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Dec-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project initially contained two components:

   1. Strengthening administrative efficiency and equity of the selected social assistance programs
   (appraisal: US$15 million; AF US$15.5 million; actual US$23.2 million). This component was to reimburse a
   portion of eligible expenditure line items, with disbursements triggered by verified achievement of agreed
   specific results (disbursement-linked indicators, DLIs) in improving administrative efficiency and equity.
   Social assistance programs were to be considered eligible for inclusion based on the existence of robust
   fiduciary arrangements. At project start, two programs -- the Child Grant Program (CGP, a human
   development-linked poverty targeted program for poor households with children under age 18) and Orphan
   and Vulnerable Children Bursary Program (OVC-B, a scholarship program for OVCs under 18 enrolled in
   secondary school) -- qualified. Other programs anticipated for eligibility included the Post Primary Bursary
   Program (PPB, a scholarship program for OVC with proven academic achievement), Public Assistance
   Program (PA, a poverty alleviation transfers program for those under age 70), and Old Age Pension (OAP,
   a universal non-contributory pension for all citizens over the age of 70). Results were to be organized
   around two results areas that corresponded with the project's objectives -- improved administrative
   efficiency of social assistance programs, and improved equity of social assistance programs -- with DLIs
   sequenced to support critical actions and inputs by project year (PAD, pp. 11-12). It was assumed that
   achievements in the area of efficiency would generate the necessary fiscal savings to finance the desired
   results related to equity, especially in terms of expansion of coverage.

   At the AF, the component was renamed to "Strengthening administrative efficiency, equity, and shock
   responsive function of the selected social assistance programs." The amounts allocated to some DLIs were
   increased with the aim of building capacity to scale up, in terms of both population covered and benefit
   amounts, in the event of a shock. The allocation to some other DLIs was increased to further incentivize
   efficiency results for the OAP.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



  2. Implementation support (appraisal: US$ 5 million; AF US$4.5 million; actual US$16.8 million). This
  component was to contain investments necessary to overcome the main constraints in terms of capacity,
  implementation, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of results supported by the first component, and to
  support the design and implementation of a pilot of livelihood enhancement activities among beneficiaries of
  social assistance programs to further households' income generating capacity in the medium and long term.
  It contained three sub-components. The first sub-component was to provide direct technical assistance and
  investment in support of achievement of DLIs under Component 1, including interventions in both results
  areas: for improved administrative efficiency, to improve coordination and harmonized delivery of social
  assistance programs, strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Social Development (MoSD),
  and consolidate the OVC-B and PPB programs; and for increased equity, to expand the registry of poor
  households through the National Information System for Social Assistance (NISSA), improve the targeting
  mechanism for OVC and PA, and expand coverage of the CGP. The second sub-component was to support
  the above-mentioned livelihoods pilot, aiming to bridge the gap between social assistance beneficiaries and
  the existing supply of programs that can help them increase their productive potential, gradually generating
  the necessary foundation for households' graduation from social assistance. The third sub-component was
  to support project management, including a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) housed in the Department of
  Planning and Information of the MoSD.

  At the AF, the component was renamed "Support for implementation and crisis response," with additional
  funds allocated to direct financing of emergency top-ups in the last quarter of 2016 and first two quarters of
  2017; expansion of NISSA; and support for resilience-strengthening social protection interventions,
  primarily the pilot of livelihood enhancement activities for vulnerable households.

  3. Inclusion of a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0). This component
  was added at the AF in accordance with OP10.00, paragraphs 12 and 13, to help improve response times
  in future situations where urgent assistance is needed.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was initially to be financed by a US$20 million International Development Association (IDA)
  investment credit, disbursed against achievement of DLIs using a results-based financing approach for the
  first component, and using a traditional investment project financing approach for the second component.
  The initial financing plan called for an additional US$7 million in financing of the first component by the
  government, for a total original project cost of US$27 million.

  The project was approved on June 3, 2016 and became effective on July 12, 2016. AF of US$20 million
  was approved in December 2016 and became effective in February 2017. The credits, totaling US$40
  million, were fully disbursed. The government delivered emergency cash assistance to vulnerable families in
  response to the 2016 drought; these costs were reimbursed to the government through the AF. The
  project underwent five restructurings:

        December 6, 2016: In addition to the AF and revision of objectives and components, the targets for
         some outcomes and DLIs were revised upward, and there were changes to disbursement
         arrangements, legal covenants, and financial management.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



         November 19, 2019: One DLI was shifted to be an outcome indicator, and other DLIs were adjusted
          and simplified. The livelihoods pilot was dropped due to implementation delays and the cancellation
          of the follow-on Lesotho Livelihoods Project, which the pilot had been meant to inform.
         January 17, 2020: In response to a drought emergency declaration in October 2019, the project
          reallocated US$7.4 million from selected DLIs to finance emergency cash transfers to about 38,000
          vulnerable households affected by the crisis. One outcome target was increased, and some DLIs
          were adjusted.
         March 14, 2020: The project's closing date was extended from May 30, 2020 to November 30, 2020
          because of the drought emergency.
         October 20, 2020: The closing date was again extended due to the drought emergency, and to allow
          full achievement of all DLIs. The project closed on June 30, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were highly relevant to country context and government strategy. At the time of appraisal,
57.1% of Lesotho's population lived below the basic needs poverty line, and 84% of the population was
considered vulnerable to poverty. Frequent and severe droughts put a significant portion of the population
at risk of food insecurity. The government was spending around 4.5% of gross domestic product (GDP) on
social assistance programs, nearly three times the sub-Saharan African average (1.7%). Spending had
generally increased at a faster pace than inflation in the preceding five years. The two largest programs in
terms of spending, the OAP and School Feeding (which provides school meals to all children attending
public primary schools), made up about three-quarters of all social assistance spending. According to the
PAD (p. 3), the social protection system was characterized by lack of overall vision, weak capacity,
fragmentation, duplication, and inefficient delivery systems. The six main programs were implemented by
four different ministries without an overall guiding framework. Poverty targeting mechanisms were unclear
or highly discretionary. For categorical programs, eligibility verification processes were prone to fraud and
error due to lack of cross checks and other adequate verification mechanisms. Beneficiary records were
paper-based and often unavailable, and systems for case management were weak or non-existent.
Payments were generally cash-based and relied on expensive processes. Overall, these programs varied
greatly in their effectiveness in reaching the poor; about half of households in the bottom two quintiles
reported receiving no social assistance at all. The only exception to these shortcomings was the CGP,
which used an objective poverty targeting methodology linked to an electronic beneficiary database.

In 2012, the government created the MoSD to be in charge of social protection (and to run three of the six
main programs, the CGP, OVC, and PA), and to implement a National Social Protection Strategy (NSPS)
that was officially launched in February 2015. The NSPS pillars are to establish coherent and progressive
social protection synergies by ensuring strong positive linkages with other ministries and key stakeholders;
integrate and harmonize operational systems for the effective implementation of social protection programs;
and strengthen the implementation of core social protection programs aimed at reducing vulnerabilities
throughout the life-course. The NSPS identifies the NISSA, a social registry that contains social-economic
information on households and a targeting tool for identifying poor households, as the backbone of the
social protection system.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



               The government recognized that considerable fiscal space was already devoted to social protection. The
               key feature of the reform plan, as embodied in the NSPS, was to achieve fiscal savings by improving the
               efficiency of social assistance interventions; these savings were to be used to increase the coverage of
               poverty targeted programs, improving targeting accuracy and equity.

               The project was also highly relevant to Bank strategy at appraisal and closing. It was fully aligned with the
               Bank's Country Assistance Strategy at the project preparation stage (FY2010-14), which recognized the
               development of a social protection strategy as a key priority, and with the Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for FY2016-19, in draft as the project was being approved, which identified modernization of the
               public sector through improved efficiency and effectiveness as a key development priority. The CPF
               FY2016-19 had a strategic objective to improve the targeting and coverage of the poorest by social
               assistance programs. This objective was revised at the time of the 2019 Performance and Learning Review
               to "improve the risk responsiveness and equity of the social assistance system," maintaining the alignment
               of the objectives to Bank strategy after the AF. The project team confirmed that, as of February 2022, the
               next CPF remains under preparation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the efficiency of selected Social Assistance Programs

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that improved administrative and delivery processes of the OAP,
                             consolidation of OVC programs, improved coordination of all social assistance programs, and strengthened
                             capacity of the MoSD would lead to increased efficiency of social assistance programs, measured primarily
                             by the removal of ineligible beneficiaries from the OAP roster. The key critical assumptions underlying this
                             theory of change included: a stable political, governance, and macroeconomic situation; independence of
                             social assistance programs from political influences; adequate institutional capacity to handle the technical
                             and operational challenges of project design and implementation; and productive cooperation among
                             stakeholders.



                             Outputs




                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



The Social Protection Technical Committees for Childhood and Old Age met twice, as planned. The Social
Protection Policy Committee met annually, as planned.

The percentage of OVC-B and CGP beneficiary children who hold a unique identification number provided by
Home Affairs increased from zero in 2016 to 51% in 2021, not meeting the target of 70%. 80% of OAP
beneficiaries have a national identification number, meeting the target.

CGP and OVC-B modules were developed for the NISSA. According to the ICR (p. 56), PA modules were
under development at the time of the ICR. This partially met the target of an integrated management
information system for the CGP, OVC-B, and PA having been developed, deployed, and made fully
operational. Delays were due to slow issuance of the support contract to complete all the modules. According
to the ICR (p. 23), the PA is still mainly self-targeted through applications that are submitted and assessed at
the district level, though new PA beneficiaries are now drawn from the NISSA.

Two cross checks were carried out between the OAP database and civil service pension database, as
planned. All accounts in the OAP had a proof-of-life verification in late 2019-early 2020, and 100% of
pensioners on the June 2021 paylist were seen in person. The OAP information system was upgraded to
require pensioners to be seen in person once per year moving forward.

Progress was made toward the development of a new secure payment system, with pilots implemented in
some districts and data cleaning ongoing at the time of the ICR. The ICR (p. 57) reported that the percentage
of payments to CGP and PA made through the unified payment system increased from zero in 2016 to 100%
in 2021, exceeding the target of 75%, but with the caveat that the 100% achievement is an overstatement, as
around 12,000 PA beneficiaries are still paid manually due to targeting differences with CGP beneficiaries.

The percentage of citizens reporting satisfaction with the administration of social assistance programs was
65% in 2021, exceeding the target of 50%. The percentage of beneficiaries reporting satisfaction was 84% in
2021, exceeding the target of 70%. No baseline information was provided, and therefore the project's impact
on citizen and beneficiary satisfaction is not known.



Outcomes



The number of non-eligible beneficiaries eliminated from the OAP roster rose from a baseline of zero in
2016 to 18,806 in 2021, exceeding the target of 15,000. The ICR (p. 50) noted that this was a net indicator of
beneficiaries taken off the program, which shrunk from about 85,000 beneficiaries at baseline to 79,000 at
closure. No information was provided on programs other than the OAP.



Due to demonstrated progress in removing ineligible beneficiaries from the OAP roster, as well as partial
consolidation of other programs into a single information system and progress toward the use of secure digital
payment systems, achievement of the objective to improve the efficiency of social assistance programs is
rated Substantial.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the equity of selected Social Assistance Programs

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that, in addition to the interventions described under the first
objective, an expansion of the registry of poor households through NISSA, harmonized targeting, and
expanded coverage of the poverty-targeted CGP would lead to improved equity of social assistance
programs, measured primarily by a larger proportion of households from the poorest two quintiles receiving
CGP and PA.



Outputs



The NISSA-Community-Based Targeting (CBT) registry covered 75% of rural community councils by project
closure, as planned, and was also rolled out to 50% of urban districts. According to the ICR (p. 28), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) directly financed the NISSA rollout exercise.

The percentage of new beneficiaries of PA and OVC-B who were selected using harmonized targeting
procedures increased from zero in 2016 to 100% for OVC-B in 2021, and remained at zero for PA, not
meeting the target of 100%. The project team further explained that the PA has not had funding to expand to
new beneficiaries for several years, but that when an existing beneficiary leaves the program, a new one from
the NISSA-CBT waiting list is added on; therefore, an unspecified number of new beneficiaries have been
selected using NISSA-CBT.

Recertification of existing beneficiaries of OVC-B and PA using harmonized targeting procedures was
reported as "in progress" (ICR, p. 61), having started in 2021. This did not reach the target of 100%
recertification.



Outcomes



The number of beneficiaries of safety net programs (unconditional cash transfers, including the CGP and
OAP programs, calculated as the number of households receiving CGP multiplied by the average number of

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



persons per household, plus the number of pensioners receiving the OAP) increased from 185,000 in 2016 to
380,794 in 2021, exceeding the original target of 200,000 and the revised target of 222,000. The number of
female beneficiaries of safety net programs increased from 92,500 in 2016 to 198,240 in 2021, exceeding the
original target of 100,000 and the revised target of 111,000.

The number of direct project beneficiaries rose from 100,000 in 2016 to 144,000 in 2021, exceeding the
original target of 115,000 and the revised target of 137,000. The project team explained that this indicator
counted the number of recipients of the CGP, as that was the core program supported by the project's system
strengthening activities, and that there were 100,000 CGP beneficiaries when the project started. The
percentage of beneficiaries who are female remained steady at 51%, meeting the target.

The percentage of households receiving CGP that are in the poorest two quintiles of the population was 65%
in 2016 and 63.9% in 2017, not achieving the original target of 75% or the revised target of 70% (set in
November 2019). The ICR (p. 52) noted that newer household data was not available because of pandemic-
related delays in conducting a new round of household surveys (now scheduled for 2022/23). The percentage
of households receiving PA that are in the poorest two quintiles of the population was 56% in 2016 and 64%
in 2017, essentially achieving the target of 65%. The ICR (p. 53) noted that more recent data is not available.

The ICR (pp. 26-32) provided additional evidence beyond the project's results framework in an attempt to
demonstrate project-attributable improvements in equity of social assistance programming. Over 23,000
households were added to the CGP in response to droughts in 2016 and 2019, nearly doubling the program's
coverage to over 50,000 households total; 27,000 households received top-up payments in 2017 in response
to the 2016 drought; and more than 40,000 households received top-up payments in 2020 in response to the
2019 drought. All new households added to the CGP during the project period were selected using the NISSA
targeting tool, and only households classified as "poor" or "ultra-poor" were eligible; according to the ICR, only
22% of households currently receiving CGP were selected before NISSA was put in place and therefore were
not subject to rigorous poverty targeting. It is therefore likely that the share of households receiving the
expanded CGP who are in the poorest 40% of the population increased between 2017 and 2021.

As the ICR noted (p. 29), overall social assistance transfers reduced the poverty headcount rate by about
6.5%, the poverty gap by 21.9%, and the Gini coefficient by 7.8%. However, it is noteworthy that the CGP and
PA programs account for a small fraction of overall poverty reduction; the CGP has a relatively stronger
impact on inequality due to its targeting, but its benefit level is insufficient for the poorest households to cross
the poverty line, and at 50,000 households, it covers only about one-quarter of all poor households with
children (ICR, p. 35). The OAP has the most impact on both poverty and inequality due to its high level of
benefit and relatively large coverage (see table below). The ICR (p. 28) argued that the project-supported
removal of ineligible OAP pensioners allowed the system to enroll more eligible persons, increasing the equity
of the OAP, but no data were presented to demonstrate the extent to which this actually occurred, and the
ICR (p. 31) later noted that the OAP does not attempt to screen out the non-poor. The ICR (p. 31) also
observed that poor households are more likely to benefit from all social assistance programs (with the
exception of OVC-B), but again, it did not demonstrate how project-supported interventions contributed to or
improved specific program targeting other than the CGP.

Simulated poverty impact associated with social protection programs, percent (World Bank, Lesotho Social
Protection Programs and Systems Review, Table 14, p. 38); data from 2016/17 household survey

                 Reduction in poverty           Reduction in inequality
Program
                 (percentage points)            (percentage points)

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)




OAP              3.5                            4.4
School feeding   1.9                            1.8
Seasonal
                 0.5                            0.5
employment
CGP              0.2                            0.5
PA               0.1                            0.1
OVC-B            0.1                            0.1
Tertiary
                 0.1                            0.1
bursaries



The ICR (Table 5, p. 30) also presented data indicating that the CGP, PA, and OAP programs had relatively
larger impact effectiveness (the ratio between the inequality or poverty reduction that the program achieves
compared with the inequality or poverty reduction it could achieve if all its budget were distributed in the most
progressive possible way) and spending effectiveness (how much less could be spent to attain a
given inequality or poverty measure with perfect distribution of program benefits) than other social assistance
programs, but no information was provided on how project-supported interventions contributed to these
results.



Achievement of this objective is rated Modest. The ICR demonstrated that the project's support contributed to
improved beneficiary selection and targeting of the CGP, but the percentage of households receiving CGP
who are in the poorest two quintiles receded from the baseline to 2017/18, no information was provided on
the project's specific impact on other programs, and the magnitude of the impact of selection of new PA
beneficiaries using NISSA-CBT is not known.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
The original project did not contain a third objective.

Rationale
The original project did not contain a third objective.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)




                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Improve the shock responsive function of selected Social Assistance Programs and, in the event of an
                            Eligible Crisis or Emergency, provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency

                            Revised Rationale
                            The theory of change for this objective held that emergency top-ups to the CGP and expansion of NISSA,
                            together with other resilience activities, would improve the country's shock responsiveness.

                            The project's third component was not activated, as the other project components were sufficiently robust to
                            address the drought emergency and pandemic conditions that arose during the project's lifetime. This in itself
                            is a marker of the project's substantial level of achievement.

                            At the time of the ICR, a report had been finalized on standard operating procedures (SOPs) to guide vertical
                            and horizontal scale-ups of the CGP program in response to shocks. The report was awaiting a consultation
                            workshop and government adoption. This partially met the target of SOPs having been put in place.

                            The January 2020 restructuring reallocated US$7.4 million to provide direct cash transfers to households
                            through the CGP in response to the 2019 drought, with beneficiaries identified through NISSA. The number of
                            beneficiaries receiving emergency top-ups to the CGP increased from 23,000 in 2016 to 67,000 in 2021,
                            exceeding the target of 50,000. Horizontal expansion of the CGP in 2020/2021 in response to COVID-19
                            used NISSA to identify additional households in need of support. According to the ICR (p. 32), non-
                            governmental organizations and other humanitarian actors are also using NISSA to identify beneficiaries for
                            their pandemic response and support programs.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PAD noted that the European Union (EU) and UNICEF had been active in the social protection sector
                            since the late 2000s, including support for expanding the registry of poor households through NISSA, testing
                            and evaluating harmonized procedures for service delivery, and expanding coverage of the CGP. It stated (p.
                            7) that "the World Bank team and EU/UNICEF have been working closely to ensure complementarity and
                            coherence in their respective support programs." The ICR (p. 43) confirmed that UNICEF contributions were
                            "especially fundamental for the development and rollout of NISSA, the development of shock-responsive
                            procedures for the CGP, and the harmonization of program management in NISSA." The ICR did not provide
                            detail to differentiate which achievements were attributable specifically to the project, or how the project's
                            interventions combined with those of other partners to produce observed outcomes.



                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 18
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



         Efficacy under the original objectives is rated Substantial, but with important shortcomings related to a lack of
         information on the project's contribution to improved equity apart from the CGP.




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Efficacy under the revised objectives is rated Substantial, with the above caveats still relevant to the equity
         objective, but with NISSA having contributed to achievement of the added third objective to improve the
         system's shock responsiveness.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD's economic analysis (pp. 69-75) suggested that the project would result in increased annual fiscal
savings throughout implementation, starting with 0.25% and eventually reaching 0.5% of GDP per year in the
last two years. These estimates focused on net savings resulting from the biggest improvements in the two
results areas, including the clean-up of databases, the adoption of harmonized administrative procedures,
and the adoption of objective targeting methods for OVC and PA, as well as increased expenditure resulting
from the expansion of the registry of poor households by NISSA and expanded coverage of the CGP. A prior
impact evaluation of the CGP found multiple social and economic benefits, including school retention
and reduced extreme food shortages at the household level; the PAD speculated that extending access to the
CGP would lead to similar results for new beneficiaries. The economic analysis was updated at the time of the
AF with no major changes; even with increased coverage of the CGP, the project was expected to remain
fiscally positive, yielding savings ranging from 0.15% to 0.3% of GDP annually.

The ICR's analysis found that the largest savings were produced by the cleanup of the OAP beneficiary roster,
with additional savings generated by consolidation and list cleaning of bursary programs as well as
administrative efficiencies in targeting and payment systems overall. The ICR (p. 35) estimated the actual overall
savings due to project interventions at 0.4% to 0.5% of GDP, with the significant majority of those savings
accruing from removal of ghost beneficiaries (amounting to 20-25% of total beneficiaries) from the OAP.

Implementation arrangements were efficient. The MoSD, as overall coordinator of the project, had already led
development of the government's NSPS and was overseeing its implementation as well as the NISSA. A
dedicated PIU handled additional work specific to the project, including fiduciary management. There were


                                                                                                             Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



minor delays in establishing the PIU at the outset of the project, but it was fully staffed by early 2017.
Administrative costs compared reasonably to international and regional standards, at about 4.1% of project
costs (including operating costs, non-consulting services, and trainings). Other than some glitches at start-up,
implementation proceeded at a reasonable pace, with acceleration after the mid-term review in late 2018, and
the mechanism for verification of DLIs and reimbursements worked smoothly. Extensions of the closing date
responded to the AF and the need to address unforeseen crises (drought events). According to the ICR (p. 41),
project activities were relatively protected from COVID-19-related delays, as social assistance cash transfers
continued to be provided during the period of lockdown and closures, though there was a pause in work on the
urban rollout of NISSA and some payment systems. The project had caught up with all pandemic-related delays
by June 2021, and remaining work was completed in time for project closing.

There were some moderate sources of implementation inefficiency, including a one-year gap between World
Bank decision review and Board of Executive Directors approval due to "country specifics and the political
situation" (ICR, p. 35); delays in the recruitment and retention of PIU staff early in the project implementation
period; turnover in senior MoSD leadership positions (Government's ICR, p. 79); unclear definition of roles and
responsibilities of government stakeholders (ICR, p. 49); and duplication or delays in activities due to inadequate
coordination of development partners (ICR, p. 49).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's original and revised objectives were highly relevant to country context, Bank strategy, and
government strategy. The project contributed to the modernization and strengthening of a number of delivery
systems for social assistance programs, making these programs more shock responsive and effectively
managed and coordinated. There was insufficient evidence to assess the project's contribution to increased
equity of social assistance programs. On balance, efficacy was substantial under both the original and revised
objectives, and therefore a formal split rating calculation is not necessary here. Efficiency was substantial.
Overall, there were minor shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement,
producing an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 46) cited substantial risk to achieved outcomes, observing that "historically the government's
financial commitment to core social protection spending has not been fully met over the years," and that
government commitment to efficiency goals, especially on OAP, "has been largely on paper." The COVID-19
pandemic has greatly increased the population's vulnerability, with border closures, reduced internal
movement, and declining remittances having impacted incomes and livelihoods. As a result, a larger number
of households has become eligible for social assistance, with stark cost implications. Even with budgetary
and other assistance from development partners, it will be difficult to meet need at these increased levels,
and declining revenue and the urgency of other priorities may constrain ongoing efforts to further enhance
the national social protection system. In addition, the political environment is complex and unpredictable. The
technical capacity developed under the project is significant, but staff and capacity constraints would be
exacerbated if funding for the sector were to decline. According to the ICR (p. 42), discussions are ongoing
between the Bank and the government regarding a possible new social protection operation in FY22 that
would extend the work begun under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Technical preparation of the project was based on extensive analytic work, including an in-depth review
  of the social safety nets sector in Lesotho (World Bank, 2013), a functional review of NISSA (World Bank,
  2013), an in-depth review of NISSA's targeting methodology and data collection capacity (Oxford Policy
  Management, 2014), an in-depth review of the PA and OVC-B programs (World Bank, 2014-15), a rapid
  diagnostic of the OAP (World Bank, 2015), the collection and analysis of social protection data in the
  Continuous Multipurpose Survey (CMS) (Poverty and Social Impact Analysis Trust Fund, 2013-14), an
  impact evaluation of the CGP (Oxford Policy Management, 2014), and the World Bank's 2015 Systematic
  Country Diagnostic.

  According to the PAD (pp. 22-23), project design incorporated lessons from prior successful social
  assistance interventions worldwide, including the importance of strong administrative, delivery, and
  information management systems for effective implementation of cash transfer programs to the poor and
  vulnerable. The Bank team also drew from the experience of two prior EU-supported programs in
  Lesotho, noting the importance of including activities aimed at strengthening the capacity of government
  at both central and district levels, the potential for a unified targeting approach and database during
  crises, and the potential positive impact of including community-based approaches in the poverty
  targeting methodology. The Bank, UNICEF, and EU facilitated South-South exchanges and study visits
  for government officials to learn from the experiences of social assistance reforms in Brazil, Zambia,


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



  Kenya, and Ethiopia; in particular, these visits helped with the conceptualization and design of NISSA as
  the founding pillar of management of social assistance.

  The PAD's risk analysis (pp. 24-26) identified numerous substantial risks, including government stability
  (recent general elections had led to a coalition government containing seven political parties), the fiscal
  situation (a probable reduction in Southern African Customs Union revenue due to a proposed revision of
  the formula), sectoral policies and strategies (potential political and/or social resistance to reform), the
  technical design of the project (the innovative nature of the instrument), and institutional capacity (the
  inexperience and workload of the small MoSD staff). Mitigation strategies included strengthening of
  MoSD capacity, technical assistance, creation of the PIU with dedicated staff to track results, a
  communications campaign to disseminate the rationale for the reform and likely consequences for non-
  eligible beneficiaries, realistic selection of indicators and targets for disbursement, clear definition of
  responsibilities for delivering results, and clearly specified and feasible protocols for verification of results.

  The project's objectives were clear and monitorable. The results framework was adequate for measuring
  achievement of the efficiency objective, but there were insufficient outcome indicators and DLIs to
  measure improvements in equity. The ICR (p. 45) also noted that the DLI matrix was complex, and that
  the investment part of the project would have benefited from specific financing for activities supporting the
  work needed to achieve the DLIs. The Government's ICR (p. 79) noted that there was insufficient
  consultation on project design, resulting in "overambitious targets and over-specified DLIs."



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (pp. 40-41) noted that implementation support was proactive and results-focused, particularly
 during preparation of the AF. Missions with site visits were conducted regularly, and aides-memoire were
 comprehensive and candid. The mid-term review, conducted on schedule at the end of 2018, produced
 recommendations for restructuring that were acted upon promptly. The ICR (p. 46) speculated that
 planning and implementation over the last 18 months of the project might have benefited from an earlier
 request for extension of the closing date.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                         Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were clearly stated and monitorable. The results framework included five outcome
 indicators, eleven intermediate indicators, and 20 DLIs, with clearly specified baselines, targets, and
 institutional responsibility for data collection. The MoSD, through the PIU, had responsibility for monitoring
 and reporting. The project itself aimed to strengthen results monitoring, including through the adoption of
 an integrated management information system, process monitoring and financial audits of OAP, and
 regular cross database checks for eligibility verification. The Bank was to support two additional rounds of
 Social Protection and Shocks modules, to be added to two rounds of the CMS in 2017 and 2019, to
 measure the evolution of the proportion of social assistance funds of selected programs going to the poor.

 The ICR (p. 42) observed that there were some shortcomings with the outcome indicators, but that the DLIs
 provided an "alternative, de facto monitoring system." However, as noted in Section 4, neither the project's
 outcome indicator nor its DLIs provided a comprehensive measure of the project's contribution to improving
 the equity of social assistance programs.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system provided regular information on progress toward most indicator targets. Planned
  household surveys were not completed due to COVID-19. According to the ICR (p. 43), the DLI
  framework was used extensively, including as the basis for disbursement of funds and as incentive for
  completion of milestones and targets. The ICR also noted, however, that the MoSD, Ministry of Finance,
  and Ministry of Home Affairs data systems were not always "fully able to provide up-to-date information."



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 43) noted that the DLI framework was used for decision making throughout the course of the
  project, including decisions on project financing needs, extensions, and measures needed to respond to
  the drought emergencies and the COVID-19 crisis.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   As project activities did not have a physical footprint, the project was classified as Environmental
   Assessment category "C" and did not trigger any of the Bank's safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



   As the MoSD had no previous experience in implementing Bank-financed projects, a PIU was created
   under the MoSD's Department of Planning and Information to handle the additional and specialized
   fiduciary management work generated by the project's second component. Fiduciary management of the
   second component relied on Lesotho's public financial management system. Financial management was
   rated Satisfactory across the project's lifetime. There were no overdue statements of expenditure or
   financial reports at closing. The ICR did not provide information on audits.

   Procurement functions were also the responsibility of the PIU. A procurement assessment at appraisal
   found that the PIU had limited human resource availability and capacity to assure adherence to the Bank's
   procurement guidelines, leading the MoSD to hire a procurement consultant. Procurement was rated
   Moderately Satisfactory or better across the project period, and there were no major issues during
   implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory        Satisfactory
                                                                              There were moderate
                                                                              shortcomings in M&E design, as
                                                                              outcome indicators and DLIs
                                                                              were insufficient to measure
Bank Performance                Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory   achievement of the equity
                                                                              objective. There was also
                                                                              inadequate support embedded
                                                                              in project design for
                                                                              implementing the DLIs.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 47-49) contained several insightful lessons emerging from the project's experience,
including:


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)



        While decisions to scale up social protection programs can be taken in direct
         response to specific events, it is more effective and efficient to front-load procedures
         and processes prior to an actual emergency. The Additional Financing for this project
         capitalized on ongoing project interventions to respond to the 2016 and 2019 drought
         emergencies. To make the program more responsive, the Ministry of Social Development is
         developing standard operating procedures for expanding and contracting the Child Grant
         Program during future droughts and other potential shocks.
        Achievement of disbursement-linked indicators may require associated operational
         funding. In this case, other than expansion and capacity building of NISSA, the project did
         not earmark investment project financing to help implement the DLIs apart from the actual
         disbursement incentive; this meant that supplementary budget from the government or other
         donors was required to complete the activities that were to produce the DLI results, and
         sometimes that funding was difficult to obtain.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR constructed a credible theory of change underpinning the project, including key critical assumptions.
Its Executive Summary usefully and concisely captured the project's overall storyline and results. It effectively
used data from both the formal results framework and DLIs to assess the project's achievement. However,
there were some shortcomings. The ICR was lengthy at 49 pages of main text and somewhat repetitive. Its
efficiency discussion conflated sectoral efficiency with project efficiency (the rating is dependent on the latter,
not the former). Its lessons contained observations that went beyond information provided in the main text of
the document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LS-Social Assistance Project (P151442)




                                                                      Page 18 of 18
