     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022845

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P143996                                    EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ecuador                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82890                                 30-Jun-2018                                           99,999,116.08

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Aug-2013                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             99,999,116.08                                                0.00

 Actual                                         99,999,116.08                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is to support the Borrower in increasing the quality and sustainability of public
   services for water, sanitation, and urban mobility. (Loan Agreement, Schedule 1, dated November 20, 2013
   and Project Appraisal Document dated July 9, 2013). The Borrower was the Municipality of Manta.

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) further states that the objective would be achieved by (i) increasing
   the availability of water supply and efficiency of water and sewerage services; (ii) improving urban mobility
   and accessibility through improvements to the street network, including sidewalks; and (iii) enhancing the

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



   capacity of the municipal government in planning and managing the provision of water and sanitation and
   urban transport services. (PAD para.20).

   For the ICRR, the objective is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To Increase the quality of water supply and sanitation services in the Municipality of Manta.

   Two associated sub-objectives are:

   Sub-Objective 1.1: To increase the quality of water supply services in the Municipality of Manta.

   Sub-Objective 1.2: To increase the quality of sanitation services in the Municipality of Manta. .

   Objective 2: To increase the sustainability of water supply and sanitation services in the Municipality of
   Manta,

   Objective 3: To increase the quality of urban mobility services in the Municipality of Manta.

   Objective 4: To increase the sustainability of urban mobility services in the Municipality of Manta.

   The original objective was not changed during implementation. During restructurings, there were some
   changes in the Results Framework, including in intermediate results indicators (IRIs) and associated targets.
   However, the project's level of ambition remained the same and the changes were not of such magnitude as
   to result in a change in the rating of the overall project outcome. Consequently, a split evaluation is not carried
   out for the ICRR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 15 to 18 and ICR paras. 14 to 21).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Changes in these components during project
   restructurings were not significant and are discussed later in this section under restructurings. During
   implementation, a fifth component "Emergency Response" was added to respond to the GoE's request for
   Bank assistance in addressing the impact of the earthquake in 2007.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



Component 1: Investments in Water Supply and Sewerage: (appraised cost US$44.0 million; actual cost
at completion US$38.93 million)

This component would support (i) increase of water storage capacity and rehabilitation of water networks in
Selected Districts through rehabilitation of primary and secondary networks; installation of household
connections and meters; and (ii) rehabilitation of sewerage networks in Selected Districts through
rehabilitation of networks, rehabilitation of a pumping station, and installation of household connections.

Component 2: Investments in Road Improvement: (appraised cost US$49.9 million; actual cost at
completion US$47.37 million),

This component would support improvement of urban areas in Selected Districts through, inter alia, (a)
carrying out of urban street upgrading works; (b) resurfacing of urban streets; (c) construction and
reconstruction of sidewalks with pedestrian facilities.

Component 3: Institutional Strengthening: (appraised cost US$7.6 million; actual cost at completion
US$3.09 million).

This component would support the institutional strengthening of EPAM (Empresa Publica Aguas de Manta),
the public water utility in Manta, through: (a) development and implementation of a management
improvement program; (b) development and implementation of a medium term strategic plan; (c)
development of a household connections program for both water and sewerage; (d) development of a water
and sewerage quality control program, including development of a monitoring plan; construction of a small
laboratory to measure water quality; and provision of technical assistance to improve maintenance of the
existing wastewater treatment plant; and (e) preparation of a water resources integrated management plan.

Component 4: Project Management: (appraised cost US$14.1 million; actual cost at
completion US$16.77 million).

This component would support the Project Management Unit (PMU) for (i) monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
activities; (ii) environmental and social safeguards management; (iii) contract management; and (iv) carrying
out communications campaigns.

During implementation, a fifth component was added to respond to the GoE's request for emergency
assistance following a severe earthquake in April 2016.

Component 5: Emergency Response: (appraised cost US$10.3 million; actual cost at completion
US$9.44 million).

At the request of the City of Manta and the GoE, this component was to finance urgent needs and critical
repairs to restore the water supply and sanitation (WSS) system which was damaged during the
2016 earthquake.




                                                                                                Page 3 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$115.60 million. At completion, the
  actual cost was US$115.60 million (ICR Annex 2).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project cost was financed by a World Bank loan of US$100 million. At project
  closing, US$99.999 million had been disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution from the Borrower was US$15.60 million.
  The actual Borrower contribution was US$15.60 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on August 8, 2013 and became effective on July 18, 2014. The original
  closing date was June 30, 2018. The actual closing date was December 31, 2020.

  Mid-Term Review (MTR): The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried out in June 2016..

  Restructurings: During its implementation period (2013 to 2020), the project underwent six restructurings.
  The original project development objective (PDO) was not changed but there were changes in some PDO
  indicators as follows:

        The target for the PDO indicator regarding the working ratio (operational expenses divided by
         operational revenues) was lowered from 60% to 70% due to lower collection rates and higher costs
         due to the 2016 earthquake.
        Two intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were recategorized to PDO indicators to measure (i)
         achievement of urban mobility and (ii) achievement of the quality of sanitation service.
        Three new indicators were added in regard to improvements in urban mobility including (i) walkability
         of upgraded streets; (ii) travel time spent in public transport along the Par Vial; and (iii) number of
         people provided with paved access to their homes in low-income neighborhoods.

  Other changes under the respective restructurings were as follows:

  First Restructuring: (June 30, 2016; disbursed amount US$5.0 million): This was a Level 2 restructuring
  which took place after an earthquake. The restructuring included introduction of an emergency response
  component for financing reconstruction services to restore water supply and sanitation services. Associated
  changes included reallocations from other components and introduction of relevant indicators in the Results
  Framework.

  Second Restructuring: (May 9, 2018; disbursed amount US$54.14 million): This was a Level 2 restructuring
  involving (i) a one-year extension in the closing date; (ii) reallocations between components to adjust for
  variations in costs; (iii) changes in the implementation schedule; and (iv) changes in the RF to better
  capture results and positive impacts, including a change in the methodology for economic analysis of
  project costs and benefits.

  Third Restructuring: (March 22, 2019; disbursed amount US$93.76 million). This was a Level 2 restructuring
  under which the Regional Vice President approved the use of loan proceeds for land acquisition related
  expenditures to compensate landowners affected by reconstruction of the Via Barbasquillo, Some
  reallocations were made between components and there were some changes to the implementation
  schedule.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



   Fourth Restructuring: (June 30, 2019 disbursed amount US$93.76 million): This was a Level 2 restructuring
   involving: (i) extending the closing date by six months; (ii) updating the implementation schedule; and (ii)
   making some reallocations between components.

   Fifth Restructuring: (November 19, 2019; disbursed amount US$93.76 million): This was a Level 2
   restructuring involving (i) extension of the closing date by six months; (ii) updating the implementation
   schedule; and (iii) some reallocations between components.

   Sixth Restructuring: (June 29, 2020; disbursed amount US$94.27 million): This was a Level 2 restructuring
   to adjust for the COVID-19 related impacts and involved (i) extension of the closing date by six months; (ii)
   reallocations between components; (iii) some changes in the RF: and (iv) updating the implementation
   schedule.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 8 and ICR paras. 1 to 8)

Country Context: At appraisal in 2013, Ecuador was in a period of robust growth. Strong economic growth
was accompanied by high urbanization rates including in Ecuador's medium and small sized cities. Among
other priorities, the Government of Ecuador (GoE) focused on investing in public infrastructure aimed at
improving basic services. Although poverty had declined considerably and the middle class was growing,
more than half of the population remained poor or vulnerable to falling back into poverty. Investments at the
sub-national level, particularly in water and sanitation (WSS) and transport, were identified as key
requirements to further reducing poverty rates.

Sector and Institutional Context: In regard to the WSS sector, despite the GoE's continuing efforts to
improve the situation, urban WSS coverage stood at about 76% for water and 58% for sanitation, and rural
coverage levels were about 25% for water and 15% for sanitation. National coverage for wastewater
treatment was only about 24% in urban areas. Challenges included low levels of continuity of service,
substantial water losses, limited cost recovery, and heavy reliance on government subsidies. Moreover,
Ecuador faced sustainability issues arising from lack of adequate resilience to the impacts of natural
disasters and climate change. To address these challenges, the GoE embarked on strengthening the
sector's institutional framework which included designation of a dedicated National Water Secretariat
(SENAGUA) to be responsible for sector-related policy formulation, program development, and technical
regulation. Municipalities were to be responsible for the operation and maintenance (O&M) of WSS
systems. In the City of Manta, the municipal water company, EPAM (Empresa Publica Aguas de Manta) is
responsible for WSS service. At appraisal, the coverage for water supply and sewerage services stood at
about 79% and 64% respectively. Issues included lack of continuity in providing water supply, inefficient

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



water supply and sewerage networks in need of rehabilitation, and operational problems in wastewater
treatment plants. At the institutional level, there were significant challenges in regard to out-of-date
cadaster, higher than warranted levels of employment, and lack of a management information system.
EPAM was also affected by losses through non-revenue water (NRW) but lacked means to estimate the
levels due to poor functioning of the micro and macro meters. To address the structural issues in the
network, EPAM developed the Manta Hydro Sanitary Master Plan. The first phase of the Plan was financed
by the Development Bank of Ecuador. The second phase was to be supported by the World Bank-financed
MPSI project.

In regard to the urban transport sector, Ecuador's rapid urbanization was accompanied by high motorization
rates leading to increasing air pollution and road accidents. The GoE launched a strategy to enhance
planning and management of transport systems and increased the level of investments in the sector. Non-
motored transport became a national priority. The GoE supported interventions in the road networks to
improve conditions for transit, pedestrians, and overall safety. Municipalities were charged with planning,
controlling, and regulating transportation issues as well as building and construction of urban road
networks. At appraisal, Manta's Directorate of Traffic and Public Works lacked tools to strategically invest in
maintenance and network improvements. Only 50% of the roads in Manta were considered to be in good or
fair condition. There were significant unpaved areas in residential neighborhoods. There was an increasing
need to reconfigure traffic patterns to accommodate the increase in traffic flows and eliminate bottlenecks,
and to develop a comprehensive road safety plan.

Alignment with national priorities: The project objective was consistent with the national priorities at the
time of appraisal, and remain so at the present time. At appraisal, Ecuador had identified access to WSS
and transport as key priorities. The National Development Plan (NDP) of 2009 included increasing access
to WSS as one of the key priorities to ensure quality of life and social cohesion. The NDP also emphasized
the need to improve transport to increase productivity, reduce pollution, and improve road safety. The
Municipality of Manta identified improvements in WSS and transport services as critical to the well-being of
its residents and to its economic growth. The project objective remains consistent with the priorities under
GoE's NDP for 2017-2021 which include (i) addressing regional and ethnic disparities; (ii) mitigating risks
from natural disasters; and (iii) protecting the natural resources endowment.

Alignment with the Country Partnership Strategy and Framework: The project objective was consistent
with the priorities identified at the time of appraisal and remain so under the currently prevailing Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) of FY19 to FY23. In regard to the World Bank Group's (WBG) Interim
Strategy Note (ISN) of 2013, the project directly supported the ISN's focus on sub-national lending as well
as the first of the ISN's two pillars - Sustainable and Inclusive Growth and Access to Social Protection and
Quality. Under the CPF's Results Area 3 (Enhancing Institutional and Environmental Sustainability), the
CPF affirms that the WBG group would contribute to improving water security and reducing water pollution
in urban areas, and would focus on disaster risk management and improvement of basic infrastructure. The
Manta PSI Project is one of five WSS and transport sector projects specifically included in the WBG's
lending program for FY19 to FY23.

Prior Bank Experience: The Bank had a successful track record in supporting infrastructure projects in the
region that focused not only on physical investments but also on institutional strengthening and capacity
building. Although the Bank had supported infrastructure projects in Ecuador, it had not been engaged in a
lending operation in Ecuador for a period of over six years preceding appraisal. The Project therefore




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



               represented the start of a period of re-engagement and responded to requests from the Municipality of
               Manta, supported by the GoE, to strengthen Manta's WSS and transport sectors.

               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDO was
               consistent (and remained consistent) with the priorities in the national programs and the Country Assistance
               Strategy/Country Partnership Frameworks. The PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators (IRIs),
               taking into account changes made during implementation, were largely relevant, measurable and adequate
               for signaling attribution of results to the project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the quality of water supply and sanitation public services in the Municipality of Manta.

                             Rationale
                             For the ICRR, assessment of the efficacy of Objective 1 is carried out under two sub-objectives: (i) to
                             increase the quality of water supply services and (ii) to increase the quality of sanitation services.

                             Sub-Objective 1.1: To increase the quality of water supply services in the Municipality of Manta.

                             The ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the theory of change (TOC) and the results chain. To
                             increase the quality of water supply services, it was necessary to (i) rehabilitate the water supply's primary
                             and secondary networks; (ii) install new and repair existing household connections; and (iii) install new and
                             repair existing meters. The project would provide inputs through financing the necessary investments and
                             technical assistance. These inputs would directly lead to relevant physical outputs including (i) rehabilitated
                             water supply networks; (ii) new household water connections/rehabilitated piped water connections; (iii)
                             macro-metering of water production; (iv) reduction in non-revenue water; and (v) increase in overall water
                             supply. The resulting outcome would be increased quality of water supply services, including increased
                             continuity of water supply service (as measured in hours per day). The longer-term outcomes would be to
                             enable more equitable access to essential services, and sustainable and inclusive growth.

                             The causal links and full results chain in regard to Sub-Objective 1 were clear. The selected PDO and
                             intermediate results indicators (IRIs), as modified during restructurings, were generally relevant
                             and measurable. However, an indicator was missing in regard to reduction in non-revenue water (NRW)
                             which is an important contributor to "increased efficiency" of water supply.

                             Key outputs (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework)


                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)




        6,707 new household connections
        138.32 kilometers (km) of new water networks
        12,654 piped water connections benefiting from rehabilitation works
        100 percent of water production subject to macro-metering
        rehabilitation of pumping stations (increasing flow by 15,000 m3 per day)
        construction of three storage tanks (capacity increased by 7,500 m3)

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras.30 to 33).

The outcome under this sub-objective was to be assessed through improvements in (i) availability and
efficiency of water production. and delivery systems and (ii) their impact on increased access and continuity
of services. Achievements in regard to the targeted PDO and IR indicators were as follows:

      Continuity as measured by the PDO indicator "continuity of service" (baseline 14 hours per day; target
         24 hours per day; actual 19.3 hours per day; achievement level 53%)
      Access as measured by the PDO indicator "new piped water household connections" (baseline 0;
       target 1,500; actual 6,707; achievement level 347%).
      Availability as measured by the IR indicator "storage capacity" (baseline 0 m3; target 7,700 m3; actual
       7,500 m3; achievement level 97%).
      Efficiency as measure by the IR indicators "water production macro-metering" (baseline 0; target
       100%' actual 100%; achievement level 100%).

The project achieved or overachieved three of the four indicators related to improvement in the quality of
water supply services. Achievement was modest for the fourth indicator regarding continuity of service. More
appropriate indicators of availability would have been "water production per inhabitant" or "water delivered per
inhabitant". Regarding efficiency, the ICR reports that the project's investments for rehabilitation of networks
and installation of macro-meters contributed to reduction in NRW, but does not include a quantitative indicator
in this regard.

Efficacy rating for Sub-Objective 1.1: Based on the above, the ICRR rates the efficacy for Sub-Objective 1 as
Substantial with moderate shortcomings.

Sub-Objective 1.2: To increase the quality of sanitation services in the Municipality of Manta.

The TOC was that, to increase the quality of sanitation services, it was necessary to (i) rehabilitate sewerage
networks; (ii) rehabilitate pumping stations; and (iii) install additional household connections. The project
provided inputs through financing of investments and technical assistance. These inputs would directly
contribute to outputs including (i) rehabilitated sewerage networks; (ii) rehabilitated pumping stations; and (iii)
additional household connections. The outcome would be increased quality of sanitation services with
increased household connections. The longer-term outcomes would be to enable more equitable access to
essential services, and sustainable and inclusive growth.

The causal links and full results chain in regard to Sub-Objective 1.2 were clear. The selected PDO and
intermediate results indicators (IRIs), as modified during restructurings, were generally relevant
and measurable. However, the indicators did not include ones related to improvement in efficiency and in the
quality of wastewater discharge.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



Key Outputs (as reported in the ICR Annex1 - Results Framework and para. 34 to 37).

      6,607 new household sewer connections
      232 km of sewerage networks replaced/repaired
      Construction of Escuela de Pesca wastewater pumping station

Outcomes: (as reported in ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 34 to 37)

The outcome under this sub-objective was to be assessed through (i) improving efficiency of sanitation
services; (ii) increasing access; and (iii) improvement in wastewater discharge quality. Achievements in the
PDO and IR indicators were as follows:

      PDO indicator "Household sewerage connections that are benefiting from the project" (baseline 0;
       original target 17,318; revised target 15,740; actual 15,740; achievement level 90% against original
       target,100% against revised target).
      IR Indicator "Number of new household sewer connections" (baseline 0; target 1,500; actual 6,607;
       achievement level 341%).
      In regard to efficiency, there was no indicator included in the Results Framework. However, the ICR
       reports that the number of reported issues such as clogging and leaks went down from 2,143 in 2019
       to 1,505 in 2020, and attributes this result to the project interventions.

The project substantially achieved or overachieved the two indicators related to improvement in the quality of
sanitation services. However, in regard to improving the quality of wastewater discharge, there was no
indicator included under the project. The Escuela de Pesca wastewater pumping station, supported by the
project, is expected to become operational only in 2022, and would contribute to improving wastewater
discharge quality.

Efficacy rating for Sub-Objective 1.2: Based on the above, the ICRR rates the efficacy of Sub-Objective 1,2
as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.

Overall efficacy rating for Objective 1: Substantial with moderate shortcomings.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the sustainability of water supply and sanitation services in the Municipality of Manta.

Rationale
The TOC was that, to increase the sustainability of the water and sanitation services in Manta, it
was essential to provide EPAM, the water and sanitation utility in Manta with institutional strengthening and

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



capacity building in key areas of its operations. The project would provide inputs through financing of
technical assistance and supporting equipment. These inputs would directly result in outputs
including development and implementation of (i) a household connections program for water and sewerage;
(ii) a management improvement program; (iii) a medium to long term strategic plan; (iv) water and sewerage
quality control program; and (v) a water resources integrated management plan. These outputs would
contribute to realization of intermediate results including a decrease in accounts receivable, increase in
collection efficiency, and increase in active connections, and would lead to the outcome of improved financial
sustainability of EPAM, thereby contributing to increasing the sustainability of water and sanitation services in
Manta.

The causal links and full results chain in regard to Objective 2 were clear. The selected PDO and intermediate
results indicators (IRIs),as modified during restructurings were generally relevant and measurable.

Key Outputs: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 38 to 42).

        Commercial system in EPAM updated and operational
        1,712 water connections activated
        Billing collection efficiency increased to 91%
        Complete network registry (cadaster) developed for the City of Manta
        Software implemented to strengthen EPAM's management's core business practices

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras, 38 to 42).

The outcome under this objective was to be assessed through improvements in EPAM's (i) working ratio
(operating expenses divided by operating revenues); (ii) bill collection efficiency; and (iii) commercial system
improvement. Achievements in regard to the applied PDO and IR indicators were as follows:

      PDO Indicator "working ratio" (baseline 88%;original target 60%; revised target 70%; actual 85%;
         achievement level 10.7% against original target; 16.7% against revised target).
      IR Indicator "billing collection efficiency" (baseline 68%; target 80%; actual 91%; achievement level
         192%).
      IR Indicator "commercial system in EPAM updated and operational" (baseline no; target yes; actual
         yes; achievement level 100%).

EPAM achieved significant gains in selected aspects of its operations and management, including in updating
and operationalization of its commercial system, as reflected in the improvement in its bill collection efficiency.
However, it was barely able to improve its working ratio, which is a key indicator regarding its financial
sustainability. Despite a lowering of ambition under project restructuring, achievement of this PDO indicator
fell far short of the original or revised targets. Since EPAM's financial sustainability is essential to ensure
overall sustainability of the improvements in water and sanitation services in Manta, the targeted outcome
was not achieved.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase the quality of urban mobility public services in the Municipality of Manta

Rationale
The TOC was that to improve the quality of urban mobility services in Manta, it was necessary to (i) improve
the street networks; (ii) upgrade and restructure urban streets including resurfacing and paving; and (iii)
construct sidewalks with pedestrian facilities, The project would provide inputs through investment financing
and technical assistance. These inputs would directly contribute to outputs including (i) upgraded, resurfaced,
and paved streets; and (ii) sidewalks with pedestrian facilities. These outputs would contribute to the outcome
of improving the quality of urban mobility public services. The longer-term outcomes would be more equitable
access to essential services and infrastructure, and sustainable and inclusive growth.

The causal links and full results chain in regard to Sub-Objective 1 were clear. The selected PDO and
intermediate results indicators (IRIs) as modified during restructurings, were generally relevant and
measurable.

Key Outputs: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 41 to 46).

        9.12 km of quality infrastructure provided for cycling
        19.90 km of streets paved and repaired
        16.05 km of upgrade streets
        18 sidewalks reconstructed
        5,400 trees planted
        17 street lights installed

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1- Results Framework and paras. 41 to 46).

The outcome under this objective was to be assessed through improvements in (i) walkability; (ii) travel time;
and (iii) number of people provided with paved roads. Achievements in regard to the targeted PDO and
IR indicators were as follows:

      Walkability: The PDO indicator used was the Walkability Index (methodology and other details
       provided in the ICR Annex 6). Results were as follows: (baseline 4.8; target 6.0; actual 6.7;
       achievement level 170%). The target was overachieved.
      Travel time: The PDO indicator was travel time along the Par Vial (the main entrance to the city of
       Manta). Results were as follows: (baseline 15 minutes; target 10 minutes; actual 13 minutes;
       achievement level 40%). The target was significantly underachieved.
      Paved roads: The PDO indicator was the number of people provided with paved roads: (baseline 0;
       target 22,100; actual 23,024; achievement level 104%). The target was achieved.

Two of the three PDO indicator targets (walkability and paved roads) were achieved or overachieved, while
one (travel time) was significantly underachieved. The positive results can largely be attributed to the outputs
indicated earlier.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 3 as Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To increase the sustainability of urban mobility public services in the Municipality of Manta.

Rationale
The TOC was that, to increase the sustainability of urban mobility services in Manta, it was necessary to
provide institutional strengthening and capacity building to the Directorate of Traffic and the Directorate of
Public Works to (i) optimize the level of public transport service; (ii) prepare and implement a road safety plan;
(iii) plan and implement efficient road management; and (iv) plan and implement road asset management.
The project would provide inputs through financing of technical assistance and supporting equipment. These
inputs would contribute to the following outputs: (i) preparation of the relevant plans and procedures; (ii)
training of staff; and (iii) installation and operationalization of supporting equipment. These outputs would
contribute to the outcome of increased sustainability of urban mobility public services in Manta. The longer-
term outcomes would be more equitable access to essentials services and infrastructure, and sustainable and
inclusive growth.

The causal links and full results chain in regard to Objective 4 were clear. The selected PDO and intermediate
results indicators (IRIs), as modified during restructurings, were generally relevant and measurable.
However, no indicator was included to measure the adequacy of financial resources available to the
Directorates for carrying out and sustaining the planned improvements.

Key Outputs: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1- Results Framework and paras. 47 and 48).

      Urban Mobility Plan developed.
      Road Network Evaluation System installed and operationalized.
      Training provided on use of road data management system.

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1- Results Framework and paras. 47 and 48).

The outcome under this objective was to be assessed on the basis of improvement in the planning and
management capacity of the Municipality of Manta in regard to urban mobility services. Achievements were to
be assessed on the basis of PDO and IR indicators as follows:

      Improved road management: The PDO indicator was "Adoption and implementation of a road
       management system". The system was installed and operationalized. The target was achieved.
      Urban Mobility Plan: The IR indicator was "Development and implementation of an Urban Mobility
       Plan". The plan was developed, and implemented. The target was achieved.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



                            The road management system enables remote evaluation of the streets for the whole city using traffic data;
                            provides a structure to prioritize investments; and facilitates strategic planning for the short-term and medium-
                            term. The system is being used by the Directorates of Traffic and Public Works to plan and prioritize
                            investments as well as to control and monitor traffic. The Urban Mobility Plan provides a guide to
                            programming transport-related public works, cover road safety elements, and monitor progress. The ICR
                            reports (para. 48) that the Municipality has invested more than US$1 million in mobility works based on the
                            Plan. The outcome of increasing the sustainability of urban mobility public services is assessed to be
                            substantially achieved.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed earlier in this Section, the efficacy of the four parsed objectives under the project were
                            assessed as follows:

                                  Objective 1 (To increase the quality of water and sanitation public services in the Municipality of
                                   Manta): Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
                                  Objective 2 (To increase the sustainability of water and sanitation public services in the Municipality of
                                   Manta): Modest.
                                  Objective 3 (To increase the quality of urban mobility public services in the Municipality of Manta):
                                   Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
                                  Objective 4 (To increase the sustainability of urban mobility public services in the Municipality of
                                   Mata): Substantial.

                            Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the project's overall efficacy as Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 23
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

(Reference ICR paras. 50 to 54 and Annex 4).

The ICR reports that the post-completion assessment of economic efficiency was carried out using the same
methodology as was used at appraisal with one exception: at appraisal, efficiency indicators were separately
estimated for water supply and for sewerage; for the post-completion analysis, they were combined for both
subcomponents.

A cost-benefit analysis was carried out. Benefits were measured using a cost savings approach. For water
interventions, cost savings were measured for; (i) new households connected to the network who previously
purchased water from water tankers at a higher price and (ii) existing customers who benefited from reductions
in water rationing. For sewerage interventions, benefits were measured as an increase in EPAM's revenues
from new sewerage connections, using the tariff as a proxy for willingness to pay. For roads improvements,
benefits were estimated as: (i) savings in vehicle operating cost; (ii) savings in travel time; and (iii) pothole
repair cost savings for the municipality. Non-quantified benefits included (i) economic growth in neighborhood
populations and (ii) flood risk reduction along the Par Vial (the main entrance to the city of Manta). Costs
included the investment costs and estimated incremental operations and maintenance (O&M) expenses. Both
costs and benefits were estimated net of taxes and duties. Other assumptions were: (i) lifetimes of 30 years
for water and sewerage and 20 years for roads interventions and (ii) a discount rate of 12%. Based on this, the
comparison of actual versus planned results were as follows:

                                          Post-             Post-
                Appraisal Appraisal
                                          Completion        Completion
                           ENPV (US$                        ENPV (US$
                EIRR (%)                  EIRR (%)
                           million)                         million)
                                          20% (including    26.5 (including
Water           25.1%      18.2
                                          sewerage)         sewerage)
Sewerage      16.0%        5.0
Roads
              33.0%        25.0           20.0%             26.3
Improvement
Total project              48.2           20%               52.8



The post-completion estimated net benefits of the project, as assessed from the ENPV, were about 10% higher
than those estimated at appraisal. Although the post-completion EIRRs for the water and roads subcomponents
were lower than those estimated at appraisal, they were substantially higher than the discount rates of 6% to
8% prescribed under the OPCS guidelines for evaluating the economic efficiency of investment projects. The
project's economic efficiency is assessed as Substantial.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



Implementation Efficiency

Project duration: As compared to the planned implementation period of 4.6 years (55.5 months), the actual
implementation period was 6.1 years (73.5 months) including three extensions of the project's closing date.
As acknowledged in the ICR (para. 56), there were significant implementation delays due to political volatility
involving changes in the city management, and a steep learning curve for the PIU which was a first-time
implementation unit. The Project's largest contracts were not tendered until 2018. External factors that affected
implementation were the major earthquake and the COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, with the extensions in
the closing date, the large majority of the planned activities under the project were implemented.

Project disbursement: As compared to the appraised total project cost of US$115.60 million, the actual total
project cost at project completion was US$115.60 million. The World bank loan of US$100 million was
almost fully disbursed.

Assessment of efficiency: Based on the foregoing, the project's economic efficiency is rated Substantial and
implementation efficiency is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The ICRR therefore rates the
project's overall efficiency as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     74.00
 ICR Estimate                                              20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Assessment of the project's outcome is based on the following underlying ratings:

       Relevance of Objectives - Substantial
       Efficacy - Substantial with moderate shortcomings
       Efficiency - Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



Due to the moderate shortcomings in the achievement of efficacy, including importantly in the financial
sustainability of water supply and sanitation services, the ICRR rates the project's overall outcome as
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and operational risks: These are rated Moderate. While EPAM and the Directorates of Traffic
and Public Works (the Directorates hereafter) have the requisite technical capacity to carry out their
operations and maintenance (O&M) activities, their operating efficiency will depend upon their ability to
maintain and operate the equipment and infrastructure in good working order. Timely and adequate
availability of financial resources to cover the O&M expenses will be crucial for efficient
performance. Despite the support of the project, EPAM was not able to achieve the targeted improvement in
its financial performance. The Directorates of Traffic and Public Works would also need adequate funding to
carry out their responsibilities..

Financial risks: These are rated Moderate, Continued support from the city and national governments
would be necessary for ensuring adequate financial resources to EPAM and the Directorates.

Political risks: These are rated Moderate, Political and administrative changes in the city
government significantly impacted project implementation through the resulting lack of clarity and delays in
decision-making. Continued support to the objectives of the project, despite such changes, would be
essential for sustainability of the project gains.

Institutional capacity risks: These are rated Moderate. While the institutional capacities in EPAM and the
Directorates have been significantly strengthened under the project, sustainability of these gains will require
continued attention from their respective managements with strong support from the city government.
Lacking these, the gains could progressively be eroded.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  (Reference ICR para. 92)

  The project represented a re-engagement by the Bank with lending in Ecuador after a period of six years.
  The strategic relevance and PDO were well aligned with the GOE's agenda and the Bank's Country
  Assistance Strategy prevailing at the time. However, as acknowledged in the ICR (para. 92), there were
  some shortcomings during project preparation. The project was prepared in a relatively short period of six

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



  months. In designing the project, there was a gap between the capacity of the local agencies and the
  project's complexity. It was not sufficiently recognized that the PIU was a first-time implementation unit
  and handling coordination with EPAM and as many as six municipal directorates would be a major
  challenge to its capacity. The ICR also reports that the initial designs were over-ambitious and needed to
  be modified during implementation. There were initial weaknesses in the Results Framework - the ICR
  reports that some of the chosen PDO indicators were not properly formulated and did not permit
  tracking of relevant aspects of the PDO. As discussed earlier in Section 4, some additional indicators
  would have allowed better assessment of important aspects including improved availability of water
  supply, reduction in non-revenue water, and efficiency and quality of wastewater discharges. The political
  risks were underestimated - changes in the local government led to a shift in priorities and delays in
  decision-making. The ICR concludes that, overall, there was insufficient readiness for implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 (Reference ICR para. 93)

 The project experienced serious delays in the earlier years of implementation. At the time of the Mid-Term
 Review (MTR) in July 2016, 3.5 years after start of implementation, only about 5% of the loan amount had
 been disbursed., and implementation progress (IP) was rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory over the first
 four years of implementation. During implementation, the supervision team had to deal with a number of
 challenges - low implementation capacity in the PIU; political shifts with changes in the city administration;
 a major earthquake; and the COVID pandemic. Following the MTR, the supervision team was pro-active in
 initiating restructurings in the project including addressing deficiencies in the Results Framework and re-
 allocations between components. The supervision team provided frequent technical assistance and
 guidance to the PIU and was pro-actively involved with the relevant decision-makers in the city
 administration. The supervision team also involved the Bank's country and sectoral managements
 in discussions with the city management to bring attention to the major project issues and obtain the
 support of the counterparts.

 During the implementation period of 6 years, a total of 16 supervision missions were carried out. The
 missions were adequately staffed with the required staff, including safeguards and fiduciary specialists.
 The project had a total of three task team leaders (TTLs) over the implementation period. The TTL at
 project closing was based in the field. Back-to-office reporting was regular. The Implementation Status and
 Results Reports (ISRs) were candid and generally filed in a timely manner.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR para. 73)

 The ICR (para. 73) lists a number of shortcomings in the design of the M&E system in regard to the Results
 Framework.

         no PDO level indicator to measure outcome in regard to the quality of sanitation services
         no PDO level indicator to measure sustainability of urban mobility improvements
         some PDO indicators focused on outputs rather than outcomes
         lack of relevance of some of the indicators
         overly complex definitions of some indicators, e.g. EPAM's working ratio

 In addition, relevant indicators were missing for assessment of important aspects such as reduction in non-
 revenue water; efficiency and quality of wastewater discharges; and indicators for adequacy of financial
 resources available to the Directorates of Public Works and Traffic.




b. M&E Implementation
  (Reference ICR paras. 75 and 76).

  The PIU was responsible for collecting project-related information from the participating agencies (EPAM
  and the Directorates); processing and compiling the information; and providing project-related information
  to the Bank including that related to the Results Framework and project progress in relation to
  procurement and disbursement aspects. During the 2018 restructuring, modifications were made to the
  RF to address the design deficiencies in indicators and add new or modified indicators to reflect changes
  during implementation. However, the PIU did not update the M&E framework until 2018 (5 years into
  project implementation). Certain indicators, e.g. the walkability index, remained complex and difficult to
  measure. Some other indicators were designed to collect the information only at the completion of the
  project. Indicators in regard to reduction of non-revenue water and efficiency and quality of wastewater
  discharges continued to be missing.




c. M&E Utilization
  (Reference ICR paras. 77 and 78).




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



  The ICR reports (para.77) that the M&E data were not adequately utilized. Indicators were not
  consistently tracked until the last years of the project. The data were used principally to comply with
  the Bank's reporting requirements.

  Overall rating for M&E Quality: In view of the significant shortcomings regarding quality-at-entry,
  implementation and utilization discussed above, the ICRR rates M&E quality as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   (Reference ICR paras. 79 to 88).

   At appraisal, the project was designated a Category B project as the civil works that were to be carried out
   were assessed to have short term environmental impacts that were not significant and could be mitigated
   with standard mitigation measures. The project triggered the following safeguards: Environmental
   Assessment - OP 4.01; Pest Management - OP 4.09; Physical Cultural Resources - OP 4.11; and Dam
   Safety - OP 4.37.

   Environmental: To mitigate potential environmental impacts, the project developed the following
   instruments: (i) Environmental Impact Study, including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
   Par Vial subproject; and (ii) an EMP for the hydro-sanitary subproject. The ICR reports (paras. 81 and 82)
   that the project finished in compliance with the Par Vial and hydro-sanitary EMPs. The ICR reports (Para.
   83) that the project ended with an overall environmental safeguard rating of moderately satisfactory. This
   rating reflects delays encountered by the PIU in addressing certain environmental risks such as hazardous
   materials management; temporary storage of construction materials; and hazardous liquids spill
   control. The ratings for Pest Management (OP 4.9) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) were
   Satisfactory.

   Social: The project triggered the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard (OP 4.12) as the works were
   expected to involve both temporary and permanent land acquisition. The PIU prepared a Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF). The ICR reports (para. 84) that the PIU had only one social specialist and
   required close support from the Bank supervision team. The ICR also reports that the PIU's low capacity
   and the high level of political involvement in the project led initially to some land acquisition issues. Several
   properties were taken over without having all the required permits or without having reached agreements
   with the land owners. The Bank took up the issues with the Borrower who complied thereafter with the
   required processes. The project ended with an overall social safeguard rating of Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (Reference ICR paras. 86 to 91).

  Procurement: The ICR reports (para. 86) that the PIU's procurement capacity was low particularly in the
  early years of the project. The PIU had not been involved in a multi-lateral bank financed project and had
  limited knowledge of procurement processes. The learning curve was steep and was affected by changes
  in trained personnel throughout the project. As a result, the project's largest contracts were not tendered
  until 2018. Political interventions also affected the PIU's procurement activities. The Bank team provided
  training and support for the PIU staff. The ICR reports that, during the last five years of the project
  implementation, procurement improved considerably. By the close of the project, the entire procurement
  plan had been contracted and executed. The ICR does not report any case of mis-procurement or
  significant non-compliance. The procurement rating at project closing was Moderately Satisfactory.

  Financial Management: The ICR reports (para. 89) that the PIU capacity was low and was affected by
  frequent turnover of staff. Issues encountered included some cases of unjustified disbursements and
  delays in submitting audit reports to the Bank. There were also delays between disbursement of bank
  funds and their utilization. At project closing, the rating for Financial Management was
  Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.



d. Other


  (Reference ICR paras. 59 to 62).

  Gender: The project did not specifically target gender-related issues. However, the improvements achieved
  in regard to water and sanitation services positively contributed to increasing welfare for women and
  children. Within households, women carry a disproportionately higher burden in regard to ensuring
  availability of water. In the absence of adequate household and piped water connections, women have to
  spend time collecting and treating water, which reduces their spare time and ability to increase their human
  capital through other activities. Improved WSS services under the project also contribute to reduction in the
  water-borne illnesses which benefits women as well as children.

  Institutional Strengthening: In addition to the institutional strengthening activities discussed in Section 4
  above, the project also supported the following activities:

        Technical assistance through a Public Private Partnership (PPP) specialist consultant on technical,
           commercial and operational planning in regard to Performance-Based Contracts.



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



         Consultants hired to support EPAM in carrying out a study of the country's legal framework as well
          as a review of the legal aspects of PPP contracts.
         Technical assistance for construction of stabilization ponds in Manta as part of the sanitation
          program.

   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The project supported alliances between EPAM and private
   companies for () the development of a medium to long term institutional strengthening plan for EPAM and
   (ii) the strengthening operational and commercial management.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: Most of the project investments were in the lower to middle
   income areas of Manta. By providing increased access to household and piped water connections, the
   project provided these households with cost savings, better quality water, and reduction in health risks. The
   transport investments also benefited lower-income neighborhoods through increased paving and reduced
   travel time.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 100 to 104) lists a number of lessons from which IEG derives the following lessons
of broad relevance and applicability for similar projects implemented in comparable environments.

Establishment of a well-staffed and well-equipped Project Implementation Unit prior to the
start of implementation is crucial for ensuring efficient implementation. The absence of a well-
staffed and well-managed PIU was a critical factor resulting in significant delays, particularly in the
years of implementation. In the case of the project, the PIU did not have prior experience in working
with multi-lateral development banks and was unfamiliar with the World Bank's safeguards and
fiduciary requirements. Appropriate technical assistance, including through specialized consultants,
should be provided in the project preparation/early implementation phases, to ensure that the
requisite capacity is place to ensure timely implementation.

Guiding projects through political change and other external obstacles requires time,
flexibility, and resilience. Changes in political administration are oftentimes accompanied by shifts
in leadership in key agencies which can result in shifting priorities. During the project's
implementation, the city had three different mayors and four different PIU leaders. The project

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)



overcame these challenges through responsive restructurings while maintaining the focus on the
original objectives.

Cross-sectoral operations can offer an opportunity to amplify the development results. The
project demonstrated the synergies and benefits of implementing cross-sectoral operations including
optimization of construction processes, and reduction in costs of materials, contracting, and labor
than would have been possible if the WSS and transport components had been under implemented
under separate projects.

Resistance to departing from national norms can be overcome, where justified, through
targeted training and agreements with the national government entities involved. In the case
of the project, differences between the national norms and the Bank's requirements in regard to land
acquisition and procurement were resolved by extensive discussions between the Bank supervision
team and the relevant counterparts. Provision of relevant training to the counterparts, early on in the
implementation process, could help in avoiding subsequent delays.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, candid, and follows the OPCS's ICR guidelines (except for length - 34 pages compared
to the recommended 15 pages or less). It provides a good diagrammatic theory of change in regard to the
causal links and full results chain, and the reporting is outcome-focused. The analysis is generally evidence
based but constrained to some extent by the weaknesses in the project's M&E system. The ICR provides
lessons learned that are of broader relevance to similar projects in comparable environments. Given the nature
of the project interventions (water supply, sewerage and transport), a more detailed discussion of the problems
faced and the mitigation measures applied would have been useful for deriving lessons learned that could
benefit other projects in future.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EC Manta Public Services Improvem Proj. (P143996)




                                                                                 Page 23 of 23
