     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022774

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P132418                                      Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                        Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18577                                     31-Dec-2018                                           9,149,054.88

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Dec-2014                                  30-Dec-2020

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               9,200,000.00                                    9,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                9,149,054.88                                    9,149,054.88

 Actual                                            9,149,054.88                                    9,149,054.88




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 William B. Denning           Peter Nigel Freeman           Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Global Environment Objective (GEO) were identical:
   i.e., to improve the efficiency and attractiveness of city bus transport and reduce greenhouse gas emissions in
   the demonstration cities (Project Appraisal Document [PAD], page 9, and Grant Agreement, Schedule 1).




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



   This review assesses the PDO in three parts: (1) improvements to the efficiency of city bus transport; (2)
   improvements to the attractiveness of city bus transport; and (3) the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in
   the demonstration cities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Nov-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three main components to the Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Service (ESCBS) project.
   There was also provision for a Project Management Unit (PMU).

   Component 1: National Capacity Building for Urban Bus Sector: Estimated cost: US$3.27 million (PAD
   par 40, but shown as US$3.5 million in the ICR Annex 3). Actual cost:US$2.37 million (ICR Annex 3). This
   component was to review policy, regulatory and fiscal constraints; at national, state and city levels, and to
   promote efficient and high-quality city bus services. It was to develop policy notes for discussion and debate
   among key stakeholders on areas of reform. The component included capacity building initiatives involving
   the development of knowledge materials, training activities, knowledge sharing and cross learning events,
   and dissemination of best practices in cutting edge areas aimed at the development of the overall urban bus
   sector in the country (PAD par 35).

   Component 2A: City Demonstration Projects: Physical Improvements Estimated cost: US$105.17
   million (PAD para 40). Actual cost: US$77.90 million (ICR Annex 3). This component supports physical
   improvements targeted at modernizing the city bus services in demonstration cities including: (i) modern
   buses, (ii) modern depot equipment for improved maintenance and extended life of buses, and (iii) modern
   Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) and Management Information Systems (MIS) - to make the services
   more user friendly and for improved planning and management of operations to enable optimal use of
   resources. Subcomponent (i) bus purchases was fully funded by counterpart financing (PAD par 36, 40).

   Component 2B: City Demonstration Projects: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building Estimated
   cost: US$2.88 million (PAD par 40). Actual cost: US$1.71 million (ICR Annex 3). This capacity building and
   technical assistance component supported the modernization efforts in selected demonstration cities. This
   included: (i) institutional strengthening, capacity building, and training; (ii) business planning including route
   planning and rationalization; (iii) marketing and branding; (iv) technical support with private sector
   participation including mainstreaming of the informal sector; (v) technical support with information
   technology management/Management Information Systems (ITS/MIS); (vi) vehicle and driver performance



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



  management with a view to improving fuel efficiency; and (vii) incremental operational expenses (PAD
  par 37).

  Four cities (Bhopal, Chandigarh, Jaipur, and Mira Bhayander) were selected by the Ministry of Housing and
  Urban Affairs (MoHUA) to participate.

  Project Management Unit Estimated cost: US$1.7 million (PAD par 40), shown as US$1.8 million in the
  ICR, (ICR Annex 3). Actual cost:US$1.11 million (ICR Annex 3).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The total actual project cost at project closure was US$84.89 million, which was US$28.11
  below (75 percent) of the appraisal estimate of US$113.0 million. Note, the total project cost appraisal
  estimate in the PAD and the ICR were not exactly identical and the PAD figure was used.

  The significantly lower actual cost was primarily due to underspending in Component 2A(i), Modern Buses.
  This activity was estimated to cost US$54.07 million at appraisal and cost US$22.28 million at completion,
  41 percent of the estimated cost. Component 2B, Technical Assistance and Capacity Building disbursed 59
  percent of estimated costs; it was expected to cost US$2.88 million at appraisal but cost US$1.71 million at
  completion. Component 1, National Capacity Building and Technical Assistance disbursed 68 percent of its
  estimated costs; this was estimated to cost US$3.50 million at appraisal but the actual cost was US$2.37
  million at completion. In contrast, Component 2A, Depot Modernization, disbursed 166 percent of its
  estimated costs; it was estimated to cost US$7.21 million at appraisal but cost US$12.00 million at
  completion (PAD par 40, ICR Annex 3).

  Financing. At appraisal the amount of Global Environmental Fund (GEF) financing for this project was
  estimated as US$9.20 million. At completion, the amount of GEF financing actually disbursed was US$9.15
  million.

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal the Borrower was expected to provide US$103.82 million, or 92
  percent of the project total (PAD par 40). At completion the Borrower had disbursed US$75.65 million, or 89
  percent of the project total (including US$1.8 million from the local private sector, ICR Annex 3). Most of the
  co-financing was from the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM), while required
  proportional contributions were provided by state and local governments. There was additional co-financing
  by the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) under Component 1 and 2A, and by
  other city authorities under Component 2B (PAD Annex 6, Role of Co-financing, par 35).

  Dates. The project was approved on December 9, 2014 but only became effective on August 29, 2016.
  There was a midterm review on August 28, 2017. The original closing date of December 31, 2018 was
  extended three times. In December 2018 it was extended for 12 months to December 2019. An initial delay
  of almost 20 months in effectiveness was due to incomplete mobilization of the PMU at the national level
  and this had a cascading effect on project implementation (ICR par 67). In December 2019 it was extended
  for a further nine months to September 2019. This was to allow sufficient time for the implementation of key
  activities, including the construction of depots, installation of depot equipment, and the setting up of ITS/
  MIS systems (ICR par 65). In September 2020 it was extended by an additional three months due to the




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



   COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed on-ground implementation of ITS/MIS and the impact evaluation (ICR
   par 20). The project closed on December 30, 2020.

   Restructurings. The project was restructured five times but no changes were made to the PDOs.

       1. The November 2, 2018 restructuring modified the methodology to assess the increase in ridership
            by more correctly measuring the change in ridership relative to the "do nothing" scenario. Two new
            indicators were introduced, the first to measure the improvement in overall user satisfaction and the
            second to record the number of city operators exposed to best practices in improved fuel efficiency.
            The latter replaced the previous indicator measuring the number of cities with training in improved
            fuel efficiency since some cities had more than one operator.
       2.   The December 28, 2018 restructuring finetuned the wording in some indicators to clarify the
            meaning. It also extended the loan closing date and the implementation schedule by 12 months.
       3.   The September 30, 2019 restructuring reflected changes between disbursement categories and in
            the implementation schedule.
       4.   The December 24, 2019 restructuring reflected an extension of the loan closing date and
            implementation schedule by 9 months.
       5.   The September 28, 2020 restructuring was for a further change in the loan closing date by three
            months and a reallocation between disbursement categories.

   Changes were initially made to accommodate the delay in grant effectiveness, and then to proactively
   accommodate the varying responses in the demonstration cities. The results framework was updated by
   refining the indicator methodology and end of project targets, along with changes in disbursement
   categories and the grant closing date.

   Split Rating. The PDOs were not changed. Although two indicator targets were revised downwards
   because of pending project delays all the others were unchanged. Since there was only a
   small difference between the results in the one case and in the other the original targets were exceeded,
   the ICR measured performance against the original targets in both cases and deemed that a split rating was
   unnecessary. IEG concurs with this approach.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: India has been adding 10 million urban dwellers each year to its cities. This rapid growth
has triggered an unprecedented urban and spatial transformation. Urban transport in Indian cities is
provided by a range of modes: public, private, and personal and they have experienced low public transit
modal shares, severe congestion, deteriorating road safety, and increasing air pollution and greenhouse
gas emissions (GHG). The National Bus Funding Scheme 2009 of the Government of India (GOI), was the
Baseline Project. Phase I included the procurement of 15,260 modern buses across the country; however,
implementation of supporting infrastructure in Phase II, such as depots, workshops, and ITS/ MIS
integration, was delayed. Land for bus depots was difficult to locate in cities due to multiple factors, and
many of the existing depots were operated with minimal or no equipment, resulting in poorly maintained
fleets, higher fuel consumption and fast deterioration of the condition of buses.


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



               At the time of project preparation, clear evidence had emerged of the rapidly declining public transport
               modal share. With reduced efficiency, availability, and accessibility of bus services, cities witnessed a
               drastic increase in private vehicle usage. In cities with a formal bus system, the bus routes operated had
               not kept pace with the changes in travel demand. Further, awareness of the correlation between efficient
               urban transit and climate change mitigation, as well as an awareness of the country’s climate commitment,
               was still at a nascent level within city governance. The Efficient and Sustainable City Bus Services Project
               (ESCBS) was designed to apply to Tier 2 cities (i.e. with a population between 1 and 4 million). Bhopal,
               Chandigarh, Jaipur, and Mira Bhayander were selected for demonstration projects.

               Alignment with strategy: At appraisal, the project was in line with the World Bank Group’s
               (WBG’s) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-17 to support poverty reduction and shared
               prosperity. The Bank was expected to assist India in dealing with sustaining high growth, making growth
               inclusive, increasing the effectiveness of service delivery; and ensuring the development was
               sustainable and competitive. At closure the project was also well aligned with the India Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for FY 18-22. It supported the first and second pillars of “resource efficient growth”
               and “enhancing competitiveness and enabling job creation." The PDO was specifically aligned to Objective
               1.3 of the CPF in respect of promoting policies and programs for the increased adoption of cleaner
               technologies that help in controlling air pollution in cities.

               Sector and Institutional Context: The PDO focused on improving the efficiency and attractiveness of city
               bus transport and reducing greenhouse gas emissions in four mid-size demonstration cities. By working on
               service level improvements, the project was expected to contribute to meeting India’s global commitment to
               GHG emission reduction. India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution advised in 2015, aimed to
               make sustained efforts in GHG emission reduction and mitigation in the transport sector, especially
               passenger transport. The national government aimed to promote efficient and green public bus transport
               and announced a national scheme at a cost of US$2.3 billion. The Bank supported this priority through a
               Reimbursable Advisory Service study on Improving Bus Public Transport Services with a focus on urban
               areas. The ESMAP training results and the technical assistance studies, undertaken as part of the ESCBS
               project was to be disseminated to other similar Indian cities as well as the pilot cities.

               The PDO remained well aligned with the government and Bank strategies, and was formulated at an
               outcome level to demonstrate the reduction in GHG emissions, while improving city bus transport service
               delivery.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the efficiency of city bus transport.

                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)




Rationale
The Theory of Change of this objective is that a GEF grant would be catalytic for the public bus transport
system in that demonstration projects would show how improvements to physical infrastructure such as bus
depots together with the purchase of suitable equipment, information and management systems, and coupled
with capacity building initiatives including the addressing of policy, regulatory and fiscal constraints, can
improve the efficiency of city bus transport in India.

Outputs

Component 2A and Component 1 contribute to PDO1 through: (i) building and upgrading depots, (ii) installing
modern depot equipment, (iii) implementing ITS/MIS in the demonstration cities, and (iv) training bus
operators on driving skills, training operators, crew, and maintenance staff on better bus maintenance
practices.

      Existing depots were assessed as planned and as a result seven depots were upgraded, while three
       cities upgraded overnight parking facilities. Some new cost saving features were introduced
       including solar panels and surveillance cameras. Separate toilet facilities for female staff were also
       introduced. Three new model depots were constructed and made operational, customized to
       actual needs in each case. Fully achieved.
      Modern depot equipment items (131 in total) were installed and are functional in all four cities. In
       Bhopal, improvements to braking efficiency and overall driving were reported. Fully achieved.
      Increased use of ITS and MIS data and tools in operations planning and management was
       implemented in three of the four cities. The fourth city, Jaipur, failed to implement the planned ITS/MIS
       system after issues in clarifying the scope and due to frequent changes in staff. It is now undertaking
       this work on its own using GOI funding. Mostly achieved.
      Training/capacity building took place at all levels for 3,051 individuals (city, state and national). This
       covered workshops, ESMAP, expert panels, general capacity building, a focus group, a conference
       and a study visit. After September 2020 some events were virtual due to Covid. Mostly achieved but
       the design lacked an indicator to give feedback on the effectiveness of the learning.

Outcomes

Rate of breakdowns

PDO Results Indicator 2A, Rate of breakdowns to not exceed 5 per 10,000km of bus operation, was fully
achieved. Rate of breakdowns is an important metric because interruptions in service have a direct operating
cost impact since service reliability has a strong impact on attracting riders.

Breakdowns/10,000 k
                         Baseline              Original Target    Revised Target       At Completion
m
Bhopal                   4.2                                                           3.4
Chandigarh               6.6                                                           0.7
                                               5.0                Unchanged.
Jaipur                   7.4                                                           2.9
Mira Bhayander           7.5                                                           0.3



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)




PDO Results Indicator 2B is improvement in bus fuel efficiency in demonstration cities by at least
12% relative to business as usual. This indicator succeeded in achieving its revised target in the pre-Covid
period (Jan.-Feb. 2020). It is now recovering from this operational disruption and by Jan.- Mar. 2021
had reached 14%, close to the original target of 15%.




% fuel
                     Baseline (l/km) Original Target Revised Target At Completion
improvement
Bhopal               3.2
Chandigarh           3.4
                                       15%              12%               14%
Jaipur               2.8
Mira Bhayander       2.8

Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the attractiveness of city bus transport.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The Theory of Change of this objective is that a GEF grant would be catalytic for the public bus transport
system in that demonstration projects would show how beyond the purchase of new buses, improvements to
physical infrastructure such as bus depots together with the purchase of suitable equipment, information and
management systems, and coupled with capacity building initiatives, can improve the attractiveness of city
bus transport in India by improving the enabling environment.

Outputs

PDO2 is primarily achieved through the activities under Component 2B; the efficiencies from Component 2A
and the training in Component 1 provide complementary support. These activities are: (i) Project preparation
costs, (ii) TA for ITS/MIS implementation, services and business planning, marketing, fuel efficiency, (iii)
Capacity building and incremental operating costs.

      More efficient and user responsive bus service plans were to be prepared and adopted in at least two
       cities. This has been achieved in one city and is in process in two other cities. Partially achieved.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)




      Having institutional systems in place for monitoring and evaluation of a bus fuel efficiency program in
       at least two cities. This was partially in place in two cities at completion and another city is in the
       process of implementing this through a different team. Not achieved.
      All of the project cities have been introducing or implementing ITS/MIS practices for internal
       administration, customer-facing activities, and operational support with varying degrees of
       advancement. Taken together, they provide a set of examples that can be useful elsewhere.

The ICR provides city level details in Annex 7. The Intermediate Indicators under Component 2B have been
modestly achieved.

The project was generally successful in improving the attractiveness of bus transport in the demonstration
cities. Total ridership increased well, although women’s proportion of the total ridership generally did not
increase as much as targeted. User satisfaction was increased both overall and for women.

PDO Results Indicator 3A, Direct Project Beneficiaries and Female Beneficiaries.

                           Baseline            Original Target Revised Target            At Completion
                                                                                         16% increase over
Direct beneficiaries                                                10% increase over "business as usual"
                           180 million         235 million
(Number of riders)                                                  “business as usual”* (Prior to Covid 20%
                                                                                         was achieved)
Female Beneficiaries
(% of ridership) by city
Bhopal                     39%                                                           39%
Chandigarh                 28%                                                           32%
                                               Increase by 3% Unchanged
Jaipur                     39%                                                           37%
Mira Bhayander             43%                                                           34%

* According to the Project Paper on restructuring (November, 2018), the methodology to assess ridership was
changed to measure the increase in ridership as a result of the project. It was modified to measure the
increase in ridership relative to business as usual (i.e. without the project).

The overall ridership exceeded the target, even allowing for the impact of Covid but the female ridership was
not achieved and fell in three of the four demonstration cities. This likely reflected a change in working
modalities during the pandemic.

Results Indicator 3B, Improvement in Women’s User Satisfaction and Improvement in Overall
Satisfaction with bus services.

Satisfaction score
                     Baseline                  Original Target        Revised Target       At Completion
(out of 5)
Women’s Satisfaction
Bhopal               3.56                      Increase in                                 4.08
Chandigarh           3.51                      satisfaction in at     Same as original     4.60
Jaipur               3.07                      least two cities                            2.64

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)




Mira Bhayander           2.42                                                            3.25
Overall Satisfaction
Bhopal                   3.36                                                            4.11
                                               Increase in
Chandigarh               3.59                                                            4.55
                                               satisfaction in at   Same as original
Jaipur                   3.44                                                            2.71
                                               least two cities
Mira Bhayander           2.62                                                            3.30

Both overall and women's user satisfaction substantially improved in three of the four cities. The end term
survey highlighted that in Jaipur both men and women were highly dissatisfied by the quality of services.
Jaipur had failed to implement the planned ITS/MIS system and had suffered from frequent changes in
management.

The activities that supported this outcome were more service kilometers operated with improved
efficiency, reliability and improved information availability. The impacts of demand responsive service
planning were evident in Bhopal, where after restructuring of the routes the average daily ridership went up
from 269 per bus in second half of 2016 to 494 per bus in 2017 (ICR par 43).

Improvement in the user satisfaction index, both overall and for women users, was visible in Bhopal,
Chandigarh and Mira Bhayander. Seat reservations for women, cleaner buses with reduced crowding, safety
features on-board (such as CCTV/ GPS tracking/ panic buttons) and the introduction of women conductors/
drivers were appreciated by female riders. Bhopal set up two more helplines for grievance reporting and
grievance redress; promoted a QR code-based anonymous driver rating and feedback system; and operated
free bus services for women on “women’s day”. Chandigarh installed passenger information systems at all
operational bus stops, modified routes, followed the social distancing norms stringently, ensured regular bus
cleaning and maintenance. Jaipur’s user perception may have suffered due to reduced bus services during
the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR para 46).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the demonstration cities.

Rationale
The Theory of Change of this objective is that a GEF grant would be catalytic for the public bus transport
system in that demonstration projects would show how improvements to physical infrastructure such as bus
depots together with the purchase of suitable equipment, information and management systems, and coupled
with capacity building initiatives including the addressing of policy, regulatory and fiscal constraints, can
reduce greenhouse gas emissions of city bus transport in India.

The projected GHG emission gains were estimated (over 2020-30) from cities are a combination of
five activities: (i) procuring buses (higher ridership), (ii) depot creation and equipment (increased fleet life and
utilization due to better maintenance and fewer breakdowns), (iii) better per vehicle fuel efficiency

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



(combination of bus maintenance and driver training), (iv) better service operations (empirical data from the
ITS/ MIS processed to inform the service plans/routes resulting in increased bus kilometers and ridership),
and (v) increased modal shift to city buses as compared to business as usual, due to improved service plan,
more reliable service, better passenger information, and cleaner buses.

Outputs

Components 2A and 2B contribute directly to PDOs 1 and 2 and indirectly to PDO3. Component 1 (National
Capacity Building for Urban Bus Sector) builds both strategic and local operational capacity to achieve PDO1.
The review of policy, regulatory and fiscal constraints at national, state and city levels, and capacity building
(training) has been carried out through studies and training undertaken by MoHUA and ESMAP.

      Policy notes and recommendations were developed for sustainable city bus transportation and
       deliberations at the national and state levels. Fifteen city/state level workshops and two national level
       workshops were held; exceeding the target of at least five national and state level workshops.
       Substantially achieved.
      Some 33 City bus operators were to be trained in fuel efficient operations through various agencies
       and through the technical assistance program. At completion 19 city bus operators had been trained
       under ESMAP. A further 20 agencies received training under the "Leaders in Urban Transport
       Planning and Management Program (LUTP)" and "the Centre of Excellence in Urban Transport
       (CEPT)." Achieved.
      Five of the six studies and training initiatives are complete, covering technical subjects: bus operator
       (drivers) skills development, procurement specifications, bus depot design, depot level training, and
       services and operational planning. The outstanding study on, “Options and Recommendations for
       Regulatory, Institutional and Fiscal Constraints in Providing Efficient and Sustainable City Bus
       Services” is said to be 85% complete and the MoHUA has agreed to finish the study using its own
       funds. As the ICR indicates, this “Study has the potential to bring about critical regulatory and
       legislative reforms for sustaining the city bus sector in India” (ICR para 27, Table3). Partially achieved

Overall, several outputs under Component 1 have been achieved. However, the critical national-level, more
strategic study output has not been completed, and although substantial training has been undertaken, it is
unclear how effective it has been.

Outcomes

PDO Results Indicator 1, Reduction in GHG emissions in project cities over a period of 10 years as a result of
the adoption of modernization initiatives from the business as usual scenario, was theoretically achieved.

Reduction in GHG Emissions (metric tons of CO2 equivalent)

Original Baseline: 1,094,430 (2014-2023); Original Target: Reduction of 230,000

Revised Baseline: 1,069,063 (2014-2023); Revised Target: Reduction of 170,000

At Completion (equivalent from 2020-30)

238,600 (Scenario 1, without new buses); 454,600 (Scenario 2, with new buses)


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



                            The Scenario 2 savings are estimated from a theoretical model based on adding more buses (700 ICE buses
                            and 300 e-buses) that all the four cities have procured or were planning to procure in next six months (ICR
                            Annex 1, A.1, page 26). Project activities would result in a higher fleet utilization and optimization, thus higher
                            service km would be operated in the project scenario as compared to business as usual. Since this was an
                            estimate, however, and no empirical measurements of GHG were made, and given that the impacts of Covid
                            need to be taken into account, the results must be treated with caution.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            This is not an easy call because some of the evidence was not sufficiently rigorous and Covid impacted the
                            results towards the end of implementation. The new depots and infrastructure improvements were all in place
                            and new equipment was provided in all four cities. There was evidence of better fuel efficiency and less
                            breakdowns. Three of the four cities introduced ITS/MIS systems. User satisfaction including female use
                            satisfaction improved in three of the four cities, but there appears to have been a management problem in
                            Jaipur. Female ridership was also below expectations, likely due to Covid and women being more dependent
                            on public transport. The reduction in greenhouse gas emissions was estimated based on a theoretical model
                            rather than empirical evidence and although there were a significant number of training activities, their impact
                            has not been assessed while a strategic study with potentially national impact is unfinished. Giving equal
                            weight to each of the objectives it appears that the efficiency and attractiveness of city bus transport has
                            substantially improved, while the objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and disseminating this
                            knowledge has at least moderately improved but there needs to be more evidence to substantiate this fully.
                            On balance the overall efficacy is substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal the economic analysis was based on incremental costs. It was claimed that it was not feasible to
   carry out traditional cost benefit analysis and argued that incremental cost analysis was normally used for GEF
   funded projects (PAD par 54). The analysis was broken down into direct and indirect effects. The direct effects
   comprised three activities: (i) bus depot modernization, (ii) the ESMAP fuel efficiency improvement program, and
   (iii) application of ITS and MIS as well as service planning and route optimization. The total was shown as
   “Lifetime direct GHG emissions“ and “Lifetime direct post-project GHG emissions” without defining “Lifetime” or
   “post-project”. By inference lifetime meant over the ten year period 2014 to 2023 (PAD Annex 6, par 7) but post-
   project remained less clear. The indirect effects analysis looked at the larger impact if the sustainable practices

                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



piloted in this project and was to be replicated across the country (top-down) as well as in another ten cities
(bottom-up).

Annex 6 of the PAD laid out the logic as to how the emissions savings would be obtained. It provided the
percentage improvements expected in vehicle and operating characteristics as well as the total tons of
emissions savings. It did not indicate the base data by city (e.g., vehicle km operated), on which the percent
improvements would be applied.

At completion the ICR provided the total tons of emissions savings under two scenarios. First, savings
between 2020 and 2030 with no additional bus procurement. Second, savings over the same period but
including the impact of the four cities having procured an additional 1,000 buses over the following six months. It
spelt out the logic of how emissions saving would be obtained and the percentage improvements expected in
vehicle and operating characteristics. It also provided the total tons of emissions savings.

The GEF grant of US$9.15 million resulted in reducing direct CO2 emissions by 454,600 metric tons. The GEF
contribution per ton of CO2 was only US$20, compared to the US$40 estimated at project appraisal. The unit
cost of CO2 reduction against the project cost of US$85 million at US$182 per ton was also significantly lower
than the estimated unit cost of US$493 per ton. This is a low estimate, because the ICR only calculated direct
emission benefits from the four pilot cities and did not calculate emission reductions due to the contribution of
the project to accrued fuel savings from the maintenance protocols, driving, or the scale up of depot
modernization on inter-city operations.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Initial delays of 20 months affected the overall implementation
timeline, while the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on project implementation was experienced from March
2020 for a period of about six months, when national and local lockdowns and precautions were put in place.
While implementation benefits from equipment and ITS systems are still being realized, most key activities were
satisfactorily completed, although one major study was not completed. Knowledge sharing activities had to
be carried out virtually. Overall, project implementation proved to be far more complex and time intensive than
initially envisaged. In view of these factors, the two-year extension of the grant closing date was not surprising.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



6. Outcome

Based on substantial relevance and substantial efficacy, with moderate shortcomings, for the PDOs, with
modest efficiency, the outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Lack of sustained ownership and commitment: Although guidance documents and manuals have been
circulated to state agencies and shared on the MOHUA website, champions are needed at the national and
city levels to keep the momentum going, and the likelihood of this may be worsened by frequent changes in
key officials and the lack of a permanent operations team in each of the cities. Continued and regular
refresher on-job training similar to the kind provided under the project would help to strengthen commitment.
Long term sustainability of the sector also requires a more enabling regulatory environment to be in place to
ensure priority to city public transport (ICR page 24).

Inadequate maintenance: Trained staff are necessary to operate the more sophisticated depot equipment,
and proper contracting arrangements (including handing over equipment to selected private operators) are
essential to ensure proper equipment usage and adequate maintenance. There is a risk that adequate
funding may not be provided by the cities for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the equipment, as well
as to address the expanding need for new fleets.

Sustainability of ITS/MIS systems: Similarly, while ITS/ MIS are in use in two cities, with limited funding
there remains a risk to their continued sustainability.

Impact of Covid-19: Should the Covid-19 pandemic continue, ridership and hence revenue would suffer and
stall progress.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation benefited from the background analysis undertaken in 12 cities and from a better
  understanding of the concerns of male and female bus users as well as non-users. Lessons from this
  analysis, along with previous pilot testing, were considered in the project design. Several rounds of
  consultation with key stakeholders were undertaken and the project was consequently designed to
  enhance the impact of government policies and programs. Moreover, with a view to simplifying the
  project design, keeping in mind the learning from the Sustainable Urban Transport Program, new depots
  were constructed on publicly owned sites to avoid land acquisition issues.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



  Both classroom and on-the-job learning were built into the project design to strengthen institutional
  capacity. The project design included the provision of technical support (in the form of the PMU) to
  Government agencies for data collection, organizing capacity building sessions, procurement, and review
  support. The design envisaged ‘learning by doing’ for blue collar staff (bus maintenance, fuel-efficient
  ways of driving, and best practice in depot equipment procurement). In addition, there was to
  be practitioner-oriented training sessions, technical assistance, and visits to demonstration projects.

  The project duration did not include contingencies for unanticipated operational issues (ICR page 18).
  The analysis of implementation capacity carried out during project appraisal indicated that the four-year
  project duration would be adequate, despite the design involving technical assistance at the national level
  and demonstration projects in four cities. There was very limited experience of working with Bank
  procedures and the impacts of this were seriously underestimated. Market interest for the supply of depot
  equipment could have been explored further; this would have saved time and effort during project
  implementation (ICR page 23).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The impact of the lack of coordination, commitment, and familiarity with Bank project requirements was
 underestimated. A delay of almost twenty months in the grant being declared effective had a cascading
 effect on project implementation (ICR page 19). Because of lack of progress the dropping of two cities was
 considered but this was not agreed to (Project Paper, First Restructuring, par 4). At the city level, depot
 construction was delayed, which resulted in turn in overall delays to the setting up of equipment as well as
 ITS/MIS implementation. This was further exacerbated by the limited understanding of working with the
 World Bank’s fiduciary and safeguard requirements, as well as because of the frequent changes of
 officials. Delays in filling posts in the PIAs as well as frequent staff turnover impacted city level performance
 and was variable among the pilot cities. By the Mid-term Review (MTR) of September 2017 the project was
 two years behind schedule, depots and equipment were not ready, some cities still scrapped buses before
 their full life expectancy, and almost every city had been through two to three rounds of depot and/or ITS
 procurement. Project restructuring was undertaken in 2018 to address these issues. Some solutions were
 also found during regular Bank implementation support missions, with the PMU supporting the cities to plan
 and deliver better, and by escalating issues to senior officials when necessary. The grant closing date was
 extended by twenty-four months to allow sufficient time for the completion of key activities, including the
 construction of depots, installation of depot equipment, and the setting up of the ITS/ MIS systems.
 Following the MTR, project delivery picked up speed for the last three years of implementation.

 Some factors were, however, outside the control of Government and/or the implementing entities. The lack
 of mature domestic players for depot maintenance equipment resulted in no or weak bid responses,
 erroneous bids, shortages of products and delivery mix-ups. Consultants, vendors, cities, and the PMU all
 lacked familiarity with equipment specifications, depot planning and design, and land suitability analysis.
 These problems were compounded by the lack of standardization of equipment and ITS/MIS systems,
 delays in delivery and commissioning, and in imparting training to staff on equipment usage. The
 procurement of modern buses under the Baseline Project (to be procured using GoI funding) did not fully
 materialize. Although 788 of the Phase I buses had already been procured at the time of project appraisal,

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



 only 360 of the sanctioned 886 Phase II buses were actually procured. This was primarily due to the very
 short timelines provided by GoI for the completion of procurement.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the project included partially appropriate PDO indicators and intermediate indicators to assess
 the achievement of the project objectives and outputs. Some indicators had to be revised during
 the restructurings to remove ambiguity in measurement. For example, the methodology had to be
 modified to measure the increase in ridership by showing the change in ridership relative to the do nothing
 scenario.

 The baseline estimation of the overall user indicator remained unclear until April 2019, two years and eight
 months after effectiveness. Data quality was not discussed as an area that needed attention during
 preparation but during implementation this became an area of concern. The inclusion of intermediate
 indicators on “depot level staff training on fuel efficiency,” “buses maintained using modern equipment per
 depot” and “rate of equipment usage per depot/city” were useful to demonstrate the correlation to incident
 reduction and fuel efficiency.

 The project established a three-tier monitoring structure (monitoring committees), and the Quarterly
 Progress Report (QPR) formats were designed in consultation with the city officials and PMU/PIAs.
 Budgets for M&E were included for the entire duration of the project (ICR page 20).



b. M&E Implementation
  Baselines were established (in one case late), and progress towards the PDO and key intermediate
  indicators were regularly tracked (ICR page 20). The initial issues in data quality, however, (especially for
  break-down rates and fuel efficiency), continued until project closure due to the limited capacities at the
  city level. Regular follow-ups and reviews by the PMU and the Bank team were necessary to ensure data
  consistency. The cities were then able to make the necessary adjustments and submit the
  QPRs timeously.

   Two new indicators were introduced, the first to measure the improvement in overall user satisfaction
  and the second to record the number of city operators exposed to best practices in improved fuel
  efficiency. The latter replaced the previous indicator measuring the number of cities with training in

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



  improved fuel efficiency since some cities had more than one operator. There was no significant change
  to the project scope. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic delayed data collection and surveys in 2020.

  The user surveys proposed as part of the M&E were updated by considering the COVID-19 pandemic
  and its impacts. Post-March 2020, the user satisfaction surveys were redesigned to capture the impacts
  of the COVID-19 pandemic on urban transport in the project cities. Additional questions were included to
  understand the changes in travel patterns, reduced economic activity, and/or user confidence in public
  transit.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E process was used to review progress, develop mitigation measures, and agree with the cities
  on improvement strategies, as well as for informed decision making for overall project management.
  Each city, based on the maturity of its operations, was able to utilize the M&E to the extent this
  was feasible. For instance, by December 2019, based on the M&E data, Chandigarh realized the
  benefits accruing from the usage of depot equipment and obtained additional support from the Project,
  as well as Government funds for the purchase of equipment for other depots (ICR page 20). These
  findings were further shared with other cities as part of the Bank’s effort to create a demonstration
  effect. The implementation of ITS substantially improved the PIUs’ access to data, and therefore the
  opportunity to use it for more effective operations.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: At appraisal, OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural
   Habitat) and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) were triggered. The project was assigned Category
   ‘B’ because potential impacts were assessed to be manageable and mostly concentrated within the depot
   sites. These impacts included drainage, water pollution due to discharge from vehicle repairs/washing,
   health and safety during construction, and traffic safety related issues during the operation of the depots. In
   line with the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the project,
   environmental assessment was undertaken along with the preparation of engineering designs for the
   depots. The resultant Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were integrated with the design elements
   to minimize environmental footprints from depot operations. Adequate budgetary provisions were included
   where separate measures were to be implemented. The three new depots (two in Jaipur and one at Mira
   Bhayander) obtained the required licenses from the respective State Pollution Control Boards for the
   purchase of raw materials like sand and stone from existing approved sources (ICR page 21).

   Measures such as internal storm water drains, and oil, and grease traps were integrated into the depot
   designs to reduce the environmental footprint of the new facilities. In addition, measures with long term
   positive environmental benefits such as solar photovoltaic panels, rainwater harvesting systems and
   sanitation systems, were included in the designs. The operation of the environmental treatment

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



  plants has enabled the reuse of treated wastewater for gardening or bus washing, and to recharge ground
  water; the use of solar PV panels has reduced dependency on fossil-based energy. These measures
  are contributing to environmental benefits by minimizing the project’s carbon footprint. However, the
  effectiveness of these facilities will depend on the implementation of the yet to be developed standard
  operating procedures, work for which is still underway.

  Implementation of the EMPs was affected by the frequent transfer of key officials. The key challenges
  during EMP implementation were securing access to work sites and the safety of workers during
  construction. In the case of the Raipur Kalan Depot in Chandigarh, the finalization of the EIA report and its
  disclosure took longer than expected due to delays in the administrative and technical approval of the
  design (ICR page 22).

  Compliance with the Bank’s environmental safeguards, as reported, was overall Satisfactory.

  Social Safeguards: OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) was triggered, as the probability of
  displacement of squatters or encroachers on or around the boundary of depots was identified as an issue.
  Construction at the Ghodbunder Depot involved the relocation of 163 slum dwellers to another temporary
  site, and an addendum to the ESMP was prepared. The Mira Bhayander Municipal Corporation
  (MBMC) secured intermediate transit camps and these slum dwellers were temporarily relocated to the
  Transit Camp of the Basic Services for Urban Poor Scheme. Based on the guidance provided by the Bank,
  MBMC took steps to improve the facilities available in the transit camp site, as well as the working
  conditions for workers in the construction site. The final relocation to affordable housing under the Pradhan
  Mantri Awas Yojna scheme was scheduled for October 2021. City agencies, with guidance from the World
  Bank team, incorporated several measures for rehabilitation, keeping in mind gender aspects. At project
  closure, most gender related recommendations had been implemented. Grievance redress mechanisms
  had also been set up by the cities for the resolution of any complaints received. The Bank is to follow-up
  with the project cities to ensure that all remaining social safeguards actions have been completed in a
  satisfactory manner.

  There were delays in the preparation of the social safeguard instruments, particularly in Jaipur and Mira
  Bhayander, due to frequent changes in staff and the lack of capacity in the implementing agencies. The
  Bank provided guidance for the preparation of these instruments as well as in capacity building in
  implementation of the ESMF and the ESMPs. The project closed with Moderately Satisfactory rating
  for Involuntary Resettlement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  The financial management capacity varied significantly in the PIAs. Bhopal City Links Ltd (BCLL) and
  Jaipur City Transport Services Ltd (JCTSL), the dedicated companies established for the operation and
  management of city bus services under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, had a low
  institutional capacity for financial management. There were repeated observations by the external auditors
  concerning poor documentation of fixed assets, weak internal controls, etc. Submission of audit reports



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



   and Interim Unaudited Financial Reports of the PIAs by the PMU was typically on time, with audit
   observations on monetary values; however, these were not significant and were mostly reconciled.

   The financial management processes for ensuring the smooth flow of funds and proper expenditure
   controls at the state PIAs were either not well established or were discontinued during project
   implementation. The project required the creation of dedicated project bank accounts in PIAs, however
   discussions during implementation supervision missions with BCLL and JCTSL revealed that these bank
   accounts were not being used for project expenditures. The external auditors also had observations on
   similar lines in the project audit reports across financial years.

   The financial management arrangements for the project at the central level piggy backed on the
   institutional set-up of the Sustainable Urban Transport Project (SUTP), which closed on March 31, 2018.
   The two projects shared a common PMU in MoHUA, which was intended to leverage the learning on
   fiduciary systems and processes required under Bank projects. However, this was not the case in the state
   PIAs. It appears that from a financial management perspective, that the Efficient and Sustainable City Bus
   Services Project (ESCBS) did not receive appropriate attention from the PMU until the SUTP closed. The
   ESCBS project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory rating for Financial Management.

   Procurement:

   The Bank’s Procurement Guidelines (2011) applied to activities funded by the GEF grant and not to the
   procurement of buses and depot construction, which were funded entirely by counterpart funds.
   Procurement was carried out for US$16.7 million (1.7 times the GEF Grant) through 70 procurement
   processes. It is confirmed that there was no non-compliance in the procurement process with respect to
   Bank Procurement Guidelines during project implementation.

   However, a lack of trained staff in the city units, lack of familiarity with e-procurement or approved systems,
   and the frequent transfer of senior officials affected project procurement. Procurement was extremely slow,
   especially in Mira Bhayander and Jaipur. For many post-review procurement activities, the required data
   had not been updated in the system.

   Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the Implementation Supervision Reports and the project
   closed with a Moderately Satisfactory rating for Procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR developed the following useful lessons:

Engaging with the state governments, along with the national and city governments, should
be considered in future projects concerned with bus service efficiency and sustainability.
A strong need was expressed for the creation of a State Technical Unit to bring the
necessary attention and focus to the project and to support cities in planning, design, financing, and
management of bus services. The Bank could also consider using the Program for Results approach
when dealing with multiple cities under same operation to implement similar interventions as a part
of existing or new Government programs.

Centralized procurement, standardized templates and formats can all help fast-track
procurement and ease the processes for medium-sized cities with weak procurement
capacity. Under ESCBS, the cities with limited ability and capacity each went through a steep
learning curve for the procurement of equipment and ITS/MIS. Having a centralized or standardized
procurement process, with recommendations on system design specifications and a list of
empaneled vendors, should be considered for future similar projects and programs. This would also
eliminate the individual negotiations that the cities may have to navigate (on spares, training, etc.) in
future, and will help standardize and bring about economies of scale.

Lack of continuity of officials and teams can affect project outcomes and consistent capacity
building efforts are critical for successful implementation. The project lost valuable time due to
the frequent transfer of officials and the consequent efforts needed to restart the dialogue with the
Bank. Even the key positions in the operations teams (e.g., traffic manager) were either absent/
vacant or were affected by high attrition at both city and state levels. The lack of adequate qualified
staff with continuity is in large part due to the policy and regulatory environment in Indian cities not
yet assigning adequate priority to urban bus transport. The Bank has already made good progress in
furthering the policy dialogue and needs to continue for the long-term sustainability of the sector.

A two-pronged approach to developing capabilities and the enabling environment can help to
leverage private sector support. ESMAP showed greater emission reduction by involving private
operators in the training. Efforts on capacity building for the private sector (such as consultants,
vendors, and service providers) in bus operations, maintenance, ITS/MIS, designing/planning
are critical and help in scaling up impact. At the same time, the creation of an enabling environment
by putting in place appropriate risk sharing and dispute resolution mechanisms, timely payments,


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)



and a collaborative approach with private operators can help support much needed market
development to achieve the necessary scale up in availability of bus services in the country.

The project should explicitly include the dissemination of the results in the four
demonstration cities. While dissemination was envisaged under the training and TA activities, it
would be a good idea for similar demonstration projects to include the dissemination of results as
part of project activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The number of buses that became available was less than expected and more evidence is needed regarding
  actual GHG emissions and the impact of the dissemination of best practice. The low capacity of city bus
  management also indicates it may take longer than expected for the full results to materialize. Implementation
  was affected by the Covid pandemic and thus the true impact of the project is not yet fully realized.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is mostly clear with some useful evidence, photographs and illustrations. It is also candid about the
reasons for the delays experienced in the project. The Theory of Change, though retrofitted and conjoining
three specific objectives as one, clearly shows the logical links between the project activities, their outputs and
the intended outcomes. The lessons are based on the difficulties experienced, especially with low institutional
capacity, and should be very helpful for future similar projects.

Some small quibbles are that the base data were not provided and so it was difficult to assess the
appropriateness of the final GHG savings figures. There could also have been more information in the ICR
taken from the project restructuring papers clarifying the reasons for the changes in wording for some of the
indicators. Some abbreviations, especially in the financial management and procurement sections, were also
not defined in the abbreviations and acronyms table.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Service (P132418)




                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
