     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022805

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P079736                                   3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07)

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Central Africa                            Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-43370,IDA-46590,IDA-49870,IDA-       31-Jan-2013                                        492,579,301.49
 51460,IDA-H3140,IDA-H3150,IDA-
 H5220,IDA-H7980,TF-10978

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2007                              28-Feb-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         201,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                          201,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                      492,594,635.08                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman         Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was, as stated in the Financing Agreement dated September 14,
   2007 (Schedule 1, page 7) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page ix):

   Original PDO.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



   " To facilitate regional trade among the member states and improve the Central African Republic's (CAR), the
   Republic of Cameroon's and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets through: (1) improving the
   implementation of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) customs union; and (2)
   reducing physical and nonphysical barriers along the Douala - Ndjamena and Douala - Bangui corridor."

   Revised PDO.

   The PDO was reformulated during the first Additional Financing (AF) on January 29, 2010 to read as follows:

   "To facilitate regional trade among the member states and improve the CAR's, the Republic of Cameroons
   and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets."

   The revised PDO was maintained through the second and third AFs until project closure. It kept the intent of
   the objectives of the original PDO but did not describe how they were to be achieved. This review is
   accordingly based on the following PDOs.

   1. To facilitate regional trade among the CEMAC member states.

   2. To improve the CAR's, the Republic of Cameroon's and the Republic of Chad's access to world
   markets.

   The AFs were to accommodate cost overruns and increased project scope. This review concurs with the
   assertion made in the ICR that changes to the outcome reflect better measurement of the project's
   achievements and not narrowing of its ambition. Therefore, this review is not based on a split rating of
   objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Jan-2010

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was financed by the Bank with parallel financing from other donors (discussed below). The ICR
   (page 69) notes that the amount disbursed by other donors was unavailable when the project closed.
   Therefore, the figures for the actual cost of each component and the total project cost reflect the Bank's
   contribution between appraisal and closing.

   There were three components (PAD, page 8).


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



1. Roads and Railways Infrastructure Improvement. The estimated total project cost at appraisal
was US$604.3 million (of this US$171.1 million was Bank- financed). The actual Bank financing for
this component with the AFs was US$452.1 million. This component planned to finance works on the
corridors linking N'Djamena (Chad) and Bangui (CAR) to Douala port (Cameroon). There were two
subcomponents.

a. Road infrastructure improvement. Activities in this component were: (i) rehabilitating roads
in Cameroon (85 kilometers (km), Chad (562km) and CAR (614 km); (ii) pluriannual performance-based,
road maintenance in Chad; (iii) periodic maintenance of works in CAR; (iv) road studies and environmental
and social management measures in the three countries; and (v) harmonizing and enforcing axle
load control policies. The scope of this component was expanded substantially with new road rehabilitations
in Northern Cameroon and CAR as a result of the AFs.

b. Railway infrastructure improvements in Cameroon. Activities in this subcomponent were: (i) renewal
of rail tracks on the Batchenga - Ka'a rail section; (ii) support for rolling stock renewal; and (iii)
implementation of environmental and social safeguards.

2. Transit and Transport Facilitation investments. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$47.8 million
(of which, US$16.4 was Bank-financed). The actual Bank financing for this component was US$35.3
million. This component was planned to finance and support transit and transport facilitation
interventions on the corridors.

Activities in this component were: (i) information technology investments in the Douala port platform to
interconnect the actors in the port clearance process; (ii) investments in equipment for safety and
security, technical assistance and computerization of the port; (iv) design and construction of sea/road
intermodal interfaces in Ngaoundere in Cameroon; and (v) building a road station in Bouar. The scope of
this component was expanded through the AF.

3. Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. The estimated
cost at appraisal was US$27.5 million (of which US$13.6 was financed by the Bank). The actual Bank
financing for this component with the AF's was US$13.4 million. This component planned to finance
institutional support for trade facilitation institutions at the regional level. There were three sub-components.

a. CEMAC Customs Union (CU) and national customs strengthening. CU refers to an agreement,
established through trade pacts between two or more countries to remove trade barriers and lower or
eliminate tariffs). Activities in this subcomponent were; (i) capacity building; (ii) developing risk analysis
tools; and (iii) finalizing the installation of Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) in remote
border posts.

b. Institutional support for transport facilitation institutions. Activities in this subcomponent were:
(i) computerization and information technology linkages of major sector stakeholders; (iii) sector studies
related to monitoring and evaluation of the transport system, sector strategies and implementing regional
instruments at the country level; (iii) financing operating costs.

c. Management of the project. Activities in this subcomponent included technical assistance to
the implementing entities in the three countries.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$679.7 million. The actual final project cost was not
  available at closing.

  Project financing. Total IDA credits/grants of US$201.0 million financed the project (US$147.10 million IDA
  credit to Cameroon, US$30.00 million grant to Chad and US$24.00 IDA grant to CAR). The Bank approved
  three AFs for the project. The final actual amount disbursed by the Bank was US$500.93 million
  (US$301.07 million to Cameroon, US$28.36 million to Chad, and US$171.50 million to CAR). About
  US$107.9 of the Bank financing was cancelled (this included US$78.5 million IDA credit to Cameroon and
  US$29.4 million to CAR).

  There was parallel financing for complementary activities by the African Development Bank (AfDB), the
  European Commission (EC), the French Development Agency (AFD), and the CEMAC Secretariat.

  Recipient contribution. The recipient contributions were planned at US$75.3 million at appraisal. Their
  actual contribution totaled US$85.6 million.

  Dates. The Bank approved the project on June 26, 2007, and the project became effective on December 5,
  2007, with an original closing date of January 31, 2013. The Bank approved three AFs for the project,
  which closed on February 28, 2021.

  Changes made through the three AFs and eight project restructurings (including one Level 1
  restructuring) listed in sequential order are as follows.

  The changes made through the first AF approved in November 2009.

        The AF covered a financing gap of US$70.0 million for Cameroon and US$48.0 million for CAR, due
         to the higher- than-expected bid prices and funding shortfall from other donors.
        expanded the scope of road rehabilitation activities in Northern Cameroon and CAR.
        extended the closing date by two years (from January 31, 2013, to January 31, 2015), for completing
         the scaled-up activities.

  The changes made through the second AF approved n June 2011 are as follows.

        scaled up further project activities in Cameroon (rehabilitation of additional roads, reconstructing one
         key bridge in Northern Cameroon and road safety features), and revised the targets in view of the
         increased scope of project activities.
        extended the closing date by a year (from January 31, 2015, to January 31, 2016), for completing
         the scaled up activities.

  The Bank supported the following changes through the first Level 2 restructuring on October 2011.

        The Government of Spain financed the "Plan Africa" when the Bank approved the second AF for the
         project. This plan financed an activity that was included in the second AF. This freed IDA funds,
         which were reallocated for funding additional road activities in Cameroon.
        reallocated funds from the "unallocated category" to improve roads and railway interventions.

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



The changes made through the third AF approved for the project in July 2012.

      The AF was intended to close a financing gap due to the cost overruns in CAR.
      scaled up road rehabilitation and trade facilitation investments in CAR (strengthening border
       customs services, computerization and implementation of a strategic customs plan, transit
       arrangements, strengthening CEMAC CU and financing studies pertaining to transport and transit
       conditions along the corridor). Targets were revised to reflect the increase in project scope.

The Bank supported the following changes through the second Level 2 restructuring for the project in
January 2016.

      extended the closing date by three years from January 31, 2016, to January 31, 2019 for completing
       the ongoing activities in CAR.
      introduced specific implementation arrangements in Cameroon (discussed below).
      reallocated credit and grant proceeds in the three countries.

The third Level 2 restructuring in December 2016, reallocated credits and grant proceeds in the three
countries.

The Bank made the following change through the first Level 1 restructuring on October 2017.

      The Bank changed the implementation arrangements for completing the rehabilitation works for a
       205 km of road section of critical regional importance that was situated in a military conflict area in
       the Far North Cameroonian region. This change entailed the works to be executed on this road
       segment by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) under an Output-Based Disbursement Force
       Account Arrangement.

The fourth level 2 restructuring in October 2017, adjusted Cameroon's IDA credits and disbursements to
allow for an advance payment to the Cameroonian ACE.

The Bank supported the following changes through the fifth Level 2 restructuring in April 2018.

      reallocated Chad's initial grant to financing strategic studies, as two project works activities were no
       longer feasible due to the worsening fiscal situation in Chad.
      amended the results framework to reflect the changes described above.

The Bank supported the following change through the sixth Level 2 restructuring in June 2018.

      extended the closing date by 17 months in all three countries from January 31, 2019, to June 30,
       2020, for completing the ongoing activities.

The Bank supported the following changes through the seventh Level 2 restructuring in June 2020.

      extended the closing date to the CAR component by eight months from June 30, 2020, to February
       28, 2021, for completing the ongoing activities, that had been delayed due to the security situation.
      cancelled about US$78.5 of the undisbursed amount of the IDA credit to Cameroon.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



   The Bank cancelled an undisbursed amount of US$29.4 million for CAR through the eighth Level 2
   restructuring in February 2020, as this amount was not utilizable, due to the prevailing conflict situation in
   the wake of the political turmoil of the December 2020 Presidential Elections.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Regional context. The CEMAC countries in addition to Cameroon, Chad, and CAR, include the Republic
of Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon. Chad and CAR are landlocked, and their access to external
markets is mainly through the N'Djamena - Douala and the Bangui - Douala international corridors, which
link N'djamena and Bangui to Doula port by roads and railways.

At the time of appraisal, the security situation in Western CAR and Southwest Chad was acknowledged as
volatile, with armed groups posing threats to goods in transit, and it was expected that there would be
security considerations in Northern Cameroon. All through the implementation period, the security situation
in the participating countries deteriorated due to factors such as, Boko Harem terrorist attacks, kidnapping
of contractor's employees, rebel attacks in Bangui and N'djamena, significant constraints on supervision
activities and the assistance of special security arrangements in Northern Cameroon.

Intra-regional trade among CEMAC countries is less than 5% of the total trade. This is due to a combination
of factors, including in addition to dominance of extractive oil, forestry, mineral and agricultural commodities
in the countries' trade mix, insufficient road infrastructure (CEMAC is one of the few regions on the
continent where no state capital is linked to another capital by a paved road), high transport costs and
delays in transporting goods to the landlocked countries, inefficient customs operations and
transit arrangements, volatile security situation in western CAR, northern Cameroon, and southwestern
Chad, and large number of legal and illegal road blocks and check points at border-crossing
points. Consequently, the project activities aimed to secure surface links by road and rail to the two
landlocked countries, while tackling on a regional scale the inefficiencies along the transport logistics chain,
and endeavoring to achieve more effective implementation of the CU.

Regional and country strategies. The PDOs was aligned at appraisal with the CEMAC's Trade and
Transport program adopted in March 2006. This program comprised the following pillars: (i) implementing
a regional institutional framework; (ii) harmonizing national regulations; (iii) providing regional
interconnectivity of customs information technology systems; and (iv) implementing a trade and transport
facilitation project on the transport corridors. The project design of the trade and transit components
was aligned with the CEMAC countries Poverty Reduction Strategy papers. The New Partnership for
Africa's development identified the Cameroon - Chad and Cameroon - CAR corridor as short run
infrastructure regional priorities.

The PDOs continue to be relevant to the regional strategy to date. The CEMAC Regional Economic
Program for 2010 - 2025 underscored the need for establishing the common market, trade facilitation and
building physical infrastructure for integration. The PDOs were also relevant to the proposed African
Continental Free Agreement (May 30, 2019).



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



               Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Regional Integration Assistance
               Strategy (RIAS) for Central Africa. The strategy underscored the need for supporting CEMAC region in the
               areas of regional integration through improving the CU, and trade and transport facilitation initiatives at the
               regional level. At the country level, the PDOs were aligned with the Interim Strategy Notes of Cameroon
               and Chad at appraisal. There was no Interim Strategy Note for CAR at that time.

               The PDOs continue to be highly relevant to the Bank's regional strategy and the strategy for the
               participating countries. The Regional Integration and Cooperation strategy for 2018- 2023, highlighted the
               need for: (i) developing regional infrastructure along the economically important trunk regional roads; and
               (ii) building human capital and connectivity. At the country level, the most recent Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for Chad for 2017- 2020 reaffirmed the need to improve Chad's access to regional trade
               through the CEMAC Transport and Trade Facilitation Project. The focus area two of the CPF for 2017-
               2022 articulated the need for building resilient infrastructure for promoting inclusive growth. This focus area
               specifically articulated the need for reducing road transport cost between Douala and N'djamena,
               increasing rail freight between Douala and Ngaoundere. and reducing dwell time in Douala port. The CPF
               for CAR is currently under preparation by the Bank.

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank has financed previous projects at the country level in Cameroon, Chad
               and CAR. This was however the first of its kind regional project in Central Africa involving three countries.
               The project adhered to the Bank's criteria for regional projects (having activities in more than one country).
               The project activities included tackling both hard infrastructure constraints (such as rehabilitation of the road
               and rail infrastructure), and soft infrastructure trade-facilitation aspects (such as customs activities aimed at
               expediting the freight movement from the Douala port to final destinations in Chad and CAR).
               These activities were aimed at the development outcome of: (i) boosting interregional trade; and more
               important by, (ii) increasing landlocked Chad's and CAR's access to external markets through the Douala
               port. Given the clear links with development outcomes, the project reach was appropriate. Therefore, the
               relevance of the PDO is assessed as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To facilitate regional trade among the member states.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The outputs of activities such as, paving existing gravel roads, periodic maintenance,
                             rehabilitating roads on selected sections of the Douala-N'Djamena and Doula-Bangui corridors, harmonizing
                             and enforcing axle load policies at the regional level, and rehabilitating critical rail infrastructure, were
                             expected to improve the crucial transport links between the participating countries. These activities along with

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



the outputs of trade facilitation interventions (such as simplifying customs procedures, strengthening national
customs activities and interconnection of the customs systems between countries and implementing a new
CEMAC transit regime, were expected to facilitate freight movement between countries, and thereby increase
the scope for regional trade. The causal links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were
logical, and the intended outcomes were fairly monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 16 - 20, and ICR Annex 9).

The following activities were completed as targeted.

      The computerized single window (Guichet Unique pour le Commerce Exteriour , GUCE)
         was established. 65 trade clearance procedures were automated. Computer systems and equipment
         were provided to GUCE and employees were trained to use the e-GUCE platforms. Technical support
         was provided for deploying the e-GUCE at three border posts in Cameroon. With these
         changes, the cargo operators and transporters from CAR and Chad had an option to carry out
         transactions remotely without having to travel to Douala as was the case before the extension of e-
         GUCE services.
        Preparatory studies were completed for implementing interconnection under the CEMAC Trade and
         Transport Facilitation Program, and Information and Technology (IT) was provided to one customs
         post in Chad, two in CAR, and five in Cameroon.
        Customs officers and other transit actors in Chad and CAR were trained on the new transit regime.
         The three countries started publishing customs statistics publicly on their website.
        Seven bridges were rehabilitated (five in Cameroon and two in CAR). This exceeded the target of five
         bridges.
        In the rail sector, the Batchenka - Ka'a railway section (175 km) had been completed when the project
         closed. 12 railway bridges (including the Edea bridge) were rehabilitated, and light signals were
         installed at four level crossings. The availability of CAMRAIL's locomotives increased from 76.90% at
         the baseline to 82.50%, exceeding the target of 80%. Forty commercial wagons were
         delivered. These results enabled: (i) restarting passenger traffic between Yaoundé and Douala: and
         (ii) improving the flow of traffic on critical sections of the network. The project also contributed to
         improving Cameroon railways financial results. The "ratio of staff costs to traffic revenues" decreased
         from 27.6% at the baseline to 24.4%, exceeding the target of 24%, and the debt service ratio of
         CAMRAIL increased to 1.60 relative to the target of 1.40.
        The time to release the customs bond from Douala port decreased from 63 days at the baseline in
         February 1, 2007, to 11 days when the project closed, easily exceeding the target of 30 days. The ICR
         (paragraph 27) acknowledges, however, that the performance on customs bond release was not
         solely attributable to project activities, but also due to the decision of Cameroon customs to release
         the bond once the cargo tracking system report confirmed that the shipment had crossed the border
         without any incident along the corridor. (In the past, Cameroon customs would only release the bond
         once the original document was signed by the destination customs and returned to the original
         customs office in Douala port, a process that required at least two months).
        The percentage of transit documents electronically transmitted by the Cameroonian customs to CAR
         and Chad increased to 50% as targeted. The ICR (paragraph 55) acknowledges that although the
         indicator was achieved, customs declaration is to date not electronically shared between national
         customs, as the CAR and Chad customs could only read the data transmitted by Cameroon customs,
         but not process documents.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



These activities were not completed as targeted.

      The CEMAC new transit regime was not operationalized to use the ASYCUDA customs clearance
       procedures.
      The logistics platform for transit goods in Douala port, the upgrading of the multimodal logistics
       platform in Ngaoundere, the feasibility platform within Douala Port, and the geotechnical studies were
       not undertaken. The non-completion of these activities resulted in no improvement on the operational
       and transactional dwell times on the Douala port (discussed under the second objective).
      The activity associated with harmonization and enforcement of axle load control policies at the
       regional level was not completed.

Outcomes.

The activities described above were intended to facilitate regional trade among the CEMAC member
countries by ensuring electronic transmission of data for goods in transit to Chad and CAR from the Douala
port.

      100% of customs operations for goods in transit were carried out electronically in Garoua Boulai,
       Kouserri, Douala and Moundou in Cameroon.

In sum, the indicators were output oriented and there is no credible evidence towards the intended outcome
of facilitating regional trade among the member states. Further, given that several activities were not
completed, the efficacy of this PDO is assessed as modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the CAR's, the Republic of Cameroons and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets.

Rationale
Theory of Change. In addition to the activities described above, activities such as communication between
stakeholders on the port community, IT interfacing, installing port safety features, strengthening CEMAC CU
and national customs and institutional support for trade facilitation, were aimed at improving the performance
of the Douala port, and thereby improve CAR's and Chad's access to world markets through the port. The
causal links between project activities, their outputs and outcomes were logical, and the intended
outcomes monitorable.

The intended outcomes were predicated on the following assumptions: (i) the conflict zones in CAR and
Chad would continue to be far from the project corridors; (ii) strong political commitment of the governments
especially with respect to enforcing customs reforms; (iii) availability of qualified contractors for all types of
works; and (iv) availability of donor funding for other sections along the two corridors.



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



Outputs.

In addition to the activities described above, the following activities were relevant to this objective.

      The IT master plan was completed at the Douala port as targeted.
      The project constructed socio-community related infrastructures along the localities crossed by the
       road works (such as, construction of thirty-three classrooms, 1,800 meters of protective walls for
       existing schools, twenty-two toilets and twenty-five water boreholes along the along the Ngaoundere -
       Garoua section in Cameroon (ICR, paragraph 56).
      The project funded road safety features. These included: (i) a diagnostic study of emergency services
       and assistance to victims of traffic accidents, a traffic accident database, and a road safety information
       system in Cameroon; (ii) awareness campaigns on road safety, a road safety database, training the
       staff working on the database, and the piloting of a communication campaign for the road safety
       week in Chad; and (iii) elaborating a road safety action plan, and awareness and preventive actions
       on road safety in CAR (ICR, paragraph 58).

The output of the following activities were below the targets.

      A total of 322 km of roads were rehabilitated on the two corridors. This was far below both the original
       and revised targets of 435 and 612 km respectively. The number of km of roads rehabilitated in the
       three countries: 109.2 km in Cameroon (target 320.2 km), 60 km in Chad (target 135 km), and 153 km
       in Chad (target 160 km).
      The share of roads in good and fair condition in the Douala - Bangui corridor increased from 53% at
       the baseline to 95.8%, exceeding the original and revised targets of 71% and 90%. The share of roads
       in good and fair condition in the Douala- N'Djamena corridor increased from 40% at the baseline to
       81.3% (This exceeded the original target of 80% but was short of the revised target of 91%).
      The number of fixed checkpoints on the Douala - N'Djamena route were reduced from eight at the
       baseline in 2007 to four when the project closed, short of the target of two. The number of checkpoints
       (6) on the Douala-Bangui corridor however did not change relative to the baseline.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to reduce the average time taken at Douala port for unloading
an imported container to final destinations in CAR and Chad.

      The average time taken at Douala port for unloading an imported container to final destinations along
       the Douala-N'Djamena corridor reduced from 32.5 days at the baseline in May 2011 to 18 days when
       the project closed. This exceeded both the original and revised targets of 29 and 27 respectively.
      The average time taken at Douala port for unloading an imported container to final destinations along
       the Douala-Bangui corridor reduced from 30 days at the baseline to 17.4 days when the project
       closed. This exceeded both the original and revised targets of 28 and 27 respectively.
      The variance in transit time for the movement of imported goods from the Douala port to final
       destinations in N'Djamena decreased to 4.3, exceeding the target of 6.3. The variance in transit time
       for the movement of imported goods from the Douala port to Bangui decreased to 3.9, exceeding the
       target of 5.1.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)




                                  The average number of turnarounds on the Douala-N'Djamena corridor increased from 15 at the
                                     baseline in 2007 to 20.4 (an increase of 36% relative to the baseline), but not on the Douala-Bangui
                                     Corridor where an average increase of only 19.2 was achieved, as compared to the target of 20%.

                            The ICR (paragraph 32) acknowledges that although some of the outcome targets were achieved, they were
                            not fully attributable to the project activities, as other donor interventions and other initiatives taken by the
                            national authorities, including through bilateral mutual agreements on transit data exchange, complemented
                            the World Bank's civil works interventions.

                            In sum, efficacy of this objective is assessed as modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is assessed as modest, in view of the limited achievements of the project. For PDO 1, there
                            were issues with the implementation of the CEMAC transit regime, which in turn contributed to the limited
                            outcomes with transit trade. For PDO 2, most of the project-related activities were partially completed and
                            some achievements were not fully attributable to the project activities.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure for: (i) Road works
   activities; and (ii) Trade facilitation investments and institutional support for trade facilitation. These activities
   accounted for 84% of the actual cost.

   Road works activities. A simplified version of the Highway Development and Management (HDM 3 and 4) was
   used for conducting the economic analysis for road activities. The costs included construction costs (but
   excluded supervision costs). The overall economic benefits were assumed to come from: (i) reduction in
   transport costs due to reduced port dwell time; (ii) reduction in uncertainty for transit travel; (iii) savings in travel
   time and vehicle operating cost due to the improved road infrastructure.

   An economic analysis was not conducted for road works in Chad and CAR due to the security situation. The
   economic analysis was conducted for two road sections in Cameroon: The Mbere - Ngaoundere section and the
   Mbe - falaise segment of the Ngaoundere - Garoua section. For the Mbere - Ngaoundere section, the Net
   Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate was - US$14.44 million when the project closed (as compared to

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



a NPV of US$74.0 million at appraisal using the same discount rate). The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of
Return was 7.1% as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 15.5%. For the Mbe - falaise segment of the Ngaoundere
- Garoua section, the NPV at 12% discount rate was - US$5.53 million when the project closed (as compared
to the NPV of US$56.0 million at appraisal. The ex-post EIRR was 7.5%, representing half of the ex- ante EIRR.
The substantial decrease in NPV and EIRR was due to the delays in road works, which were delivered almost
four years after the initial expected date. Further, the economic analysis considered only the construction
cost, and not the supervision costs which amounted to US$24.1 million (including US$9.4 million in Cameroon,
US$9.3 million in CAR, US$5.4 million in Chad and US$5.3 million for World Bank supervision costs).

 Trade facilitation investments and institutional support for trade facilitation activities. The methodology
entailed comparison of the impact of the electronic and integrated clearance procedures on the port dwell time.
The project benefits were assumed to come from the improved transit procedures for Chad and CAR due to the
improvements in Douala port. The NPV at 12% discount rate was - US$72.36 million (as compared to the
NPV US$5.09 million at appraisal. There was no EIRR cited at closure. The negative NPV was due to the surge
in port dwell time between 2014 - 2018. and even though the rest of the activities in CAR and Chad were going
well, the negative impact brought about by the port of Douala's activities outpaced the positive economic
benefits of CAR's and Chad's components.

Administrative and operational shortcomings. There were several operational shortcomings during
implementation such as: (i) long delays in mobilizing enterprises on the ground (in some cases up to one year)
for bringing the critical equipment for civil works; (ii) poor qualification of the contractor's key operational staff
(and long delays to replace them); (iii) gaps in equipment needed as per the contract for works; (iv) delays in
preparing execution studies and plans (e.g. for the two main bridges and the road section PK00-PK35, which
were not completed 16 -20 months of the contract start); and (v) the very long delay in importing the quarry
explosives, and clearing imported equipment through the Douala port. These administrative shortcomings were
exacerbated by external factors over which the project had no control such as, deteriorating security situation in
the three countries, macroeconomic conditions, and the restrictions imposed in the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic. The combined effects of these factors led to much higher overall final project cost for road works.

Rail sector activities. Although the rail activities were completed successfully, they were delayed two to nine
times compared to the original deadlines and had substantive cost increases due to factors such as, low
capacity and bankruptcy of service providers (leading some to close the contracts which necessitated the need
for restarting the procurement process), unavailability of ballast laying equipment, uncontrolled occupation of
right-of-way, and other constraints linked to the operation of the railway line (ICR, paragraph 36).

Regional Implementing Agency. Regional and national coordination and engagement activities were affected
by low capacity and commitment levels of key stakeholders. CEMAC Commission was responsible for the
coordination of all facilitation facilities in the three countries. However, it did not play its designated role, due to
institutional weaknesses and lack of commitment to the project. The regional steering committee held its last
meeting in 2012 and after this there was no competent authority to guide the activities of the participating
countries (ICR, paragraph 49, page 43). These factors contributed substantially to the non-completion of the
new CEMAC transit regime.

In sum, the project did not demonstrate value for money for the Bank financing. The modest positive
achievement of the PDO results were achieved with substantive costs and over six years extension of the
project implementation period (100% extension of the original timeline). Despite several extensions to the




                                                                                                          Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



closing date, about US$107.9 of the Bank financing was cancelled (this included US$78.5 million IDA credit to
Cameroon and US$29.4 million to CAR). Given all these factors, efficiency is assessed as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                15.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    84.00
 ICR Estimate                                             7.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Bank's and the region's strategies is assessed as High. Efficacy of the two
objectives is assessed as modest in view of the limited achievement of project activities. Efficiency is assessed
as negligible, given the economic analysis and significant administrative and operational shortcomings during
implementation. Taking these factors into account, overall outcome is assessed as unsatisfactory, reflecting
major shortcomings in the project's achievements of its objectives and in its efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. Cameroon has operationalized its road safety database, and the road agencies
in CAR and Chad have allocated adequate financial resources for the road safety features implemented
under this project (ICR, paragraph 104).

However, there is high risk to development outcomes, in view of the inadequate financing for road
maintenance activities in all the three countries. Cameroon had appropriate funds for maintenance till 2011,
and since then there has been no viable arrangement for funding road maintenance activities. This means
that some of the road sections along the Douala- N'Djamena and Douala - Bangui corridors will need
reconstruction in the short run. Likewise in CAR, the funds that can be mobilized by the Road Fund for road
maintenance are low. Further, axle load limits are still not harmonized in the three countries. Although the


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



countries have road weighing stations, permitted axle loads level still differ from one country to another (ICR,
paragraph 103).

There is high risk to development outcomes for activities associated with intermodal platforms and port
efficiency. The failure of CEMAC to play a coordinating role in this project, has led the participating states to
develop bilateral approaches to coordinating facilitation operations. Given the low commitment of the
ministries of transport of the respective countries to trade facilitation operations, the sustainability of the few
achievements made in this project could be undermined due to the lack of a regional trade facilitation
mechanism (ICR, paragraph 105).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The analytical underpinnings of the project were sound and based on the following: (i) the Bank's
  Cameroon Transport Sector program; (ii) the results of the 1994 World Bank lending review study on
  regional corridors; (iii) the CEMAC Integrated Network Study (2003) which identified the priority
  corridors; (iv) lessons from rail concession projects, including the study on Cameroon railways; (v)
  the Bank's Diagnostic Trade Integration studies for Chad and CAR; and (vi) the Independent Evaluation
  Group's (IEG) World Bank Report on multi country operations (The Development Potential of Regional
  Programs: An evaluation of World Bank support of Multi country operations. December 19, 2006).

  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed trade and
  transport facilitation projects - Trade and Transport Facilitation Project in Southeast Europe, Greater
  Mekong Area Regional Integration Program, and the ongoing East Africa trade and transport facilitation
  project. ( However, these projects did not have comparable capacity deficiencies, security risks, and also
  probably had greater commitment from the government's involved). Lessons incorporated at design
  included: (i) involving the key public and private stakeholders during preparation (PAD, paragraph 33);
  and (ii) although each country project was implemented independently, they were focused on keeping the
  goal of regional integration. This flexible approach aided in customizing activities to the country context.
  Given that there parallel financing for complementary activities from other donors, the Bank prepared this
  project in close collaboration with AFDB, ADF and the EU (However, there is scant evidence that this
  made any difference).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal such as, security risk as Chad and CAR are conflict-affected
  countries, political instability in CAR, vested interests opposed to customs reforms and fiduciary risks.
  Mitigation measures incorporated at design included, close monitoring of the security situation
  through consulting with local communities and adopting contingency planning for contractors,
  and country-based support for the customs reform agenda. With mitigation measures, the over all project
  risk was only rated as substantial and not high, given the large number of entities involved in the project
  activities (PAD, page 23).

  There were substantial shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry. One, as indicated in Section five, costs were
  underestimated. This in combination with factors such as the fragile security situation in the countries,
  and shortfalls in funding from other donors, contributed to a financing gap and need for AFs for the
  project; Two, the implementation arrangements were not appropriate. CEMAC Commission was

                                                                                                        Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



  responsible for the coordination of all facilitation facilities in the three countries. However, it did not play
  its designated role, due to institutional weaknesses and lack of commitment to the project. The regional
  steering committee held its last meeting in 2012 and after this there was no competent authority to guide
  the activities of the participating countries (ICR, paragraph 49, page 43). These factors contributed
  substantially to the non-completion of the new CEMAC transit regime. The commitment of the
  government's of the participating countries was mixed. This led to the limited completion of country-level
  activities. Three, there were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9); and four, the
  arrangements made at appraisal for M&E, fiduciary and safeguards compliance were not adequate
  (discussed in sections 9 and 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank held ninety-two field missions during the project lifecycle (ICR, paragraph 94). However,
 the missions held with CAR and Chad had to be either virtual or through Douala, because of the security
 issues in those countries. The practice manager undertook two missions in CAR to participate in high-level
 meetings (e.g. involving the Minister of Public Works and the Ministry of Transport) to help the client in
 solving implementation issues. The supervision team also made some field trips in the Boko Haram
 threatened areas in the Far Northern parts of Cameroon with special security arrangements (armored
 vehicles and military escorts).The supervision team provided implementation assistance to the ever-
 changing needs of the each country through eight Level 2 restructurings. This aided in responding to the
 security crises.

 There were moderate shortcomings in supervision. One, given the problems experienced during
 implementation, the supervision was hampered by lack of continuity of leadership, with no less than eight
 experienced task team leaders during the project lifetime of seven years. Two, to address security issues,
 the supervision team chose an innovative option through entrusting the Army Corps of Engineers under an
 output-based force account arrangement. The team worked with the client to develop a replicable approach
 including the army to carry out works in conflict areas. The results obtained through this area were however
 poor, partly due to the Bank's lack of experience of intervention in conflict areas. and three, the Bank at
 best reactively resolved implementation issues such as, due to inadequate funding from other donors,
 delayed implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan, managing the severe accidents with the client
 (discussed in section 10a), and identifying the ineligible expenditures (discussed in section 10b).

 Given the factors enumerated above, the ICR assesses the Bank performance during supervision as
 moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The number of fixed customs checkpoints for secured goods in transit along the Douala - N'djamena
 corridor and along the Douala - Bangui corridor was appropriate for monitoring PDO activities. The Douala
 port dwell time for the main importers was appropriate for monitoring PDO2 activities.

 However, the M&E framework, with the extensive number of indicators could have been simplified,
 particularly in the context of the fragile context and weak implementation capacities of the Project
 Implementation Units. Furthermore, although the indicators were easily measurable, they were not
 straightforward in quantifying which outcomes were attributable to the project (given the parallel activities
 by other donors and other national initiatives not directly under the project's mandate). It would have helped
 to indicators pertaining to assessment of transport costs, trade volumes and passenger travel and road
 accidents on the selected segments of the corridors.

 The CEMAC Secretariat was responsible for implementing the CU based on the data from the participating
 countries (PAD, paragraph 56). At the country level, the ministries in charge of public works were
 responsible for annual assessments of the road infrastructure condition on the corridors, the ministries of
 transport in charge of monitoring the implementation of trade facilitation measures, and the national
 customs authorities in charge of monitoring customs indicators (PAD, paragraph 57). The baseline data on
 indicators were derived from the Bank's Trade Diagnostic studies (PAD, paragraph 59).



b. M&E Implementation
  Frequent adjustments had to be made to the results framework through the Level 2 restructurings to
  reduce the unrealistic number of indicators. Further, the targets for some indicators were revised upwards
  to reflect the increase in project scope through the AFs for the project.

  There were difficulties in collecting and aggregating indicators data across the three countries (ICR,
  paragraph 70). This problem persisted all through the implementation period. The ICR notes that the data
  on indicators in the Results Framework were not updated, and always reported in a fragmented way
  that was not coherent. At the regional level, CEMAC was unable to play its coordination role, and at the
  national level there was poor performance in implementing M&E in the three countries.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that the outcome indicators provided limited support in monitoring
  infrastructure investments. Although the data were useful for the general supervision by the World Bank,
  its use at the regional level was limited. The ICR also notes that there is no evidence that the data was
  utilized to inform any strategy or policy changes by the Governments.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



  In sum, M&E is rated as modest given the limitations in design and shortcomings in implementation and
  utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project triggering four safeguard policies at
   appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). (PAD, page 35). The project
   classification changed to a Category A (full assessment) project during implementation.

   Environmental Assessment and Natural Habitats. The direct environmental and social impacts of
   activities associated with road and rail sector interventions were expected to be limited, as these
   investments were along the existing sections. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), an Environment
   Management Plan was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 139).

   The project classification changed from a Category B project to a Category A (full assessment) project
   under the World Bank safeguard policies, following the decision to entrust the implementation of a road
   segment in the far northern part of Cameroon to the Army Corps of Engineers. An Environment and Social
   Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared to address issues pertaining to safeguards (ICR, paragraph
   76). The ESMP was further updated to include measures relating to COVID-19 prevention, with guidelines
   from the World Bank (ICR, paragraph 79).

   The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that the safeguards performance was rated as moderately unsatisfactory for
   an extended period. This was due to a combination of factors including, the reforestation operation which
   did not take place as planned in Cameroon, and the Army Corps of Engineers did not fully comply with the
   requirements of the labor law regarding civilian staff, absence of an environmental and social audit in Chad
   and issues regarding waste management and disposal on the new customs building, as well as issues
   pertaining to the abrupt halt on the construction of the Baoro-Bour road in Chad. The ICR does not state
   that there was final compliance with the environmental safeguards.

   The project reported six Occupational and Health and Safety (OHS) project incidents in Cameroon since the
   start of the works. Of these, two were classified as severe. two as serious and two as indicative. A
   safeguards corrective action plan was prepared and implemented (ICR, paragraph 77).

   Involuntary Resettlement and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (paragraph 141) notes that road
   widening under the Cameroonian section would involve land acquisition along the Benoue National Park.
   The physical cultural resources safeguards were triggered as several tombs were to be moved. A
   Resettlement Action Plan was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address resettlement and the
   safeguards on physical cultural resources (PAD, paragraphs 141 and 142).




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



   The ICR (paragraph 81) notes that a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared during the
   restructuring in 2016, due to the security situation that arose in the project area. The RPF identified the
   need to recruit a Non-Governmental Organization to monitor the implementation of the complaint's
   management mechanism and social communication in the project area. A dedicated Third-Party Monitoring
   (TPS), a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), and Works Independent Observatory (WIO) were
   implemented. The ICR (paragraph 81) observes that there were no implementation difficulties. The GRM
   functioned well and this mechanism made it possible to capture and process all the complaints (ICR,
   paragraph 84). The ICR, on the other hand, does not provide any details on whether there was land
   acquisition, involuntary resettlement or any issues with the safeguards on physical cultural resources.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial management arrangements
   of the implementing agencies at appraisal. The Bank concluded that these arrangements were satisfactory
   (PAD, paragraph 114).

   The ICR (paragraph 87) advises that the administrative, financial and accounts management functions
   were rated moderately unsatisfactory overall. However there were variations across the participating
   countries. In CAR, the regularity and quality of financial reporting was adequate and was rated as
   moderately satisfactory. In Chad, there was a shortcoming relating to insufficient mobilization of
   counterpart funds which resulted in an outstanding balance to contractors. In Cameroon, there were issues
   associated with significant uncleared matters pertaining to the railway component. This issue was only
   partly resolved when the project closed as there was still a remaining unjustified balance of about US$8
   million. The Bank granted an exceptional extension to resolve the issue by February 28, 2021.

   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the procurement management
   arrangements of the implementing agencies at appraisal. This assessment concluded that these
   arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 114).

   Nevertheless, the ICR (paragraph 88) reported that procurement management was rated as moderately
   unsatisfactory overall. The main issues across all countries were long delays in awarding contracts and
   problems in monitoring the execution of contracts during implementation. The ICR reports no case of mis-
   procurment.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    There were substantial
                                 Moderately             Moderately                  shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory              and moderate shortcomings in
                                                                                    supervision.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. An appropriate regional institutional frameworks (such as a corridor authority) with
appropriate powers and operational capacity is essential for regional projects involving two
or more countries. The regional authority for this project was highly inefficient, due to lack of
capacity and funding. The absence of such an organization encouraged bilateral discussions and
arrangements on regional issues, which could undermine the coordination of activities at the
regional level.

2. The technical design of transport projects should include activities for maintaining the
proposed infrastructure. For CAR and Chad, the maintenance of the proposed physical
assets were not part of the project design. A lesson from this project that project design should
ensure that there is an efficient budgeting mechanism and appropriate implementation capacity to
maintain the physical road assets.

3. Expanding the scope of the project to finance socio economic infrastructure for local
communities along the road corridor helps in fostering inclusive outcomes.
The rehabilitation/construction of schools and markets in the project impact areas of the rehabilitated
road in this project had an important impact of the living conditions of the population along the
corridors.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. It candidly discusses the problems encountered in a regional project where all the
participating countries had security issues. The theory of change provided in the text provides a clear link

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-CEMAC Transp Transit Facil (FY07) (P079736)



between the project activities, their outputs and the intended outcomes. The theory of change also explicitly
states the assumptions under which the intended outcomes are likely to be realized. The ICR draws
reasonable lessons from the experiences in implementing this project.

There are minor shortcomings. The length of the ICR is almost three times the recommended length of 15 to 20
pages. The ICR could have benefitted from better editing. The ICR does not provide sufficient detail or clearly
state whether there was compliance with the environmental safeguards.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
