     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022823

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P110693                                  VN New Model University

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47860                               30-Nov-2017                                       149,113,884.70

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2010                             31-May-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          180,400,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                           165,100,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                       149,113,884.70                                           0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Judyth L. Twigg            Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                       Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7), the
   project objective was as follows:

           To develop an autonomous research-based university to demonstrate a new policy framework
           on governance, financing, and quality in Vietnam's higher education system.



                                                                                              Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)




   The project objective remained unchanged. Targets for several key project indicators were revised; however,
   as the changes reflected upward revisions of targets due to the lengthened project period, a split
   assessment/rating is not applicable.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Policy and Regulatory Framework (Appraisal: US$ 6.2 million; Revised: US$ 5.4 million; Actual: US$
   5.1 million): This component aimed to develop policy and regulatory frameworks for a new model
   university, capable of self-governance with appropriate institutional structures and policies in place
   and demonstrating autonomy and accountability in its relationship with the Ministry of Education and
   Training (MOET). Activities included: developing policies and essential documents; developing codes and
   procedures on financial management, guidelines on quality management, and a human resources policy
   framework; establishing an information technology system that would integrate all systems; and developing
   admissions policies.

   2. Academic and Research Development (Appraisal: US$ 36.1 million; Revised: US$ 30.4 million; Actual:
   US$ 29.7 million): This component aimed to develop policies and capacity for academic programs and
   research including close collaboration with industry and private sector partners. Activities included:
   developing policies on responsibilities of academic departments; establishing a long term teaching and
   research strategy, based on German methods; internal and external accreditation processes; providing
   start-up support grants for professors; and equipping libraries and laboratories.

   3. Campus and Facilities Development (Appraisal: US$ 108.6 million; Revised: US$ 112.1 million; Actual:
   US$ 110.0 million): This component aimed to construct an entirely new campus located on 50.5 hectares of
   land in Binh Duong Province, using a combination of the highest German and Vietnamese design and
   construction standards that were environmentally friendly. The campus consisted of four main areas:
   academic and research, science park, sports and support services, and student and faculty housing.

   4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$ 5.3 million; Revised: US$ 4.4
   million; Actual: US$ 4.3 million): This component was to support project management and coordination
   (e.g., planning, procurement, financial management, and communications) and monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)



   Project cost

         The original project cost at appraisal was US$ 200.62 million. This was later revised to US$ 165.1
          million, of which US$ 149.1 million was spent.
         Over the course of the project, there was a loss of approximately US$12.82 million due to SDR/US$
          exchange rate fluctuations.

   Financing

         The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 180.4 million. This was later revised to US$
           165.1 million, of which US$ 149.1 million disbursed.
         US$ 15.3 million was cancelled from the Credit due to savings realized in campus construction
           costs.

   Borrower contribution

         The estimated Borrower contribution at appraisal was US$ 20.2 million. This was later revised to $0.

   Dates

         November 2017: The project was restructured due to significant delays in construction of the new
          campus. The project closing date was extended from November 2017 to November 2020 and
          targets for several key project indicators were revised upwards, to account for the lengthened project
          period.
         August 2019: The results framework was revised to clarify definitions of indicators.
         November 2020: The project was restructured to allow for approval of the financial sustainability plan
          and the completion of activities, which had experienced delays due to COVID. The project closing
          date was extended from November 2020 to May 2021.
         May 2021: US$ 15.3 million was cancelled from the Credit due to savings realized in campus
          construction costs.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Vietnam has been experiencing robust economic growth and a stable macroeconomic environment, which
has significantly contributed to a reduction in poverty (from 58.1% in 1993 to 12% in 2009). As the country
has achieved near universal primary and lower secondary education, the fastest growth has been taking
place at the tertiary level. Enrollment in colleges and universities has nearly doubled, reflecting increased
demand for higher education alongside government policies to expand access to the tertiary sector, such as
introducing cost-recovery. However, there remain challenges in the quality of education (i.e. proportion of
faculty with doctorates and student:faculty ratio) and low spending on research. Given the ambitiousness of
the government of Vietnam's goals to increase enrollments in higher education while ensuring quality of

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN New Model University (P110693)



               education and research (and supporting autonomy), it was decided to establish a limited number of new
               autonomous research-based universities under a “New Model Universities” program to demonstrate how to
               effectively implement these steps and achieve the goals.

               The government’s recent social and economic development plans (2012-2016, 2016-2020) identified the
               development of high quality human resources as a key action, in part by increasing enrollment in colleges
               and universities. The sector-specific Higher Education Reform Agenda (2006-2020) identified specific
               objectives to increase enrollment, increase quality, introduce research, and improve governance.

               The Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (FY 2012-16), in place at the time of project appraisal,
               identified increased capacity for innovation and value added as a key outcome, with the number of higher
               education students benefitting from Bank activities as a key indicator. The more recent Country Partnership
               Framework (FY 18-22) further sharpened the focus of education priorities to labor market readiness through
               the tertiary education sector. The "demonstration" aspect of the project was also a key element of the
               project objective. The relevance of the objectives is therefore rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To develop an autonomous research-based university to demonstrate a new policy framework on
                             governance, financing, and quality in Vietnam's higher education system

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear, with key activities and outputs likely to contribute to the intended outcome to
                             develop a new university model based on new policy frameworks on governance, financing and quality. The
                             project concept originally arose from a political decision within the government of Vietnam to establish a
                             "Vietnamese public university with a German footprint," marked by institutional autonomy, academic
                             excellence, and self-governance. This planned Vietnamese-German University (VGU) was also to contribute
                             to gradual changes in higher education policy. The university model was explicitly designed to be
                             autonomous and research-based, with the intent of attracting high quality faculty, researchers, and
                             students. The key outputs included policies and regulatory frameworks in the areas of governance, financing,
                             and quality; management information systems; a new human resources framework; quality assurance
                             systems; and state-of-the-art facilities including the construction of a new campus, labs, and libraries. These
                             outputs would likely lead to the intermediate outcomes of increased self-governance, financial sustainability,
                             increased research and collaborative capacity, increased academic quality, increased enrollment in higher
                             education, and the demonstration effect for other higher education institutions in Vietnam.



                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN New Model University (P110693)




Outputs

     Construction and opening of the Vietnamese-German University (VGU). The number of enrolled
        students increased from 90 in 2010 to 1,566 in 2021 (target: 2,516). Of these, 425 students were
        female (target: 629). According to the ICR (page 23), the shortfall was due to limited space available
        for enrolling students, given that VGU was in temporary facilities while the new campus was under
        construction; however, with the opening of the new campus, it is expected that enrollment will
        increase. 484 scholarships were provided to female students and students from disadvantaged
        groups (target: 190).
       Establishment of the University Charter, which delineates the main functions of VGU including legal
        status, mission, roles, tasks, and structure of internal bodies. The Charter established VGU's
        autonomy in the areas of revenue creation, revenue spending, and internal decision-making (such as
        human resources and curricula).
       Establishment of VGU's organizational structure, which consists of three decision-making bodies
        inside the university: the University Council (which guides the Presidential Board); the Senate (which
        guides academic decisions at the university level); and the Faculty Council (which guides academic
        decisions at the faculty level).
       Development of overarching academic management policies and guidelines on the roles and
        responsibilities of academic departments. The policies include: (i) academic activity management
        including general examinations, admissions, merit scholarships, and tuition fee regulations; (ii)
        regulations and guidelines on doctoral programs; (iii) regulations on student research activities; and
        (iv) regulations on management of scientific and technology activities.
       Construction of a state-of-the-art library, including resource books and licenses for databases.
       Development of business plan and financial sustainability models. After an internal review of the
        various models, VGU agreed on a model that would increase tuition fees by five percent
        annually. Financial management training was provided by an international consulting firm on topics
        such as risk management, delegation of authority, internal auditing, and budgeting and planning.
       Establishment of a Strategy and Quality Management Department, which developed internal quality
        assurance guidelines and a handbook, and conducted workshops to train staff on internal and external
        evaluations.
       Establishment of a Research Management Department and Industry Relations & Technology Transfer
        Centre, including the provision of modern laboratory equipment to establish 33 specialized
        laboratories and six combined research and teaching computing labs.
       Awarding of 14 professorship start-up grants to develop research projects, build research capability,
        and participate in regional and international networks and forums.
       The number of academic staff increased from 74 in 2016 to 91 in 2021 (target: 253). According to the
        ICR (page 21), the shortfall was largely due to the delay in opening study programs and lower
        enrollment than expected due to the delays in the construction of new campus; however, with the
        completion of the new campus facilities, it is expected that enrollment will increase along with faculty
        recruitment. VGU also developed a gender equity strategy and placed a gender equity specialist on
        the appraisal board for staff promotions to advise on gender issues and participate in the process of
        promoting staff.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN New Model University (P110693)




      Development of human resources policy framework guiding the recruitment and retention of high
       quality academic and administrative staff, and the establishment of a human resources department,
       which has compiled job descriptions and performance indicators for all departments and staff.
      Development of an information technology system, which is enabling integration of all university
       systems and processes (including internal web and archiving systems).
      Development of a five-year marketing strategy, which differentiates marketing to high school students,
       current VGU students, alumni, and industry partners.
      Health and safety standards guidelines are in the process of being formulated, intended to create a
       safe working environment and mitigate risks.



Outcomes

Governance capacity

      The University Charter was approved by the Prime Minister during project preparation for a period of
       five years. A revised Charter was developed in 2014 and given final approval in 2017. The Charter is
       undergoing a third revision, to reconcile some of the areas in the charter that may conflict with the
       national legal system, such as cost norms and permission to rent out part of the campus.
      The institutional structure was drafted in 2013 and became official in 2016 through a Presidential
       Decision. According to the ICR (page 17), this governance structure has enabled the collection of
       knowledge, experience, and opinions for the university and has created transparency in the academic
       decision-making process.

Financial sustainability

      A Tri-Partite Partnership Agreement (TPA) was signed by VGU, the World Bank, and the German
       government in 2020, outlining funding sources for the next five years. Under the TPA, the government
       of Vietnam committed to fund most of the operational costs for VGU. However, although the document
       that operationalizes the TPA (including financial autonomy regulations and specific amounts to be
       committed by each party) has been drafted and is under review by the relevant government agencies,
       as of project closing it had not yet been formally approved, due to delays stemming from the COVID-
       19 pandemic.
      The revenue-to-expenditure ratio increased from 0.99 in 2016 to 1.13 in 2021 (using a cash-basis
       approach). Using an accrual-basis approach instead (i.e. accounting for cash is no longer included in
       the revenue), the ratio was 1.08. According to the project team, the aim was not necessarily financial
       autonomy, but financial sustainability (regardless of the source of revenues i.e. public funding vs.
       tuition).

Academic and research quality

      The number of internationally accredited programs increased from 3 in 2010 to 15 in 2021. This fell
       short of the target of 21 programs. Of note, the programs were accredited by international or German
       accreditation agencies. The ICR (page 20) also noted that given the institutionalization of accreditation
       within VGU and the strong links with accreditation agencies, there is a "strong likelihood" that any
       future programs will be accredited.

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN New Model University (P110693)




      The number of international scientific indexing publications from VGU faculty increased from 18 in
         2016 to 192 in 2021. This surpassed the target of 132. These articles, published in international
         journals, covered topics such as sustainable manufacturing, sustainable urban development,
         computational engineering, and material sciences economics.
        The percentage of bachelor's degree graduates who acquired jobs related to their field of study and/or
         enrolled in graduate programs within 12 months after graduation increased from 74% in 2016 to 86%
         in 2020, then fell slightly to 82% in 2021. This achieved the target of 80%. According to the ICR (page
         21), the decline in 2021 was due to the fact that the number of students enrolling in graduate
         programs decreased as graduates postponed their postgraduate studies due to the COVID-19
         pandemic. Also, industry feedback from the last employability survey showed that industries were
         pleased with VGU graduates and wanted to absorb more VGU graduates.
        100% of lecturers hold PhDs, achieving the target of 100%.
        The number of collaborative research projects with national and international partners increased from
         5 in 2016 to 72 in 2021 (30 international and 42 national). This achieved the target of 65.
        During the period 2016-2019, VGU’s projects with private sector industry were valued at
         approximately US$251,274.

Demonstration effect

      Dissemination workshops and training sessions were conducted with MOET, VGU, international
       experts, policy makers, donors, and other universities to share the experiences of creating VGU as a
       model university. The dissemination of information included human resource policies and systems,
       quality management policies, knowledge transfer/ industry relations, and teaching excellence. For
       example, a large workshop was conducted in October 2020 on VGU's governance structure and
       academic development, and included 150 participants.
      Experience and lessons from this project informed discussions of the amended higher education law
       (2019), the Bank-supported higher education sector analysis (2020), and preparation of the new Bank
       project Vietnam University Development (P166656). According to the ICR (page 15), VGU is now the
       model for the original government initiative to introduce foreign university models in Vietnam. VGU led
       the way in establishing international collaboration in setting up a transnational research university to
       support the Vietnamese higher education sector.



Achievement of the objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of a governance structure that enables
autonomy and transparency, financial sustainability, and sufficient quality of research and education, and that
is having a significant demonstration effect. Although there were some shortfalls in achieving targets (number
of students enrolled, number of faculty hired), these were largely due to construction delays but are likely to
be met with opening of full capacity of VGU. There was also a shortfall in the number of programs receiving
accreditation, although the likelihood of future programs being accredited is strong.




Rating


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN New Model University (P110693)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated Substantial due to full operationalization of the Vietnamese-German University as a model
                            university, with governance, financing, and quality structures in place and evidence of autonomous and
                            transparent governance, financial sustainability, and quality of education.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the economic analysis (PAD, Annex 9) discussed the potential economic impact of VGU on the
   country's economy (spending impact and knowledge impact) and the financial viability of VGU after project
   completion. The cost benefit analysis estimated the impact of VGU on increasing the skills and employability of
   its graduates, leading to benefits of higher lifetime wage earnings. Costs were calculated according to the
   number of students enrolled (including Vietnamese and German government transfers per student and tuition
   fees). Benefits were calculated as increased wages of bachelors and masters graduates, which were considered
   to be higher than the average university graduate in Vietnam. The net present value (NPV) of the project was
   originally estimated at US$ 509.86 million, and the corresponding internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated at
   7.64 percent (ICR, page 59).

   At completion, the economic analysis (ICR, annex 4) updated the figures used in the cost benefit
   analysis. Enrollment figures were based on actual and projected enrollments given the delayed launch of
   academic programs. The NPV of the project was estimated at US$357.26 million. The corresponding IRR was
   estimated at 7.41 percent. The IRR is similar to that at appraisal, as expected benefits and costs will be realized
   once enrollment is at expected levels. However, the NPV is significantly lower than expected due to project
   delays. There were also some inefficiencies in project implementation, including a multi-layer management
   structure, coordination challenges, delays in approval of procurement plans, a temporary funding freeze, and
   overall delays due to political sensitivities.

   The total project financing was US$ 165.1 million, of which US$ 149.1 million was spent. The actual project
   period was eleven years, four years beyond the originally planned period. Over the course of the project, there
   was approximately 8 percent less budget available than planned due to exchange rate losses, and total project
   disbursements were approximately 98.4% of the revised project costs.

   Given the significant implementation delays (particularly in the key activity of campus construction, which
   affected subsequent activities), shifting project management arrangements, and lower than expected NPV,
   efficiency is rated Modest.


                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  100.00
 Appraisal                                               7.60
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  100.00
 ICR Estimate                                            7.40
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, Bank strategy, and government higher
education strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to full operationalization of the Vietnamese-German
University as a model university, with governance, financing, and quality structures in place and evidence of
autonomous and transparent governance, financial sustainability, and quality of education with significant
demonstration effect. Efficiency is rated Modest due to significant delays in construction of VGU, thereby
leading to an extended project period and lower enrollment during the actual project period. Overall, the
outcome is Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of essentially moderate shortcomings in the project's overall
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The institutional, partnership, and legal frameworks for VGU have been established through the University
Charter and TPA. Financial sustainability of VGU is likely to be achieved through the finalization of the
Special Financing Regime, in which the government of Vietnam gradually assumes all operational costs, and
the projected increasing enrollments for VGU. Political commitment to the continued operations and goals of
VGU also remains strong.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  Leading up to project preparation, the Bank had conducted a preliminary feasibility study on establishing
  the university based on governance statutes of the partnering technical university in Germany, which was
  then followed by the signing of founding documents between the two governments. Project
  preparation benefited from a US$700,000 Trust Fund grant from Korea, which supported activities to: (i)
  identify key processes and draft terms of reference for the university's systems; (ii) support academic and
  research and development planning, and curriculum development and training programs for the
  university's leadership, management, and teaching and research staff; and (iii) identify key processes
  and draft terms of reference for the designing, building, and equipping of VGU. There was also extensive
  technical assistance available due to the multiple partnership agreements established with German
  partners.

  The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework was overall well-designed with clear and relevant
  indicators, though with a shortcoming in the identification of indicators for measuring financial
  sustainability (see Section 9). Risks were appropriately identified and rated significant. As noted in the
  ICR (page 29), while several of these risks were clearly identified during project preparation with
  mitigation measures included, such as capacity building activities to develop autonomy, financial
  sustainability measures, initiatives to attract quality faculty, and campus construction challenges, the
  timeline to resolve the risks was longer than anticipated, contributing to significant delays. Other risks
  such as coordination challenges among implementing units and political commitment were not as clearly
  addressed. As noted in the ICR (page 35), in retrospect, the design was ambitious, because of the need
  to blend cultures, processes, and regulatory frameworks, and the time it takes to create from scratch a
  university that meets international standards.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided intensive supervision support, through both regular and interim supervision
 support missions and almost daily engagement by the in-country task team. This supervision included
 significant capacity building efforts for the counterpart teams and detailed reporting on project progress.
 However, although the project concept was initiated at the political level, cooperation and working
 relationships with the MOET bureaucracy, which had no relevant experience, took time. In addition,
 there were significant shifts in project management arrangements. The original structure was used for the
 period 2010-2016; however, in 2016, the MOET established a ministry-level Project Management Board
 (PMB) that was responsible for overseeing the implementation of approximately 30 donor projects, which
 led to transition delays.

 Project restructurings were well used to address obstacles and to refine the results framework.
 Implementation improved in the second part of the project period, as the MOET established a task force to
 improve campus construction, and the Project Management Unit was relocated to the construction site,
 with a new Director who had a strong civil engineering background and large civil works management
 experience. Overall, as noted by the ICR (page 35), despite significant implementation obstacles, the Bank


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)



 team effectively worked with the government to find appropriate solutions that would not compromise the
 integrity of the design.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework and design were overall sound. Key indicators and targets were clear, relevant, and
 measurable, enabling tracking of implementation progress and achievement of outcomes, with the
 exception of identifying indicators to measure financial sustainability. The PDO-level indicator -
 development of a financial sustainability plan for VGU - would not necessarily capture whether the plan was
 actually adopted and implemented; the intermediate outcome-level indicator - revenue:expenditure ratio -
 is more appropriately outcome-oriented. Some targets were appropriately revised upwards during project
 restructurings, due to the extended implementation period. Of note, given the importance of the
 demonstration effect of this project, the results framework included an indicator on dissemination
 activities. Evaluative activities were included, such as the tracer studies to assess student employability.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (page 32), M&E activities were integrated into the routine functions of VGU and the
  relevant project management units. Therefore, data was collected in a timely manner, with "high quality
  and reliability." The project results framework was updated on a timely basis to inform supervision
  missions. Tracer studies on employment were implemented as planned, and VGU also established
  internal quality assurance systems to assess the quality of academic programs.



c. M&E Utilization
  As noted in the ICR (page 33), M&E data was made available regularly for the results framework and
  was used to (i) analyze project progress toward reaching the project development objectives, (ii)
  determine modifications for the two project restructurings, and (iii) inform the analysis of the ICR. In
  addition, the results from the first employability survey led to a modification of the original indicator.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to planned civil works. The
   safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (BP/OP 4.01) was triggered. As part of project preparation,
   an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared, which identified potential environmental and
   social impacts from campus construction.

   In accordance with the EMP, contractors submitted plans for approval prior to starting construction
   activities, health and safety training was conducted for workers, and environmental quality monitoring
   checks were conducted. During the campus construction period, there were no occupational health and
   safety or environmental complaints received. A Grievance Redress Mechanism was put in place before
   construction activities started, with only one complaint from the locality in written form on the wastewater
   treatment for five households near the project area. The complaint was settled in January 2020. According
   to the ICR (page 34), safeguards performance was monitored and supervised regularly on a daily basis and
   consistently rated in the satisfactory range in Implementation Status and Results Reports.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management performance was initially rated moderately unsatisfactory
   between September 2011 and December 2013. This was largely due to delays in approvals for Statements
   of Expenditures that led to delays in disbursements and delays in submission of audit reports. By
   December 2013, performance improved and the rating was maintained at moderately satisfactory until just
   prior to project closing, when it was upgraded to satisfactory. During the project period, the main issues
   were (i) lack of counterpart funding and (ii) delayed approval of project financial plans. Required audits
   were submitted to the World Bank in accordance with the Financing Agreement, and over the project
   period, the auditors’ opinions were unqualified. Capacity development workshops were conducted by Bank
   fiduciary specialists.

   Procurement: Procurement performance was overall in the satisfactory range, with a period of
   unsatisfactory performance between July 2018 and December 2019 due to transfer of project management
   responsibilities to the newly created PMB. The PMB had limited fiduciary capacity, which led to overall
   implementation delays, particularly in the areas of awarding goods and works contracts. Eventually, the
   PMB delegated implementation responsibility directly to the VGU project management units, thereby
   removing an internal layer of approval and significantly reducing the administrative bureaucracy, enhancing
   contract management and supervision, and allowing for a coordinated workplan among contractors. The
   ICR did not report on any procurement irregularities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN New Model University (P110693)



   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 High                 High

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR (page 36-37), adapted by IEG:

      Developing a transnational university model -- involving two very different countries --
       can require extra time and attention to the issue of differing cultural practices in
       operating a higher education institution. In the case of this project, there were
       complexities given that the German and Vietnamese systems involved different practices
       with regard to governance, teaching, and research. Although the project design and
       mitigation measures recognized the complexities of this type of institutional development, it
       took more time than anticipated to blend the two systems.
      Bringing in experienced technical assistance from the very start can help to facilitate
       smooth implementation of a complex project. This project, which aimed to create a new
       state-of-the-art university from scratch, was highly dependent on the involvement of
       experienced civil engineers, construction managers, and specialists with technical knowledge
       of research equipment. The VGU staff had limited experience in purchasing research
       equipment, and as a result, staff and researchers depended on visiting scholars from
       German universities to support the development of technical specifications and capacity
       development. However, these visits were short, which often delayed the completion of
       technical specifications and led to further delays in the procurement of equipment.
      Investment in one university institution as a demonstration model can be a successful
       approach to impacting the sector, as long as learning and dissemination are
       embedded in the project design and results framework. In the case of this project, key
       planned outputs included workshops and training sessions with Ministry and higher
       education officials, and the results framework included an indicator on dissemination
       activities.



                                                                                                Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN New Model University (P110693)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR quality was overall satisfactory, in particular with regards to the quality of evidence. It was extremely
thorough and provided detailed information on project implementation experience and outputs. Particularly
given the "demonstration effect" aspect of the project objectives, the ICR provided strong evidence of the
project's impact not just on the students but on the higher education sector and on government policies. In
other words, results were not just about enrollment and employability, but other institutional outcomes. Lessons
were informative and well drawn from project implementation. There were a couple of inaccuracies, such as the
statement that the changes made at the time of the 2017 restructuring did not alter the scope of the project
(page 15) -- some outcome targets were, in fact, increased -- and the statement that all the risks associated
with campus construction and shared project management between MOET and VGU were correctly identified
(page 29).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
