     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Social Protection System (P147212)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022884

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P147212                                     MX Social Protection System

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84470,IBRD-88230                       28-Jun-2019                                       621,818,922.70

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Oct-2014                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            621,818,922.70                                              0.00

 Actual                                        621,818,922.70                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg                Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to support the Borrower's effort to: (i) increase access of PROSPERA
   Beneficiaries to social and productive programs; and (ii) develop instruments for an integrated social
   protection system (Loan Agreement, November 19, p. 6).

   Note: PROSPERA stands for Program of Social Inclusion, a conditional support program for poor households.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Social Protection System (P147212)



   The 2017 additional financing revised associated outcome targets upward, except for one target that was
   marginally revised downward for reasons unrelated to project ambition, but rather to shifts in government
   strategies. The original target for that indicator was essentially achieved and the revised target was exceeded.
   Hence, this ICR Review did not apply a split evaluation that has no practical relevance in this case.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   I. Support to PROSPERA Program and its linkage with social and productive programs (Appraisal:
   US$317.5 million; Revised: US$604.73 million; Actual: US$604.73 million)

   The first component aimed at supporting PROSPERA’s efforts to improve the social and economic
   wellbeing of beneficiaries by promoting investment in human capital and strengthening the program’s
   linkage with other social and productive programs while ensuring continued improvements in the program’s
   service delivery to its beneficiaries.

        a. Promoting investment in human capital through the provision of conditional support for education,
          health, and nutrition.
        b. Strengthening operational capacity to promote PROSPERA beneficiaries' access to social
           and productive programs by defining roles and responsibilities of PROSPERA’s staff to support
           coordination with other programs; designing capacity building activities to strengthen program
           implementation and linkages with complementary social and productive programs; strengthening the
           communication strategy towards beneficiaries, including youth and indigenous peoples; and (iv)
           designing and piloting coordination models for the inclusion of PROSPERA beneficiaries in social
           and productive programs.
        c. Strengthening PROSPERA’s monitoring and evaluation tools and strategy through technical
           assistance for updating targeting and recertification methodology; development of a digital platform
           with information on PROSPERA beneficiaries and social and productive programs; studies and data
           collection on beneficiary perceptions; and an evaluation of the long-term impact of the program.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Social Protection System (P147212)



   II. Strengthening the social protection system (Appraisal: US$31.6 million; Revised: US$43.6
   million; Actual: US$15.5 million)

       a. Developing and implementing an integrated Social Information System, including assessment
          of information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure needs; acquisition of software and
          provision of ICT services; developing an operational manual; developing capacity building
          mechanisms, including for software; and reviewing the legal framework and developing protocols for
          information exchange among ministries and agencies responsible for the implementation of
          PROSPERA and social and productive programs.

       a. Supporting the development and implementation of the Regional Social Development
          Strategy (RSDS) of the Secretariat of Social Development (SEDESOL), including by carrying out
          diagnostic studies to identify challenges in the development of social interventions; defining
          SEDESOL's organizational structure needs to implement RSDS; developing institutional capacity to
          support SEDESOL's implementation of the RSDS; developing the technological infrastructure
          required to obtain and analyze information on the supply of social programs and social needs; and
          developing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation system for RSDS.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost and financing. At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$350 million under an IBRD Loan
   consisting of a parallel project investment financing within a larger government program whose total cost
   was estimated at US$12.2 billion. The Bank was responsible only for its parallel financing, including for
   audit purposes (PAD, p. 9). An additional IBRD Loan of US$300 million was approved on January 19, 2018.
   The actual project cost under Bank financing was US$621.8 million, including front end fees of US$1.6
   million, reflecting a total disbursement of 96 percent.

   Dates. The project was approved on October 24, 2014 and became effective on February 17, 2015. A Mid-
   Term Review was carried out on March 24, 2017. The 2018 additional financing extended the closing date
   by two years, from June 28, 2019 to June 30, 2021. The project closed on June 30, 2021 (while also noting
   that the closing date of the additional financing Loan of US$300 million was moved up by 14 months to
   close earlier on April 30, 2020, as it was fully disbursed).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
During the past two decades, Mexico has made significant progress in social protection, including through
the establishment of the flagship conditional support program, PROSPERA, that had a
demonstrably positive impact on consumption, health, nutrition, and education (ICR, p. 5). The Bank has


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       MX Social Protection System (P147212)



been supporting the government in strengthening the social protection system over these two decades,
including PROSPERA’s predecessor program, Oportunidades.

As a next program phase (associated with this project), the government intended to promote the integration
of PROSPERA’s beneficiaries into the overall social protection system, by connecting poor families to
productive opportunities that can enhance their social mobility and ability to generate income, as an
additional route of action toward reaching the program’s long-term goal of breaking the inter-generational
cycle of poverty. With this goal in mind, the government launched this new phase for the program, including
linking and coordinating with other programs. Twenty-nine social and productive federal programs modified
their operating rules and formally agreed to provide preferential access to PROSPERA beneficiaries (PAD,
p. 4). The new phase required institutional changes, including redefining staffing profiles and
responsibilities, capacity building, and updating program communication strategies to link PROSPERA with
social, productive, and income generating programs.

In the larger context, and as a backdrop to PROSPERA’s intended evolution for expanding its linkages with
other programs, the overall social protection system was not achieving its full potential to address the multi-
dimensional nature of poverty because it remained fragmented (PAD, p. 3). Weaknesses included
duplication among various programs and a lack of information to identify gaps in demand and supply of
social services. According to the PAD, in 2011, there were 273 federal programs directed at improving
socio-economic welfare. Various programs were using different targeting and delivery mechanisms, and co-
existing with many other state programs, although most federal spending was concentrated in 10 federal
programs.

The federal administration that took office at the end of 2018 established social policy as one of three pillars
of its Development Plan 2019-2024. Changes made by the new government included the transformation of
PROSPERA into an education scholarship program (Benito Juarez National Program of Scholarships for
Welfare) aiming to strengthen inclusive and equitable education. While the design of PROSPERA and the
education scholarship program are different, the goal of promoting human capital development of the poor
and vulnerable was shared by both programs.

At project closing, the first objective that was entirely centered on PROSPERA’s beneficiaries to participate
in social and productive programs was no longer relevant because the new government ended PROSPERA
30 months before the project closing date. The second objective on developing instruments that facilitate an
integrated social protection system remained fully relevant. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPF for the
period FY2020–FY2025) acknowledges the recent shift of the federal government from conditional cash
transfers towards a greater focus on economic and financial inclusion while maintaining a constant focus on
supporting integrated approaches in social protection. Project adjustments supported the new government
strategy in promoting financial inclusion and in addressing low access to transaction accounts among the
poor in line with CPF Objective 1 to foster financial intermediation and inclusion, and with CPF Objective 5
to strengthen the capacity of the social protection system for economic inclusion.




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  MX Social Protection System (P147212)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Support the Borrower's effort to increase access of PROSPERA beneficiaries to social and productive
               programs



               Rationale
               Theory of change

               Under the pathway of change illustrating how increased access would be realized, it was reasonably
               expected that activities that strengthen program operational capacity to promote linkages with other social
               and productive programs, including by defining roles and responsibilities of PROSPERA staff to support
               coordination with other programs; adjusting the operating structure and staff roles to support the process of
               connecting beneficiaries to such programs; and strengthening and carrying out a communications strategy
               targeting beneficiaries, would result in staff being trained and certified on linkages between programs,
               changes made in the program operating structure, relevant messages communicated to beneficiaries,
               PROSPERA beneficiaries becoming aware of complementary program opportunities, and study findings
               being used to improve program linkages, including beneficiary perceptions. The above activities and outputs
               would plausibly contribute to increased access of PROSPERA beneficiaries to social and productive
               programs, reflected by the extent of their participation in these programs.

               The above theory of change on program linkages was grounded in the larger context of PROSPERA that
               concurrently seeks to develop human capital by continuing its activities and strengthening its capacities for
               the provision of conditional support in pursuit of improving program effectiveness in raising income and
               consumption, schooling attainment, and health and nutrition status (ICR, p. 6). These changes would be
               supported by improved targeting and recertification methods and by using knowledge generated by
               evaluation studies.

               As a long-term impact, the above undertakings would be expected to contribute to improved quality of support
               and well-being of the poor.

               By design, the project appropriately limited project accountability to increasing access to other programs
               because PROSPERA had little or no control over other social and productive programs, including their quality
               (ICR. p. 23).



               Outputs and intermediate results

               Main outputs consisted of conditional support delivered to PROSPERA beneficiaries, revised functions and
               responsibilities of PROSPERA staff for making linkages with social and productive programs, design and

                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Social Protection System (P147212)



approval of an inclusion model and a module for tracking knowledge of complementary programs, staff
training with an updated training curriculum, certification of staff, communications to beneficiaries, survey
designs for long-term evaluation of PROSPERA, establishment of a Technical Subcommittee of Employment,
Income and Savings, technical meetings on targeting methodology, and an international symposium on New
Generation of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs.

- The percentage of PROSPERA beneficiaries in Q1 and Q2 of income distribution increased from a baseline
of 68.5 percent in 2010 to 70.5 percent in 2019, close to the target of 71 percent.

- The percentage of PROSPERA students who transitioned to the upper secondary education level increased
from a baseline of 65 percent in 2013 to 72.8 percent in 2018, essentially achieving the target of 73 percent.

- The percentage of PROSPERA beneficiaries who were aware of complementary social and productive
programs increased from a baseline of zero in 2013 to 46.8 percent in 2018, short of the target of 80.6
percent.

- The number of certified bilingual promoters increased from a baseline of 136 in 2017 to 200 promoters in
2018, exceeding the target of 160 promoters.

- The percentage of citizen demands received and resolved within the time period established in the protocol
increased from a baseline of zero in 2017 to 99 percent in 2018, exceeding the target of 90 percent.



Outcomes

The evidence showed that the project contributed to a significant increase in access of PROSPERA’s
beneficiaries to social and productive programs:

      The number of PROSPERA beneficiaries who participated in social programs increased from a
       baseline of 0.47 million in 2014 to 1.8 million beneficiaries in 2018, exceeding the target of 1.2 million
       beneficiaries. Among those beneficiaries, 63.3 percent were females, exceeding the target of 55
       percent.

      The number of PROSPERA beneficiaries who participated in productive programs increased from a
       baseline of 14,370 beneficiaries in 2014 to 318,217 beneficiaries in 2018, exceeding the target of
       236,000 beneficiaries. Among those beneficiaries, 54.5 percent were females, exceeding the target of
       50 percent. On an index of 0-10, PROSPERA beneficiaries categorized their level of satisfaction with
       the support given by program staff to access productive programs as 6.9 in 2018, constituting a 40
       percent increase relative to the previous year.

The above achievements reflect noteworthy participation by women. The ICR (p. 20) noted that women had
the opportunity to participate in programs that aimed at increasing their assets, income earnings, and
employment opportunities. For example, the Childcare Facilities for Working Mothers Program had a positive
average effect of 18 percent on the probability of having a job and of six additional hours of work for
beneficiaries.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Social Protection System (P147212)



Beyond the stated objective on increasing access, the ICR (pp. 15, 18, and 19) reported on supplementary
evidence related to long-term results of PROSPERA that showed positive impacts on multiple dimensions.
Information sources included evaluations of PROSPERA’s long-term results over two decades through a
series of studies undertaken in close collaboration and support of the World Bank (PROSPERA-RAS),
external literature, and the 2018 National Health and Nutrition Survey. Examples of salient findings included
the following:

- Beneficiary household children’s participation in PROSPERA translated into improved labor market
outcomes for them as adults, i.e., they were on a better trajectory than their parents;

- The average child benefiting from the program in the long term was 36.6 percentage points more likely to be
employed than an individual never exposed to the program;

- A one-year increase in schooling was associated with 3.4 and 4.8 percent increases in hourly wages for
men and women, respectively;

- A one percent increase in height was associated with 10.7 and 8.8 percent increases in hourly wages for
men and women, respectively;

- Between 2012 and 2018, there was a reduction in the share of households who experienced moderate or
severe food insecurity and a 20 percent decline in chronic malnutrition, especially in rural areas;

- All breastfeeding indicators improved, with a nearly 10 percentage point increase in inclusive breastfeeding;
and

- Young adults who formed their own households fared substantially better than their parents in terms of
schooling, assets, and income when compared to counterparts who did not participate in the program.

Direct project beneficiaries increased from a baseline of 25 million in 2014 to 25.4 million in 2018, slightly
exceeding the revised target of 25 million beneficiaries. Among those beneficiaries, 53.7 percent were
females, exceeding the target of 52.8 percent. The target for project beneficiaries was slightly lowered in 2018
since further expansion of PROSPERA was not expected (ICR, p. 10) in view of government strategic shifts.

Notwithstanding the quantitative achievement in participation of PROSPERA beneficiaries in social and
productive programs through the end of 2018, shortcomings in attaining such linkages with other programs
were reported by the ICR (p. 28). An overall framework for guiding coordination modalities between
PROSPERA and other programs was lacking. Discussions between PROSPERA and other programs
sometimes focused more on negotiations than on shared objectives among programs. The ICR noted that
effective linkages required more than administrative changes, as references to the “preferential access” of
PROSPERA beneficiaries in the Rules of Operation of the complementary programs were non-binding and
not sufficient to ensure that PROSPERA beneficiaries would receive support. Social and productive program
budgets were not “tagged” for PROSPERA beneficiaries. Hence, programs could opt to privilege their original
clients. The lack of re-enforcing budgetary policies to prioritize PROSPERA beneficiaries weakened the
linkage strategy under this objective. Also, as the new government ended PROSPERA at the end of 2018, 2.5
years prior to the closing date, the ICR would have been expected to provide sufficient information on related
consequences relevant to this objective.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Social Protection System (P147212)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Develop instruments for an integrated social protection system

Rationale
Theory of change

The intended outcome for this objective (developing instruments) was output-focused. Although not ideal, the
stated objective was justified by the fact that achieving a fully integrated social delivery system is a long-term
process in a country with rich diversity and a large number of social programs, and for which time and
additional inputs at various levels would be required (ICR, p. 24). Hence, the objective focused on the
development or improvement of pre-requisite tools that enable or facilitate integration.

According to the ICR (p. 8), it was reasonably expected that:

- developing and implementing an integrated social information system would result in ICT infrastructure
needs being assessed and met, an operational manual for software and hardware, and protocols for
information exchange, and would plausibly contribute to an operational integrated social information system;

- developing and implementing a RSDS would facilitate institutional capacity strengthening, M&E system
design, and diagnostic studies on SEDESOL structure, and would plausibly contribute to an operational
regional strategy for social development;

- strengthening planning and monitoring of the social infrastructure fund would contribute to diagnostic
studies, capacity building, and dissemination of good practices, and would plausibly contribute to better
planning and use of funds by subnational governments; and

- supporting and implementing strategies for financial inclusion and service modules (Integrative Centers of
Development), including financial education and a grievance redress mechanism, and provision of adequate
infrastructure in underserved areas would plausibly contribute to Integrative Centers being linked to the
information system, and enabling electronic means of payment.


      Explanatory Note: Integrative Centers of Development are service modules envisioned by the
       government as convergence points of multiple communities that already share geographical proximity,
       culture, and public and productive infrastructure with special focus on marginalized and indigenous
       areas, and as a vehicle towards integrated service delivery. The inclusion of social participation
       and territorial and integrated benefit delivery approaches aims to contribute to the vision of a
       government that is close to its people, economically prudent in its operation, and has communities and
       beneficiaries at the center. Integrative Centers bring supply and demand sides together for integrated
       service provision of social programs and aim at increasing social cohesion and participation. They
       constitute a space for the provision of benefits for the Programs for Development (25 programs that
       promote development and well-being, most of which were newly created by the new

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Social Protection System (P147212)



       administration); financial Inclusion actions such as the ones aiming at enhancing payment
       mechanisms and improving financial literacy (supply); information and enrollment for potentially
       eligible populations (demand); and addressing citizen complaints. As of July 2021, there were 10,936
       Integrative Centers in operation (Task Team clarifications, January 28, 2022).



Outputs and intermediate results

Six services, short of the target of nine services, have been migrated to the Social Information System, which
included other modules to support field staff to attend to beneficiaries and potential beneficiaries for the
Programs for Development (ICR, p. 16). Services included data entry for beneficiary applications; comparison
of records against other databases; generation of potential beneficiary populations; thematic maps; analysis
of poverty thresholds of potential beneficiaries; and management of beneficiary records.

Intermediate results related to Integrative Centers of Development were reported as follows:

     i. The number of centers connected to the Social Information System increased from a baseline of zero
       in 2018 to 10,936 centers in 2021, exceeding the target of 600 centers.
    ii. The number of centers installed in municipalities with high indigenous populations increased from a
       baseline of zero in 2018 to 2,410 centers in 2021, exceeding the target of 300 centers.
   iii. The number of centers that performed financial education actions increased from a baseline of zero in
       2019 to 10,762 centers in 2021, exceeding the target of 450 centers. Financial education actions were
       carried out through the provision of face-to-face and online short training to actual and potential
       beneficiaries and through the distribution of booklets to the beneficiary population. Financial education
       actions covered topics on income and expenditure management, savings, and credit, and were
       designed for the beneficiaries of social programs, notably for the Program of Microcredits for
       Wellbeing.
   iv. The number of centers that received and attended to citizen demands per established protocols
       increased from a baseline of zero in 2018 to 10,936 centers in 2021, exceeding the target of 300
       centers.

The project also supported an International Seminar on Urban Poverty in 2015; the 4th High-level
International Meeting of the Network of Multi-dimensional Poverty in 2016; and a seminar on Good Practices
in the use of the Social Infrastructure Fund in 2017.



Outcomes

The following outcomes were reported by the ICR:

Seven instruments were developed for the integrated social information system and implemented: Unique
Registry of Beneficiaries; Targeting Mechanism; Social Registry; Social Program Catalogue; Business
Intelligence Tool; Geographic Information System; and Data Science Lab. Out of a target of eight instruments,
the Back-Office Dashboard was not finalized. The ICR (p.16) noted that the seven instruments are being
maintained by the Secretariat of Welfare and remain functional.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MX Social Protection System (P147212)



                            In 2019, and to be responsive to the government’s evolving strategy on financial inclusion, the project added
                            an indicator reflecting the ability of Integrative Centers of Development to provide electronic means of
                            payment of social benefits to beneficiaries. By June 2021, there were no centers that enabled electronic
                            means of payment of social benefits to recipients against a target of 600 centers. A main reason for the lack
                            of progress in electronic payments by the centers was another shift in government strategy towards
                            strengthening public financial institutions that guarantee payment mechanisms for beneficiaries and
                            prioritizing localities lacking access to banking services, while concurrently using Integrative Centers as single
                            window to attend to beneficiaries and to provide them with information. This ICR Review takes into account
                            these strategic changes that were beyond the control of the project, and considers the objective to develop
                            instruments for an integrated social protection system as almost fully achieved, as reflected by the totality of
                            evidence, and further supported by the streamlining of 233 social programs in 2014 to 123 programs in 2021
                            (ICR, p. 27).




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Both objectives, to increase access of PROSPERA beneficiaries to social and productive programs, and to
                            develop instruments for an integrated social protection, were almost fully achieved. The achievements are
                            further supported by the intermediate results and by supplementary information provided by the ICR on long
                            term impacts. The instruments developed by the project contributed to reducing fragmentation of social
                            programs, as the number of social programs was streamlined from 233 programs in 2014 to 123 programs in
                            2021, as noted above. The aggregation of achievements under both objectives is consistent with a substantial
                            rating for overall efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis of the PAD (p. 55) outlined an economic rationale for supporting conditional support
   programs and the social protection system with a focus on expected impacts, suitability of public financing, and
   value added for Bank support. The PAD (p. 59) referred to a 2008 cost-effectiveness analysis for PROSPERA
   that was undertaken after monetizing impact evaluation results of the program in rural areas. The analysis
   addressed only returns to schooling. It compared costs with benefits derived from education, valuing the benefits
   in the form of increased future earnings that result from additional years in school. The analysis also took into

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Social Protection System (P147212)



account opportunity costs and expenditures associated with participation, such as for transportation. According
to the analysis, the simulations showed benefit-cost ratios ranging from 1.4 to 7.1, using a 10 percent discount
rate, indicating that costs were offset by the value of benefits. The analysis also considered the results a lower
bound of expected benefits since impacts on health and nutrition were not included.

The ICR discussed positive impacts of PROSPERA in relation to education, nutrition, and employment aspects
(see Section 4). The ICR (p. 20) also stated that available information on the integrated social information
system suggested substantial benefits that justified the investment in the information system. Cross-checks of
program beneficiary lists with the RENAPO database (civil registry/identity) led to the reduction of duplications
and invalid IDs. Another example on improvements in the federal social pension program showed that, in 2016,
11 percent of beneficiaries did not have a verified ID, and that, by June 2021, the share had dropped to 5.6
percent. According to the ICR, savings achieved through the improvement in the quality of the beneficiary
registry were estimated at US$280 million/year, but without information on how these savings were calculated.

This ICR Review notes that the ICR’s economic analysis discussed PROSPERA’S achievements, impacts, and
efficiency gains accruing to the sector to illustrate project efficiency. These represent important outcomes that
belong in the efficacy section and should not be confused with project efficiency. The ICR’s efficiency section is
meant to assess the extent to which project resources were used efficiently. Also, the ICR (p. 49) did not fill out
Annex 4 on Efficiency Analysis that was expected to provide details on project efficiency analysis, assumptions,
and any further information supporting the analysis.

Adverse aspects of implementation have moderately affected project efficiency. The COVID-19 pandemic
prevented full execution of the project in its final year. Implementation of technical assistance activities was
delayed due to the lack of timely budgetary resources and lengthy internal government procedures, which led to
delays in procurement processes and reduced the time for executing contracts. Slower than expected
implementation of technical assistance activities was the main reason for the two-year extension of the closing
date (ICR, p. 22). Frequent changes in SEDESOL management led to some delays in the development and
implementation of the Integrated Social Information System. Nevertheless, the Additional Financing was fully
disbursed ahead of schedule, and the closing date of the corresponding loan was advanced by more than a
year.

Per communication received from the World Bank Team on March 9, 2022, efficiency analysis information was
available from other sources, but the ICR did not report on related findings. Nevertheless, based on positive
benefit-cost ratios provided by the PAD, and based on implicit assumptions anchored in global experience that
basic human capital development interventions supported by the project in nutrition, health, and education are
cost-effective, and with a reasonably adequate project implementation, but with shortcomings that moderately
reduced project efficiency, overall efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Social Protection System (P147212)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated substantial, as one of the two project objectives remained fully consistent with
the Country Partnership Framework for the period FY2020–FY2025 at project closing. Efficacy is rated
substantial, as objectives were almost fully achieved. Efficiency is rated substantial in view of moderate
implementation shortcomings that reduced efficiency. The overall outcome is rated satisfactory, indicative of
essentially minor shortcomings in the project’s overall preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that development outcome may not be maintained was analyzed in relation to each objective. While
the PROSPERA program no longer exists, the current federal administration transformed it to an education
scholarship program that includes scholarships for initial and basic education, targeted to poor and
vulnerable students and universal scholarships to all students in public high schools. The goal of bolstering
human capital development of the poor and vulnerable to break the intergenerational transmission of poverty
remains central to both interventions. Some of the operational structures and features of PROSPERA are
maintained. Importantly, the current administration in Mexico continues to emphasize access to
complementary social and productive programs, and recent household survey data suggest that
achievements have been sustained (ICR, p. 27). However, the elimination of PROSPERA has led to gaps in
the integrated attention for some specific groups – mainly children below school-age and women of
reproductive age – and for primary health services, both of which could have consequences for development
outcomes, as could the move away from a focus on households to individuals (ICR, p. 27).

With regard to the development of instruments for an integrated social protection system, this undertaking
has legal backing. The integrated information system was created in 2018, and the Secretariat of Welfare is
responsible for integrating, maintaining, and updating this system with beneficiary registries. Previous and
current federal administrations have taken measures to reduce fragmentation of social programs, and,
as previously noted in Section 4, the number of social programs was streamlined from 233 social programs
in 2014 to 123 social programs in 2021.

It is also expected that institutional strengthening generated by the project would contribute to maintaining
the risk to development outcome at a low level. The project contributed to strengthening SEDESOL (now




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Social Protection System (P147212)



Secretariat of Welfare) and to enhancing coordination capacities among programs. The project strengthened
M&E with improved practices in data management, processing, and quality assurance (ICR, p. 21).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project benefited from the experience of previous operations and from policy dialogue under
  knowledge advisory services. Readiness for implementation and fiduciary arrangements benefited from
  the Bank’s previous engagement with Mexico. Past lessons reflected in project design included the
  importance of supplemental interventions to translate human capital into labor market success, and the
  importance of system management tools to support a more integrated approach to social protection and
  inclusion (PAD, pp. 9-10). Two counterparts were in charge of project implementation, the National
  Coordination of PROSPERA and SEDESOL (responsible for the second component on instruments for
  integration). Both project components were well structured. A procurement assessment for SEDESOL
  was carried out by the Bank and mitigation measures were agreed upon. Component activities were well
  prepared, including for requirements and structures of conditional support (PAD, p. 25), and for technical
  assistance that aimed at strengthening linkages with social and productive programs (PAD, pp. 26-27). A
  Project Operations Manual was also prepared. As previously noted in Section 3, the operating rules of 29
  social and productive programs were changed to provide prioritized access of PROSPERA beneficiaries
  to these programs (PAD, p. 28).

  Risks were adequately identified with mitigation measures defined. Risks included those related to the
  large amount and complexity of technical assistance and stakeholders’ alignment under the same vision.
  The monitoring plan built on PROSPERA’s long-standing robust monitoring system. The project was
  classified under Environmental Assessment Category C, but it triggered Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.10 on
  Indigenous Peoples, for which an Indigenous Peoples Plan was prepared to further guide the provision of
  culturally appropriate services and activities to indigenous communities

  The ICR noted that there was a need for clear coordination modalities between PROSPERA and other
  programs early on. Per Task Team clarifications (January 28, 2022), other government programs were
  still in the process of developing coordination details. Another issue resulted from the fact that the PDO
  statement did not capture the project’s main support to PROSPERA’s core program aiming at improving
  conditional support delivery. Given the importance of PROSPERA core program to the achievement of
  the first PDO on program linkages, the statement of objectives would have been expected to explicitly
  include reference to the core program. However, the Task Team clarified that support to the core
  program was implicit, as was also reflected by some indicators in the Results Framework, and the Team
  noted that without PROSPERA as the platform for cash transfers financed under the project, access to
  other programs would not be realized. Also, the project share of the total program (US$12.2 billion) was
  relatively small.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Social Protection System (P147212)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank Team carried out implementation support missions on a regular basis, switching to a virtual
 format under COVID-19 travel restrictions. The Mid-Term Review guided the changes effected through
 restructuring that accompanied the additional financing. Aide-memoires were complete, and the
 Implementation Status Reports were candid on implementation status and issues encountered, including
 changes in priorities of the new federal administration for a territorial-based social protection strategy,
 including financial inclusion and banking services. Bank Team reporting was timely and complete (ICR, p.
 25). The Team incorporated specialized technical support needed for the integrated social information
 system. It was responsive to government requests and introduced project adjustments in support of
 changing government approaches to financial inclusion. The Team was proactive in facilitating new
 interventions and assisting national counterparts to navigate Bank processes, and in advocating for budget
 resources at higher levels of government in a challenging environment where the government’s approach
 to territorial-based integration changed twice during the life of the project (ICR, p. 27).

 In addition, the Team mobilized resources for complementary knowledge services that supported long term
 evaluation of the program and the social information system, including through technical inputs. Transition
 between TTLs was smooth. The Bank Team collaborated closely with counterparts in the Inter-American
 Development Bank that was providing technical assistance to PROSPERA on revisions in the conditional
 support for education aiming at improving school enrollment and completion, access to health and nutrition
 services, and early childhood development.

 There were some shortcomings, however. An overall framework for guiding and facilitating program
 linkages and coordination, that could not be finalized during preparation, would have been expected to be
 established during implementation. As noted in the M&E section, there were no evaluations related to
 participation in social and productive programs, although they were envisaged. These evaluations would
 have helped in testing the links in the results chain and explaining access bottlenecks. However, per
 communication received from the World Bank Team on March 9, 2022, this concerned project-envisaged
 evaluations, and several operational, qualitative, and process management evaluations were undertaken
 with national funding, although their main findings were not reported by the ICR. As PROSPERA Program
 ceased to exist by the end of 2018, a revision of Objective 1 that was specific to PROSPERA beneficiaries
 would have been expected, but per communication received from the World Bank Team, the incoming
 government asked the Bank not to modify the PDO, and the request was accommodated by the Bank
 Team.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Social Protection System (P147212)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Objectives were clearly stated and reflected by indicators that were measurable. Baselines were available.
 The results chain adequately illustrated the pathway towards the attainment of intended outcomes, and
 intermediate results adequately captured intended progress. However, given the importance of
 PROSPERA to the achievement of the first PDO, reference to core program support could have been
 made explicit (ICR, p. 24). Monitoring arrangements built on existing mechanisms. In 2019, a PDO
 indicator and several intermediate indicators pertaining to the Centers of Integrated Development were
 added to capture the new administration’s territorial approach to integration.



b. M&E Implementation


  Overall implementation was adequate. This was facilitated by the fact that several indicators were drawn
  from the well-established PROSPERA monitoring system. One tool (Puntos Centinela) of the monitoring
  system was enhanced in order to generate data on beneficiaries’ knowledge regarding access to
  complementary social and productive programs. However, data on access of beneficiaries to social and
  productive programs depended on the cooperation of these programs, and at times, there were delays in
  receiving the required information. The ICR (p. 24) noted that, while there were other analyses of the
  experience of making linkages with other programs, the project would have benefited from selected
  process evaluations of the experience with a few programs. These evaluations were not undertaken,
  although they were envisaged. As for the core PROSPERA Program, the ICR noted that its long-term
  evaluation was completed in a methodologically sound manner, and that the authors were highly qualified
  and supported by an external Advisory Group (ICR, p. 24). Implementing agencies submitted timely and
  regular reports on project activities and progress data.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used at various levels. Beyond routine project monitoring purposes, the decision to
  improve the communications strategy for indigenous populations, including through the creation of
  bilingual promoters, responded to M&E findings that showed weak results, such as in the use of health
  services. Discussions on project performance were an important focus of implementation support
  missions and deliberations with national authorities. Since only overall numbers of participants in other
  programs were monitored, the use of M&E to promote coordination at the program level had limitations.
  The results of the long-term evaluation of PROSPERA were widely shared, published, and used to
  inform the social protection sector and similar programs in other countries (see Section 10c).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX Social Protection System (P147212)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified under Environmental Assessment Category C, as it was not expected to
  generate adverse environmental impacts (PAD, p. 15). Since indigenous beneficiaries represented 24.9
  percent of PROSPERA’s total beneficiaries, the project triggered safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10 on
  Indigenous Peoples, and compliance was satisfactory throughout project implementation (ICR, p. 25), as
  also reported in the Operations Portal.

  An Indigenous Peoples Plan was prepared, and it specified the planned actions, including the use of an
  Indigenous Communication Plan and bilingual promoters. The number of certified bilingual promoters
  exceeded the target, and related coverage increased from four states in 2012 to 18 states in 2018, and from
  four languages to 30 languages during the same period. Following the 2019 restructuring, the government
  continued to implement the plan with additions reflecting the focus on Centers of Development, specifically
  the installation of these centers in indigenous areas (ICR, p. 25). Targets related to citizen engagement and
  attention to citizen demands were exceeded.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management was satisfactory throughout the implementation period. Overall public financial
  management systems were strong in the country. PROSPERA and SEDESOL were governed by well-
  defined operating rules and regulations, and had an adequate internal control environment with sound
  financial systems and procedures used by government entities. In addition, the Bank conducted regular
  financial management supervision and provided periodic training. Audits were carried out annually. The
  ICR did not report any audit qualifications, and the Task Team confirmed on February 3, 2022 that there
  were none, and that there were no overdue or pending audit reports. Procurement performance was also
  satisfactory until mid-2019, when it was downgraded to moderately satisfactory due to delays in
  procurement processes that resulted from lengthy internal government procedures and lack of budget
  allocations at the beginning of the year.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (p. 21) reported a positive impact of the operation in enriching global knowledge. Mexico shared
  best practices and experiences of PROSPERA, and the program was visited by government officials from
  numerous countries. According to the ICR, the extensive set of published studies documenting program
  results was an important asset in global knowledge and a model for evaluation efforts in other countries.



d. Other


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        MX Social Protection System (P147212)



   --



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory       Satisfactory
                                                                               Both ICR and this ICR Review
                                                                               rated Quality-at-Entry as
                                                                               satisfactory. This ICR Review
                                                                               rated the Quality of Supervision
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory       Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               as moderately satisfactory
                                                                               because of insufficient
                                                                               coordination in facilitating
                                                                               program linkages.
Quality of M&E                    Substantial        Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-29) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons,
partially re-stated by IEG:

Supporting a long-term evaluation of a large social protection program enriches global
knowledge. The role of the project in supporting a long-run evaluation of PROSPERA resulted in
valuable global knowledge. Long-run evaluations of social programs are rare, even among OECD
countries. The feasibility of such an evaluation for PROSPERA depended on sustained commitment
by the government to a robust measurement of impact at the outset. Project financing of the final
survey, resource-intensive organization of multiple rounds of surveys, and the ability of the World
Bank to mobilize additional resources for the analysis were instrumental in completing the evaluation
cycle. Given the growth of conditional support programs internationally, the results are expected to
inform such operations.

Promoting access of conditional support beneficiaries to other social and productive
programs can be further facilitated by a legal framework and by budgetary resources to these
programs. Although access of PROSPERA beneficiaries to social and productive programs was
quantitatively attained, achieving linkages was challenging. Preferential access was not binding.
Budgets were not "tagged" for PROSPERA beneficiaries, and programs could opt to privilege their
original clients. Opportunities and expectations to access productive programs were moderated by
financial constraints.

The broad framing of the objective to develop instruments for an integrated social protection
system facilitated the ability of the project to respond to changes in government strategies.


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Social Protection System (P147212)



Under the project, the government territorial-based strategy changed twice, but the PDO remained
valid as the focus on an integrated social information system was maintained.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The following areas are recommended for further assessment because they would be beneficial for knowledge
  generation in the social protection sector, both nationally and internationally:

  (1) evaluate, after a progression of one to two years, the near-term impact and benefits that accrued to
  conditional support beneficiaries from linkages with productive programs;

  (2) evaluate the impact of building instruments that facilitate integration on further actual progress in integrating
  various programs in the social protection system; and

  (3) probe deeply into the consequences of the termination of PROSPERA conditional support program.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was results-oriented and aligned with development objectives. It adequately illustrated the theory of
change and its results chain. It provided an overall candid critique of the project, but with insufficient information
on project aspects pertaining to Objective 1 during the project period that followed the consequential
termination of PROSPERA. It was tightly written and appropriately linked the narrative with the evidence and
ICR ratings. The ICR was internally consistent and offered specific lessons and recommendations derived from
project experience. These should be useful for similar future operations. The ICR had moderate shortcomings.
Key implementation challenges were reported in the lessons section rather than integrating them into the main
narrative. The ICR did not provide information on nationally funded evaluations addressing participation in
social and productive programs in the context of program linkages. The ICR followed guidelines, except in two
areas. First, the ICR’s efficiency analysis discussed impacts and efficiency gains accruing to the sector as a
result of the operation. These outcomes were confused with project efficiency, for which the ICR was expected
to assess the extent to which project resources were used efficiently. The ICR did not report on efficiency
analysis findings that were available from other sources. Second, the ICR Components Section in the main
text did not provide information on actual cost by component, and the related Annex 3 was blank (ICR, p. 48).
The information was promptly provided by the Task Team.


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MX Social Protection System (P147212)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                       Page 19 of 19
