     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022917

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P130182                                    Education Improvement Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Armenia                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83420,IDA-53870                       30-Sep-2019                                          28,683,341.91

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Mar-2014                                30-Apr-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          28,681,619.46                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Christopher David            Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                             Nelson                       Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 4), the project's
   objectives are "to improve school readiness of children entering primary education, improve physical
   conditions and the availability of educational resources in upper secondary schools, and support improved
   quality and relevance in higher education institutions of the Borrower."

   One outcome target, relevant to the objective to improve physical conditions and availability of educational
   resources in upper secondary schools, was reduced at a 2018 restructuring. A split rating is therefore

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



   conducted for that objective. At the time of that restructuring, US$11.72 million, or 40.9% of the total
   US$28.68 million in Bank financing spent as of January 1, 2022, had been disbursed.

   This Review validates an Interim ICR, required because an Additional Financing (AF) under preparation at the
   time of the ICR (February 2022) was expected to result in an overall project implementation period that would
   exceed ten years. The AF is scheduled for consideration by the Board in June 2022, with a project closing
   date of December 2025. The Interim ICR presents outcomes and results as of January 1, 2022. Per
   guidelines, the final ICR is to be prepared and submitted following project completion.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   1. Enhancing the quality of general education (appraisal: US$27.5 million, of which the Bank would
   finance US$22 million; actual: US$27.6 million) contained four subcomponents:

          Promoting school readiness and equal opportunities at the start of general education was designed
           to increase preschool access, enrollment, and quality through dissemination activities for parents
           and communities about preschool opportunities and benefits, and provision of grants and technical
           assistance to micro-projects. The grants were to support refurbishment of classrooms, purchase of
           equipment and furniture, provision of pedagogical materials, and teacher training.
          Enrichment of upper secondary schools was to rehabilitate selected high school facilities in poor
           physical condition and improve teaching and learning conditions in all high schools, including the
           provision of digital learning materials, modern equipment, and school furniture as well as teacher
           training. Rehabilitation works were to comply with seismic resistance standards.
          Improving data collection and monitoring of education system performance was to improve the
           National Center of Education Technology's (NACET's) capacity to monitor schools and provide them
           with adequate information and communication technology (ICT) coverage, with the goal of NACET
           playing the role of national center for education statistics and providing decision makers and key
           stakeholders with timely and relevant information on the whole spectrum of the country's education
           system. Activities were to include upgrading of NACET's facilities, development of an ICT education
           strategy, provision of hardware and software, and training of staff and teachers. This sub-
           component was also to finance Armenia's participation in large-scale international student
           assessments.
          Supporting further improvements in the quality of education through curriculum revisions was to
           finance technical assistance and consultative workshops to bring the National Curriculum



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



          Framework for grades 1-12 into conformity with national education law, prioritizing key competencies
          that students should have acquired by the end of each level of education.

   2. Mainstreaming of the Competitive Innovation Fund (CIF) for higher education institutions (HEI)
   into full implementation (appraisal: US$6.25 million, of which the Bank would finance US$5 million; actual:
   US$5.32 million) was to support the roll-out of a competitive grant program for HEIs that was developed and
   piloted under a previous project. The aim was to improve the quality, labor market relevance, and
   efficiency of academic programs. Proposals with a focus on underserved groups or regions were to be
   prioritized. Specific activities to be financed included updating the fund's operational processes and
   procedures, providing the grants, monitoring grant implementation, and tapping private-sector and
   international donors to bolster the fund's sustainability.

   3. Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (appraisal: US$3.75 million, of which the Bank
   would finance US$3 million; actual: US$2.32 million) was to provide financing for project implementation
   to the Center for Education Projects (CEP), the project implementation unit (PIU) within the Ministry of
   Education and Science. CEP was to receive support for administering, coordinating, implementing, and
   monitoring and evaluating project activities, as well as associated procurement and financial management
   functions.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$15 million IDA Credit and US$15 million IBRD Loan, with a US$7.5
   million contribution from the government (integrated within the annual budget allocation for the education
   sector). Of the total US$37.5 million planned project cost, actual spending as of January 1, 2022 was
   US$35.72 million. At that time, the IBRD Loan was fully disbursed, and US$13.68 million of the IDA Credit
   was spent, for total Bank spending of US$28.68 million. The government had contributed US$7.04 million.

   The project was approved on March 13, 2014 and became effective on November 20, 2014. A mid-term
   review was held in October 2017. The original closing date, September 30, 2019, was extended twice:

         On August 27, 2018, the closing date was extended by 24 months to September 30, 2021, partly in
          response to disruptions caused by the Velvet Revolution (a peaceful transition of power resulting
          from widespread protests in April and May 2018). There were adjustments to the components,
          component costs, and results framework, though the project's overall logic remained intact. The
          outcome target on number of supported high schools meeting Armenia's construction and safety
          standards was reduced due to unexpected additional costs of earthquake-seismic reinforcement.
         On September 23, 2021, the closing date was extended by another seven months, in part due to the
          2020 Nagorno-Karabakh conflict (six weeks of fighting in September through November that
          produced 90,000 refugees in Armenia, including 11,500 school-aged children) and the COVID-19
          pandemic, to April 30, 2022.

   The Interim ICR was submitted on February 14, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)




Rationale
The PAD (pp. 1-3) demonstrated that the project's objectives were relevant to country context. At the time
of appraisal, considerable progress had been made in improving access to pre-school, general education,
and higher education. Enrollment rates were nearly universal for primary and lower secondary education;
the pre-school enrollment rate was anticipated to reach 75% by 2015; and there had been significant
growth in higher education enrollment, from 19.6% in 2001 to 28.6% in 2008. More females than males
were enrolled in upper secondary and tertiary education. The government had undertaken a wide range of
reforms to improve quality of education at all levels, including curriculum development, teacher training and
certification, introduction and integration of information technology, and standardized performance
assessments, as well as the implementation of a per-student financing mechanism that produced
substantial efficiency gains. However, there were challenges remaining at all levels. Pre-school expansion
was not on track to meet the government's 2017 target of 90% enrollment. Prior reforms had not yet
produced demonstrable changes in student performance at the general education level, with grade 4 and
8 test scores stagnant or declining between 2003 and 2011. High school facilities were aging and, in some
cases, unsafe (lacking proper seismic stability and sanitary infrastructure). There was a mismatch between
the skills offered by institutions of higher education and those required by the labor market.

The State Program of Education Development (2011-2015) reflected these challenges, emphasizing the
need to: (i) ensure that all children enter general education ready to learn; (ii) build an education system
that can provide high-quality education to all students; (iii) establish a diverse tertiary education and
research system responsive to labor market needs; and (iv) improve productivity by endowing tomorrow's
labor force with the appropriate set of skills. Armenia's overall development strategy for 2014-2025
prioritizes the development of human capital, with particular emphasis, under its education pillar, on
strengthening upper secondary education, increasing the efficiency of basic education, reducing regional
disparities in education access and quality, and improving teacher training.

The project was aligned with two of the four key results areas identified in the Bank's County Partnership
Strategy for Armenia at appraisal (2014-2017): enhancing human capital through better access to quality
services, including health care, education, culture, and basic infrastructure (which is reflected in all of the
project's objectives); and expanding employment through high-productivity, decently paid jobs (which is
primarily reflected in the project's objective to improve the relevance of higher education). It was designed
to build on two previous Adaptable Program Loans (APLs) in the education sector (First Education Quality
and Relevance Project, 2004-2009, and Second Education Quality and Relevance Project, 2009-2015). It
remains aligned with the second focus area of the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2019-
2023), Human Capital Development and Equity, and specifically with its objective of "enhanced access to
good-quality educational services for skills development and employability." Planned results under that
CPF objective include increasing the share of children enrolled in early childhood education, improving the
quality of diagnostic tools implemented across different areas of the education system, and creating a new
cluster of HEIs and research centers.

Within the context of Bank and government strategy, the PAD's description of country conditions provided a
compelling argument that the specific areas contained in the objectives were important: pre-school
enrollment levels that were increasing but not on track to meet government targets; sub-standard physical
conditions and resource availability in high schools, of particular concern given the recent extension of the
general education system from 10 to 12 years (PAD, p. 2); and a mismatch between the skills being
acquired in tertiary education and the needs of the labor force. However, it did not provide information
or context that situated these areas as the most binding constraints to achievement of education sector

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Education Improvement Project (P130182)



               goals as outlined in the government's strategy and the Bank's current CPF. In other words, there was not
               clarity in project documents on the reasons that these objectives were chosen over other possible
               education objectives. There is no explanation, for example, for prioritizing pre-school, upper secondary, and
               tertiary education over the primary and lower secondary levels, or for focusing on quality and relevance but
               not efficiency in higher education. There is also insufficient justification for the scope and breadth of the
               project's objectives, spanning from pre-school to higher education. Furthermore, the second objective, to
               improve the physical conditions and availability of educational resources in high schools, was output-
               oriented; it did not specify educational outcomes that were to result from planned improvements in high
               school infrastructure and resources. A more outcome-oriented objective would have been expected
               particularly given the Bank's previous experience in the sector. The Second Education Quality and
               Relevance (APL2) project (2009-2015, P107772) had an objective to enhance school learning in general
               education; this project's second objective is not consistent with progress over time.

               While the objectives were clearly aligned with country context and with Bank and government strategy,
               there were significant shortcomings in their justification, framing, and overall cohesion. Relevance of
               objectives is therefore rated Modest.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve school readiness of children entering primary education

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that expansion and enhancement of pre-school education,
                             through provision of furniture and education materials to community-based pre-schools, teacher training, and
                             communications efforts to inform parents and other stakeholders on the benefits of early childhood education,
                             would lead to higher enrollments in better-quality pre-school facilities. These higher enrollments would, in
                             turn, improve the readiness of those children to enter primary education.



                             Outputs

                             Micro-project grants were provided to 136 community-based pre-schools, exceeding the original target of 120
                             and the revised target of 134 schools. Grant support included establishment of the schools and provision of
                             furniture and equipment, educational literature, and age-appropriate toys. To put this result in context, the
                             total number of pre-schools in Armenia rose from 717 to 906 from 2015 through 2019, meaning that 70% of
                             this increase in the number of pre-schools was financed by the project. 93% of these schools are located

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Improvement Project (P130182)



outside the capital city. 258 pre-school teachers were trained using project funds. As of January 2022, all of
the schools are fully operational. 3,462 five- to six-year-old children were enrolled in these project-supported
pre-schools in their first year of operation, exceeding the original target of 2,400 and the revised target of
3,450 children. A total of 13,580 children have been enrolled in these schools (52% boys and 48% girls) from
2015-2020, covering about 6% of children entering the first grade in a given year.



Outcomes

Early Development Index (EDI) scores of children enrolled in preschools supported by the project increased
by an average of 32% in academic year 2015/2016, 43% in 2016/2017, 57% in 2017/2018, and 85% in
2018/2019. EDI scores of children in comparable communities who were not enrolled in preschools increased
by an average of 9% in 2015/2016, 24% in 2016/2017, 29% in 2017/2018, and 75% in 2018/2019. The EDI
measures basic math knowledge, logic and thinking, oral language understanding, early literacy, and fine
motor development. The differences between the treatment and comparison groups were statistically
significant in all years, meeting the target. However, the formulation of the target in binary terms does not
provide space for distinguishing between Substantial and High achievement. Furthermore, the comparison
group used in the analysis was children who did not attend pre-school at all. A more persuasive comparison
could have been drawn between children who attended pre-schools supported by the project, and those who
attended pre-schools not supported by the project. In addition, the ICR does not provide a general analysis of
which factors -- establishment of the pre-schools themselves, teacher training, provision of materials,
increased community awareness -- were most important in producing these results.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve physical conditions and the availability of educational resources in upper secondary schools (original
outcome targets)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was situated at the output level: the provision of furniture, computers,
and laboratory equipment to high schools, as well as the rehabilitation of schools to meet modern standards
of safety and energy efficiency, was to result in improved physical conditions and availability of educational
resources in those schools.



Outputs



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Improvement Project (P130182)



Rehabilitation works were implemented in 13 schools, with 11 completed and two scheduled to be completed
by project closure.

188 classrooms were rehabilitated in eleven schools, not meeting the original target of 225 classrooms but
exceeding the revised target of 162 classrooms.

Under this objective, the ICR reports on other outputs that are indirectly connected to the objective:

Standards and syllabi for six general education subject disciplines across grades one through twelve --
Armenian language and literature, foreign languages, society and social sciences, physical education and
safety activities, arts, and technology -- were revised, with revisions endorsed by the government. This did not
meet the original target of ten subjects or the revised target of nine subjects. Revisions for math, ICT, and
science were removed from the project and instead carried out under a European Union-financed operation;
according to the ICR (p. 30), this reallocation of responsibilities was not documented through a formal project
restructuring.

A system of learning assessment was put in place at the primary education level, achieving the target.
Armenia now participates in international assessments, uses assessment data regularly to inform policy, and
makes annual reports publicly available. The Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)
2019 assessment was administered to fourth graders in 2019, with the results released in 2020.

With project support, including for software design and for maintenance of hardware and software, an
Integrated Education Management Information System (EMIS) is fully operational nationwide, covering
general, vocational, and tertiary education. 4,475 administrative staff were trained in the use of the EMIS,
exceeding the target of 4,000 staff.

All schools in Armenia were equipped with hardware and software that allows them to feed NACET with
timely information on student enrollment and attendance. A NACET data center was completed, and the
NACET building was rehabilitated. Attendance data is being collected in high schools targeted by the project,
but this information is not yet being used to track and improve student attendance, or to demonstrate that
student attendance is higher in treatment high schools than in comparison group high schools, as originally
planned.



Outcomes

Educational resources were provided to 107 high schools, including laboratory equipment for science and
technology instruction, computers, and furniture, meeting the target of 107 schools. The project included this
result as an outcome indicator, but it is a straightforward output.

The number of high schools targeted by the project that meet Armenia's construction and safety standards
increased from zero in 2013 to 11 in 2022, not meeting the original target of 17.

The ICR (p. 14) reports on survey data indicating that students and teachers are satisfied with the new school
rehabilitation works, laboratory equipment, teacher training, and educational resources. 55% of teachers said




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Improvement Project (P130182)



that they needed additional training to teach practical lessons in the new laboratories, and 53% said that
laboratory materials were lacking, indicating the need for ongoing investment and maintenance of resources.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve physical conditions and the availability of educational resources in upper secondary schools (revised
outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
The number of high schools targeted by the project that meet Armenia's construction and safety standards
increased from zero in 2013 to 11 in 2022, almost meeting the revised target of 12 schools. The ICR (p. 13)
notes that rehabilitation works are expected to be completed in an additional two schools by the end of the
project period. The project team later confirmed that the additional two schools are scheduled to re-open in
the near future.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support improved quality and relevance in higher education institutions

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that provision of competitive grants to HEIs, together with
technical assistance and training on the implementation of those grants, would improve the quality of higher
education. Partnerships between public and private institutions were expected to make public institutions
more responsive to market incentives and labor demand. Together, these results would support improved
quality and relevance in the participating HEIs.



Outputs

A CIF Coordinating Council was established, bringing together a range of key actors in tertiary education.

18 CIF grants were awarded to 14 HEIs, exceeding the original target of 10 but not meeting the revised target
of 15 institutions. As of the 2019/2020 academic year, 57,400 students, or 81% of all students enrolled in
higher education in the country, were enrolled in HEIs receiving these grants. Four of these grants were
aimed at improving management, information systems, and quality assurance systems in the HEIs. Two of

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Education Improvement Project (P130182)



                              the grants were aimed at increasing enrollment of socioeconomically disadvantaged students and increasing
                              student diversity. The other 12 aimed directly at improving relevance through the promotion of employer
                              involvement in education processes and course development, provision of internships, and development of
                              labor market study centers and career centers.

                              Six partnerships between HEIs or research centers and private industry were established under the CIF,
                              exceeding the original target of four and the revised target of five partnerships.



                              Outcomes

                              The share of grants established under the CIF achieving at least 80% of their proposed objectives increased
                              from zero in 2013 to 83% in 2022, not reaching the target of 100%. According to the ICR, 15 of the 18 grants
                              have completed implementation, and the remaining three -- at Yerevan State Medical University, the State
                              Linguistic University, and the Armenian National Agrarian University -- are on track to be completed by project
                              closure.

                              The project team provided additional information on the indicators that were tracked by HEIs implementing
                              CIF projects, demonstrating that 76% of those indicators supported quality improvement, and 35% supported
                              relevance improvement. Of those indicators, most were achieved at a rate of 90% or higher. Although this
                              information is aligned primarily with outputs of the grant program, rather than demonstrating outcomes related
                              to quality and relevance in HEIs, it does demonstrate progress toward improved quality and relevance.
                              Additional outcome-oriented evidence, such as data on labor market outcomes of graduates, could have
                              more convincingly demonstrated improved quality and relevance of higher education.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original outcome targets, the project substantially achieved its objectives to improve the school
                            readiness of children entering primary education and to support improved quality and relevance of higher
                            education. The key outcome target was not met for improving the physical condition of upper secondary
                            schools. Efficacy under the original outcome targets is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education Improvement Project (P130182)




  OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  Under the revised outcome targets, the project substantially achieved its objectives to improve the school
  readiness of children entering primary education and to support improved quality and relevance of higher
  education, and it was on track to achieve the revised target for improving the physical condition and
  availability of educational resources in high schools. Efficacy under the original outcome targets is therefore
  rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD (Annex 6) conducted a cost-benefit analysis for each component separately, assuming that costs and
benefits were additive. Benefits were assumed to stem from the planned direct results of the project as well as
longer-term changes in the quality of the labor force. Education premia were estimated with the Mincer equation
using data from the 2010 Integrated Living Conditions Survey. The model was calibrated, and the discounted
expected cash flow generated by level of education and gender was estimated, using labor market statistics
from the 2011 Statistical Yearbook of Armenia. A 3% discount rate was used. Costs considered not only direct
project costs but also the long-term costs and fiscal effort the government would have to make in order to
sustain the project's investments. The fiscal burden included higher maintenance costs for renovated high
schools, the expansion of pre-primary education, and the additional costs of increased enrollment at all
education levels. The analysis found a total net benefit of US$138.9 million and a benefit-cost ratio of 3.2, robust
to a sensitivity analysis that varied returns to education and the discount rate.

The ICR (Annex 4) repeated this analysis using a 3% discount rate, finding a net present value (NPV) of
US$118.8 million and benefit-cost ratio of 2.9, equivalent to a rate of return of 12.7%. Its assumptions -- that
every year of pre-school education raises EDI scores by 0.26 standard deviations, that rehabilitated secondary
schools would improve cognitive skills by 0.24 standard deviations, and that the CIF interventions would reduce
the average student's first job search time to one month -- drew from global evidence, though their applicability
to this project is not convincing given the lack of data provided on educational outcomes. Sensitivity analysis
varying the discount rate to 1% or 5% and the number of beneficiaries by 10% confirmed the positive returns to
the investment, with a benefit-cost ratio of 4.7 and NPV of US$45 million under the best-case scenario, and
benefit-cost ratio of 1.9 and NPV of US$290.3 million under the worst-case scenario. The ICR (p. 17) noted that
there may be non-quantifiable, longer-term additional benefits from the project, including enhanced school
environments, social benefits of increased educational attainment (improved health, reduced crime, lowered
adolescent pregnancy), and higher productivity levels and economic growth.

The ICR also noted key sources of implementation efficiency: the PIU's flexible adaptation to eternal shocks, to
turnover at the ministerial level (four education ministers during the implementation period), and to temporary
changes to PIU staff, as well as effective reallocation of unused funds. However, there were moderate
implementation inefficiencies as well: cost overruns for the high school rehabilitation activities and for
rehabilitation of the NACET building, as well as delays in procurement of equipment, and overall implementation


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education Improvement Project (P130182)



delays resulting from the 2018 Velvet Revolution, the 44-day conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh in 2020, and the
COVID-19 pandemic.

It is also noteworthy that some of the project's activities, noted in Section 4 under the discussion of the second
objective -- the curriculum reform, learning assessments for primary education, and support for the EMIS and
NACET -- were not directly linked to any of the project's three objectives.

On balance, given strong economic returns and only moderate implementation inefficiencies, project efficiency is
rated Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               12.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was Modestly relevant. Although the objectives fell within government and Bank strategy, project
documents do not present a compelling case that its three objectives addressed the most binding constraints to
achieving desired outcomes in the education sector, and the second output-oriented objective did not represent
progress over time in relation to previous Bank-financed interventions in the sector. The project substantially
achieved its objectives to improve the school readiness of children entering primary education and to support
improved quality and relevance of higher education. The original outcome target was not met for improving the
physical condition of upper secondary schools, but that objective was substantially achieved under the revised
outcome targets. Efficiency is rated Substantial because of positive economic returns and evidence of only
moderate implementation inefficiency.

These ratings produce an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory under both the original and revised
outcome targets, and therefore a final Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of moderate
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education Improvement Project (P130182)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Achievements at the pre-school level are likely to be sustained. Pre-school education is marked by strong
local ownership and government support. Project-supported pre-schools operate on the physical premises of
existing general education schools, and their maintenance is included in general education budgets. Strong
government prioritization of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education at the
high school level indicates that the equipment and infrastructure supported by the project will continue to
receive maintenance support, including ongoing training of relevant staff. However, according to the ICR (p.
25), ongoing funding for maintenance of investments at the university level is less certain. The AF under
preparation includes interventions to monitor investments and improve practices to help sustain project
gains. The government's 2021-2026 development program allocates resources toward school construction
and renovation (including renovating and equipping at least 500 kindergartens and pre-schools), provision of
additional school laboratories, introduction of new and updated educational materials at all levels,
and performance-based funding mechanisms for tertiary education.

The project contributed to institutional strengthening, along several dimensions, that is likely to be sustained:
it supported coordination and alignment among education departments, local communities, and grantee
schools toward the goal of improving access and quality of pre-schools, and established the CIF
Coordinating Council as a platform for establishing priorities in education and research in HEIs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  As would be expected given the Bank's long engagement in Armenia's education sector, project design
  reflected key lessons learned, especially the importance of realistic assessment of institutional capacity to
  manage reform, and the need to base a project's concept and objectives on stakeholder consensus and
  priorities. Planned interventions were also grounded in existing evidence and literature on the impact of
  high-quality pre-school on children's capacity to learn when they reach first grade, the positive
  relationship between adequate secondary school infrastructure and student learning outcomes, and the
  effectiveness of CIFs in boosting quality and relevance in tertiary education.

  The PAD's risk assessment (pp. 13-14) identified overall implementation risk as moderate, based on the
  need to engage and coordinate with a wide variety of stakeholders and the challenges of meeting a
  diversity of stakeholder needs, the possibility of CEP staff turnover, the limited experience of the ministry
  and CEP with the Bank's safeguard policies, the need to build local authorities' capacity to implement
  planned pre-school expansion, and the risk of limited demand for community-based pre-school
  education. The PAD's Annex 4 detailed adequate risk mitigation measures.

  Implementation readiness was high, given the extent to which the project relied on systems and
  structures in place from previous projects. New activities were planned to be implemented in a staggered

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



  manner prior to launch on a larger scale; for example, the rehabilitation of high schools was started in five
  pilot schools and then expanded to an additional eight schools in a later phase.

  There were, however, significant shortcomings. The seismic vulnerability of high school buildings was not
  assessed during the project design stage (ICR, p. 24), leading to challenges in the preparation of
  rehabilitation designs, increases in the required budget for rehabilitation works, and a consequent need
  to restructure the project to decrease the number of high schools that could be covered. There were
  further shortcomings with specification of the objectives and M&E design. The PAD did not make a
  compelling case for the project's specific objectives representing the most important goals within the
  government's overall education strategy and the Bank's country strategy. Additionally, as the ICR (p. 21)
  points out, the project's theory of change did not always follow a tight logic. There were several planned
  activities -- the setup and maintenance of the EMIS, the participation of fourth and eighth graders in
  TIMSS, and the revision of subject standards and curricula for grades 1-12 -- that did not contribute
  directly to the achievement of any of the three objectives. Moreover, the second objective, to improve
  physical conditions and availability of resources in high schools, was expressed as an output rather than
  an outcome; there is no objective or indicator that captures the intended outcomes of the investments.
  There were no outcome indicators to measure directly the achievement of the third objective, to improve
  the quality and relevance of higher education. Finally, the project covered multiple levels of the education
  system, making it difficult to ascertain a cohesive theory of change that worked across the entire set of
  interventions.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team had an adequate skills mix representing a wide range of technical and sector expertise,
 including specialized expertise in education economics, early childhood education, higher education, and
 ICT (ICR, p. 24). Supervision missions benefited from strong field support from the Bank's office in Yerevan
 and from a local senior consultant who supported implementation. There were four changes in task team
 leadership across the project's lifetime; the ICR does not comment directly on any adverse impact of this
 turnover, though it hints at challenges with a statement in the "Lessons" section that "Bank staff turnover,
 including that of task team leaders, should be accompanied by better handover and longer overlaps to
 ensure supervision support and communication flow with incoming governments, PIU staff, and key
 stakeholders is maintained" (p. 26). The project team restructured the project in 2018 to accommodate cost
 overruns and a challenging political environment. The team flexibly adapted project procedures to
 accommodate emerging issues and priorities; for example, to expand the number of HEIs benefiting from
 the CIF program, it adjusted eligibility criteria so that HEIs that had received grants in prior funding rounds
 would not be eligible for the final found.

 The ICR (pp. 24-25) notes two key shortcomings. First, there was inadequate documentation of changes
 throughout implementation, including rationale for the majority of revisions to the results framework under
 the 2018 restructuring (including the decision for a different donor to handle curricular revisions for three
 subject areas). Second, the Bank team was slow in responding to "No Objection" requests. It should also



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



 be noted that the lack of outcome orientation for the second objective and the lack of outcome indicators to
 measure the third objective were not addressed.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 CEP was responsible for coordinating monitoring activities and for bringing together representatives of the
 education ministry to monitor results. Results indicators were selected on the basis of data requirements
 already established as part of the ministry's regular data collection, and were also to be monitored
 using baseline and follow-up surveys as well as reports prepared by CEP. Project design envisioned
 "strong beneficiary/stakeholder participation in project monitoring and supervision activities on an ongoing
 basis" (PAD, p. 12), including using project websites and social media as a forum for students, parents,
 educators, and other beneficiaries to provide feedback. Project efforts were to be directed at building
 ministry capacity in policy planning, monitoring, and evaluation, with CEP working eventually to transfer to
 the ministry responsibility for quality reporting, internal and external evaluations and assessments, and
 monitoring and evaluating the project's outcomes.

 As noted in Section 8a, there were important shortcomings in the project's overall logic, the outcome
 orientation of the second objective, and the adequacy of the outcome indicators for the third objective.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 22), CEP collected data on project indicators as planned, reported in biannual
  project implementation reports shared with the Bank. The establishment of the EMIS provided additional
  capacity for measuring results. Capacity at NACET was developed to the point that it regularly provides
  monitoring information directly to the ministry. According to additional information provided by the project
  team, almost all grant-funded pre-schools, high schools, and HEIs gathered feedback from beneficiaries
  and stakeholders through on-line platforms, and most of the participating HEIs engaged with beneficiaries
  and stakeholders through dedicated social media accounts and websites. M&E capacity at the ministry,
  however, was not developed such that responsibility for M&E could be transferred from CEP. The ICR
  notes some additional M&E shortcomings that persisted during implementation: regular ministry
  administrative data reported primarily on outputs rather than outcomes; annual targets were missing for
  some indicators; gender-disaggregated data was not collected and reported as planned for several
  indicators; and progress on one intermediate indicator -- improved student attendance in high schools
  targeted by the project -- was not reported at all. The ICR (p. 22) cites an agreement between the PIU
  and the Bank that data on this indicator would not be reported until project closing, as results would
  become apparent only 1-2 years after school rehabilitations were completed. The ICR questions why the

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



  Bank agreed to this arrangement, but it should be noted that an attendance indicator would measure an
  outcome that goes beyond the output-oriented objective to improve physical conditions and availability of
  educational resources.




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 22) notes that project M&E data was used to inform major changes in implementation,
  including increasing the targets for support of community-based pre-schools and revising the eligibility
  criteria for HEIs to apply for CIF grants.

  Overall, uncorrected shortcomings in M&E design made it impossible to assess achievement across all
  three objectives. M&E Quality is therefore rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
   Assessment, and OP/BP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources. Because all civil works were to take place
   within the existing footprint of educational facilities, OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, was not triggered.
   Rehabilitation works were expected to have some temporary negative impacts typical for reconstruction and
   rehabilitation of small to medium-size buildings. Managing and minimizing these impacts was to be
   achieved by adhering to good construction practices and to an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for
   each civil work. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was developed as part of project
   preparation, with site-specific EMPs to be worked out as beneficiary institutions were identified and
   rehabilitation designs drafted. In the event that any school buildings targeted for rehabilitation carried
   historical value, renovation designs were to be cleared with the national authorities responsible for the
   preservation of cultural heritage; these provisions were included in the EMF. According to the ICR (p. 23),
   the site-specific EMPs were developed as planned, and designated staff monitored their implementation.
   The ICR reports that safeguards performance was rated Satisfactory throughout the project's lifetime.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   A financial management (FM) assessment was performed by the Bank in October 2013 and found that
   CEP had adequate arrangements in place. The ICR (p. 23) reports that there was compliance with FM
   requirements throughout the project implementation period. FM was rated Satisfactory in all



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)



   Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs). Interim financial reports were always submitted on time
   and found acceptable to the Bank, and audits were on time and clean.

   A procurement assessment was performed by the Bank in June 2013. It found that CEP had adequate
   procurement capacity, but limited experience in procuring and implementing works contracts, which were a
   major element of the project. Procurement risk was therefore rated Moderate at appraisal. The ICR (p. 23)
   reports that procurement arrangements were "generally adequate," with the Bank exercising prior review
   on a comparatively large share of contracts. A project procurement review was conducted annually.
   Changes in the civil works contracts for rehabilitation of schools, the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, and the
   COVID-19 pandemic produced delays. Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory in all ISRs.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (p. 18) notes some possible unintended gender outcomes. By increasing access to pre-school,
   the project may have indirectly encouraged mothers of young children to join or return to the labor market
   earlier than they otherwise would have. Improvements in high school infrastructure, including better
   provision of water supplies and promotion of general sanitation and hygiene, may have led to increased
   female student attendance. It would have been useful if the project had sought to better capture and record
   potential changes to this end, given the effort devoted to undertaking an impact evaluation measuring the
   effects in early childhood development.

   A supplemental technical assistance to this project, "Gender Dynamics in STEM Fields of Study and
   Occupation," was developed to understand the factors contributing to wide underrepresentation of women
   in STEM in both higher education and the workforce. It found that cultural stereotypes related to the types
   of work deemed suitable for women were the dominant barrier to gender equality, with women and girls
   self-selecting out of STEM education tracks and career choices. These findings were shared with the
   government in 2017.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The project's objectives were
                                                                               only modestly relevant, and
                                                                               progress on improving physical
                                                                               conditions and the availability of
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               educational resources in upper
                                                                               secondary schools was modest
                                                                               under the original outcome
                                                                               targets.



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Education Improvement Project (P130182)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                               There were important
                                                                               shortcomings in the project's
                                                                               overall logic, the outcome
                                                                               orientation of the second
Quality of M&E                   Substantial         Modest                    objective, and the adequacy of
                                                                               the outcome indicators for the
                                                                               third objective. These issues
                                                                               were not addressed during
                                                                               project implementation.
Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 26) offered several insightful lessons, some of which are highlighted here:

Projects in sectors where the Bank has prior experience can benefit from a mix of tried-and-
tested activities with more innovative interventions that entail higher levels of risk. In the case
of this project, the pre-school community-based microprojects and CIF had already been through
proof-of-concept at the project design stage, allowing for rapid start-up and freeing human and
financial resources to focus on more ambitious new undertakings like the rehabilitation and
equipping of high schools.

Projects that span several different levels of education can benefit from a unifying focus; at
minimum, a plausible, coherent theory of change is required for each separate objective
covering a different education level. In the case of this project, some interventions (those related
to data monitoring and performance, as well as curriculum revision) were not tightly connected to
any of the three objectives, and the formulation of the second objective discouraged an emphasis
on outcomes. This was particularly disappointing given previous experience working in the sector.

Achievement of objectives cannot be demonstrated in the absence of appropriate indicators.
In the case of this project, achievement of the second objective was limited to counting outputs
because of the way the objective was framed, and there were no indicators to measure achievement
of the third objective (nor did the ICR provide additional data to compensate).




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Improvement Project (P130182)




The ICR is concise and candid, with clear statements of the shortcomings in the project's design and M&E
framework. Its evidence is of generally high quality. The analysis is outcome-oriented, noting where the project
lacked data on some key outcomes. Its lessons are insightful and derived from project experience. With the
reduction in ambition of the key indicator measuring achievement of the second objective, a split rating
methodology was required; the ICR did not follow guidelines in this area. In the absence of outcome indicators
to measure achievement of the third objective, the ICR could have offered evidence outside the formal results
framework or commented on the lack of availability of such evidence; this Review’s assessment of that
objective relied on information provided later by the project team.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
