     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022784

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127723                                    Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82720                                 31-Mar-2019                                        265,092,778.75

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jun-2013                                30-Mar-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            300,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             265,092,778.75                                             0.00

 Actual                                         265,092,778.75                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Elisabeth Goller             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement dated September 24, 2013
   (Schedule 1, page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PDO):

   " To contribute to the improvement of the Borrower's transport and logistics efficiency while
   enhancing the Borrower's capacity in environmental and disaster risk management ".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



   This review is based on the objectives stated below.

   1. To contribute to the improvement of the Borrower's transport and logistics efficiency.

   2. To enhance the Borrower's capacity in environmental management.

   3. To enhance the Borrower's capacity in disaster risk management.

   Although some indicators were changed, the PDOs remained unchanged and the project scope was
   expanded substantially with the co financing from the international private bank in 2015 (discussed in section
   2e). Therefore, this review is not based on a split rating of objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components.

   1. Improving transport and logistics efficiency and safety. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$394.2 million (including contingencies). The revised estimate was US$ 694.2 million (discussed in
   section 2e). The actual cost was US$694.2 million. This component planned to finance activities for
   improving transport and logistics efficiency and improving road safety. There were two sub-components.

   a. Rehabilitation and upgrading the State's transport networks through supporting the Road
   Agency's (DER) road rehabilitation and upgrading program. Activities included: (i) rehabilitating roads,
   constructing third lanes, duplications, slope protection and improving intersections of existing paved
   roads; (ii) reconstructing two bridges with wider clearance on the Tiete and Piracicaba rivers to enhance
   waterway navigation on the Tiete river: (iii) carrying out a pilot of performance-based contracts for road
   rehabilitation and maintenance (CREMA) contracts on 100 kilometers (km) of roads: and (iv) improving road
   safety.

   With the 2015 restructuring, the scope of this component was expanded with co financing from the
   international private bank (Santander) to include rehabilitation of additional kilometer (km) of roads.

   b. Sustainable transport planning and management and supporting the Secretariat of Logistics and
   Transport through financing studies. Activities in this component included: (i) improving transport
   planning to increase multimodality and embedding disaster risk management as an instrument of public
   policy in land use planning and the territorial management agenda; (ii) greening transport through pilot
   investments based on the recommendations of the "Green Freight Study"; (iii) enhancing the understanding
   of transport impact assessment; and (iv) improving road safety.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



  2. Strengthening sustainable environmental and land use planning and territorial management
  capacity. The estimated cost was US$18. 0 million (including contingencies) at appraisal. The actual cost
  was as estimated. There were three sub-components.

  a. Strengthening sustainable environmental and land use planning and territorial management
  capacity. This subcomponent financed activities aimed to improve the State's capacity to plan and manage
  sustainable land use and territorial management in an integrated fashion.

  b. Improving environmental enforcement and environment quality monitoring. This subcomponent
  financed activities aimed to improve the State's capacity to manage and monitor the environment.

  c. Supporting the modernization of the environmental licensing system. This subcomponent financed
  activities aimed to improve the State's capacity to efficiently process environmental licenses and
  environmental strategic assessment.

  3. Increasing State’s resilience to natural disasters. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$16.0
  million (including contingencies). The actual cost was as estimated. There were two subcomponents.

  a. Mainstreaming disaster risk management in the transport sector. This subcomponent aimed to
  mainstream disaster risk management in transport planning and work execution through financing studies,
  small works, and acquisition of goods to the Geological Institute.

  b. Enhancing disaster risk management policy and institutional capacity. This subcomponent aimed to
  strengthen the capacity for disaster risk management through financing studies and acquisition of goods to
  support the implementation of the disaster risk management program of the Geological Institute.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$429.0 million, plus the front end fee,
  totaling US$728.2 million.

  Project financing. An IBRD loan of US$300.0 million financed the project. By the time the project closed, it
  had disbursed US$265.10 million.

  There was co financing of US$300.0 million from the International private bank (Santander) in 2015 under
  the Non-Honoring of Sovereign Financial Obligations (NHSFO), a credit enhancement product offered by
  the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). This instrument protected the lender (or investor)
  against losses resulting from the government's failure to make a payment when due. This co financing
  amount was fully disbursed during implementation.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was planned at US$129.0 million at
  appraisal. However, their actual contribution was significantly less than planned at US$46.5 million.

  Dates. The Bank approved the project on June 14, 2013, and the project became effective on December
  18, 2013, with a planned closing date of March 31, 2019. However, the project closed two years behind
  schedule on Mach 31, 2021.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



   Other changes. The project was restructured three times (Level 2 restructurings) during implementation.

   The first restructuring on February 24, 2015, supported the following changes.

         Changing the financing plan with the availability of financing from Santander.
         This significantly increased the project scope.
         Modifying the results framework. The indicator pertaining to the share of roads that were reported to
          be in good and fair condition was increased from 34% to 48%.

   The second restructuring on November 5, 2018, supported the following changes.

         Adjusting the disbursement arrangements as the government decided to use the resources from
          Santander to finance the public works.
         Extending the project closing date by 21 months from March 31, 2019, to December 31, 2020, to
          address the delays in preparing engineering design, beginning critical technical assistance activities,
          and due to the State's change in priorities of highways.
         Changing the results framework. As envisioned at design, the original indicator for intramodality
          aimed to measure the proportion of exported biofuel (mainly transported by inland waterway in the
          state on the Tiete river (from 0% to 30%). This indicator became obsolete as the focus on biofuel
          was no longer relevant since the federal government cut subsidies on ethanol and transportation of
          biofuel dropped to nearly zero. Another important external reason was the drought in 2016 that
          resulted in a drastic reduction of Tiete waterflow and the state banned waterborne transport on the
          river to prioritize energy production. This indicator was revised to any exported good transported by
          inland waterways.

   The third restructuring on December 16, 2020, supported the following changes.

         Adjusting the implementation schedule.
         The indicator of exported good transported by inland waterways could not be directly reported (only
          estimated) until the new bridge was open to larger vessels and vehicles and was affected by many
          external factors in export volumes that were not attributable to the project. This indicator was
          replaced by changes in the vehicle operating costs on project roads.
         Extending the project closing date by three months from December 31, 2020, to March 31, 2020, for
          completing the ongoing activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The Sao Paulo state in Brazil, faced development challenges at appraisal
such as: (i) disparities within the state, given that the service and industrial sectors, which contributed to
44% and 54% of the states GDP, were concentrated around the state's main center; (ii) road safety
issues, given that the state's roads were limited to a few radial road corridors connecting the largest cities:
(iii) an unbalanced transport matrix with limited less polluting transport modes (such as waterways); (iv) the
need to preserve the natural environment, as widespread agricultural development in the past had altered

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



the states natural ecosystem; and (v) the need to reduce vulnerability to natural disasters (notably flash
floods), given the high density of population and informal urban development in some regions of the state.

The project aimed at addressing three development challenges: (i) improving the state's transport and
logistics efficiency, including road safety and modal shift considerations, as the existing transport and
logistics capacity was inadequate to meet the current and future needs; (ii) addressing environmental
concerns given that widespread agricultural development in the past had altered the States natural
ecosystem; and (iii) reducing vulnerability to natural disasters.

Government strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Sao Paulo's four-year development plan for 2012-
2015 Plano Pluri Annual (PPA). The State's strategy to support implementation of the plan relied on three
pillars: (i) supporting the implementation of the state's Logistics and Transport Development Plan, an
updated version of Brazil's first long-term development strategy formulated by the state in 2000;
(ii) supporting the implementation of the strategic environmental assessment and the economic and
ecological zoning to ensure sustainable growth; and (iii) supporting disaster risk management for reducing
geological risks. The PDOs continues to he relevant to the State's PPA for 2020-2023. This plan highlighted
the need for expanding access to urban services, achieving a more integrated environmental management
for sustainable development and expanding investments in social protection against natural disasters.

Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was well-aligned with two pillars of the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for 2012 - 2015: (i) "to promoted regional economic development" through improved
policies, strategic infrastructure investments, and support for the private sector in frontier areas; and (ii) "to
improve sustainable natural resource management and enhance climatic resilience while contributing to
local economic development". In addition, the PDOs continue to be relevant to the two focus areas of the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018-2023: " supporting inclusive and sustainable development"
and "mobilizing greater infrastructure investments by the private sector to improve service delivery".

Prior Bank experience. The Bank had executed several road-transport focused projects in Brazil, and was
financing the ongoing Sao Paulo State Feeder Road Project, when this project was prepared. This project
replicated the implementing arrangements of the ongoing project (through centralizing fiduciary
management under the DER) and supported an integrated approach (with a civil works component and two
institutional strengthening activities). Given these features, the overall project reach was appropriate. The
PDO was outcome-oriented and the project activities could be expected to contribute to improving transport
and logistics efficiency and enhance the States capacity in environmental and disaster risk management.

That said, the PDO was not clearly specified. The meaning of 'transport and logistics efficiency' is not
clearly specified. Therefore, the relevance of PDO is assessed as substantial. Looking at the project
activities, this review defines "transport efficiency" as improvements in road condition through upgrading
and rehabilitation, safer roads and the use of more efficient contracts (CREMA), and "logistics efficiency" as
improved roads and bridges that facilitate the movement of freight to alternate transport modes such as
railways or inland waterways.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To contribute to the improvement of the Borrower's transport and logistics efficiency.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as rehabilitating roads, upgrading the state's transport
               networks with road safety features, and the pilot of road rehabilitation works under the CREMA contract were
               expected to improve the road network condition and reduce the number of fatalities. The outputs were
               expected improve transport efficiency. These outcomes together with the outputs of activities such as
               constructing bridges for inland waterways was expected to improve intermodal connectivity and increase
               logistics efficiency. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and the outcomes were logical and
               the intended outcomes were monitorable.

               Outputs (ICR, pages 14 - 15).

                     680.13 km of roads were rehabilitated (with improved designs, third lanes, duplications, slope
                        protection and improved intersections), slightly short of the target of 690 km. The roads were
                        rehabilitated with road safety features (such as railings, improved pavements, divided highways with
                        paved shoulders and improved signage).
                       74% of the project roads were reported to be in good and fair condition, with an International
                        Roughness Index (IRI) of less than three (= good), exceeding the target of 48%.
                       Of the total road networks in the State, 40% of the roads were in good and fair condition in 2021 (with
                        an IRI of less than three), as compared to 34% at the baseline in 2013. This was short of the target of
                        48%. The ICR notes that at the end of 2019, 49% of the roads were in good and fair condition (thereby
                        exceeding the target), but that a great deal of maintenance was deferred in 2020 due to the public
                        health restrictions and protocols in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
                       One bridge over the Tiete river was constructed as targeted to support the modal shift from roads to
                        inland waterways.This was short of the target of two bridges. According to the clarification provided by
                        the team, construction of two bridges was envisioned at design. However, during the first
                        restructuring, the reconstruction of two bridges was replaced by building one bridge in a different
                        location upstream in the same Tiete river to achieve similar outcomes.
                       The performance-based road rehabilitation and road maintenance (CREMA) contract was
                        completed, for the first time in Sao Paulo State. This contract covered 100 km of roads and was
                        implemented over sixty months (from May 2015 to December 2020).

               Outcomes.

               The outputs of activities aimed at improving the condition of the road network and with improved road safety
               features were expected to have two intended outcomes: (i) reduce vehicle operating costs in the project
               roads; and (ii) reduce the number of fatalities on the project roads.



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)




      Average vehicle operating costs (VOCs) on the project roads decreased by 5.4%, exceeding the
       target of 5%. The ICR also notes that in several road segments, the VOC was reduced by over 10%,
       with a value reaching a maximum of 22% on one road segment. The improved condition of the road
       and the construction of the bridge could be expected to facilitate the movement of freight to alternate
       transport modes such as inland waterways.
      The average number of road fatalities on the 100 most critical spots over the 2016-2020 period
       declined from 124 at the baseline to 62 as targeted. The ICR notes that yearly data showed consistent
       decline in fatalities since 2016. Hence, a supplemental sub indicator was included over the 2016-2020
       period to mitigate fluctuations and better represent the actual reduction in road safety risk during the
       period. Although reporting baselines and results as trends instead of on one year is important to
       attribute the achievement to the project, the ICR could have mentioned the statewide trends because
       if fatalities went down significantly down statewide, the reported achievements might not be fully
       attributable to the improvements on the project roads.

This review assesses the efficacy of this PDO to be substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the Borrower's capacity in environmental management.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as improving the State's capacity to review and approve
environmental reports for roadworks, designing an Ecological and Economic Zoning (ZEE) for the State, the
modernization of the environmental licensing system, installing underwater monitoring stations were likely to
enhance the State's capacity for environmental management. The outputs of these activities were expected to
contribute to the intended outcome of reducing the number of days for the Environment Secretariat to
approve environmental preliminary reports for the transport sector. The causal links between the project
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 16 -17).

      Geo-referenced information systems and a scenario room for integrated environmental assessment
       was established and personnel were trained to operate the systems as targeted.
      Unmanned aerial vehicles, six automatic stations and a surface water monitoring system were
       installed as targeted.
      57 underwater monitoring stations were installed as targeted. Given that there were only 21
       monitoring systems at the baseline, this tripled the pre-project capacity for automatic water quality
       analysis.
      Systems were established for monitoring environmental impact and technical teams were trained in
       the country and abroad on using the systems.


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)




      An Ecological and Economic Zoning (ZEE) proposal was developed. The ZEE is a technical and
       political planning instrument that established territorial planning and management guidelines,
       considering the environmental and socio-economic characteristics of the different regions of the State.
       It is used to formulate public policies for sustainable development and guides the licensing of
       productive activities. However, this proposal was not yet presented to the State of Sao Paulo
       Environmental Council (CONSEMA) when the project closed.

Outcomes.

The outputs of the activities were expected to reduce the number of days required for the Environmental
Secretariat to approve environmental preliminary reports.

      The number of days required to approve preliminary reports by the Environmental Secretariat in the
       transport sector decreased from 156 days at the baseline in 2013 to 116.5 days, marginally short of
       the target of 117. The ICR (paragraph 26) notes that the number of days will continue to be monitored.

Given that the environmental licensing processes were streamlined and modernized without lowering the
ambition of environmental standards, this review concludes that the project significantly contributed to
enhancing the States capacity in environmental management. Therefore, the efficacy of this PDO is assessed
as substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance the Borrower's capacity in disaster risk management.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as developing Disaster Risk Management (DRM)
contingency plans in selected municipalities, developing a platform connecting the States DRM systems,
integrated DRM systems and carrying out DRM mapping assessments in selected municipalities were likely
to enhance the State's capacity to manage disaster risk, particularly risks related to climate change in the
transport sector. The outputs of these activities were expected to develop contingency plans for the road
agency's local representations covered by the project. The causal links between the project activities, outputs
and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 17-19).

      The platform connecting the State Disaster Risk Management monitoring systems was developed and
       operationalized as targeted.



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)




                                  These activities were installed as targeted: (i) inductively coupled Argon Plasma Mass Spectrometer;
                                   (ii) sensors for multiparameter probes; (iii) Gel Permeation Chromatography System; (iv) acid
                                   distillation system; (v) two data RACK-DATAGEO servers; (vi) server-type computing equipment; (vii)
                                   twenty five work stations for the environmental military police; and (viii) disk drawer for data storage.
                                  45 municipalities in the Sao Paulo metropolitan region concluded disaster risk mapping in 2021, as
                                   compared to 12 at the baseline in 2013. This exceeded the target of 38.
                                  The activity associated with operationalization of a platform connecting the State Disaster Risk
                                   Management monitoring system was not completed when the project closed.

                            Outcomes.

                            The outputs of the activities described above were expected to establishing contingency plans for selected
                            municipalities.

                                  Three contingency plans for coping with natural disasters was developed by the Geological Institute
                                   within the State Secretariat of Infrastructure and Environment for the UBA's of Caraguatatuba, Mogi
                                   das Cruzes and Sao Vincente. These plans provided municipalities with prevention plans for natural
                                   disasters for the protection of around nine million people living in the municipalities and suggestions
                                   for works and interventions in commercial and residential areas such as planting, vegetation, slope
                                   reconstruction, interventions in storm sewers and draining channels. It is not however clear if the
                                   developed were adopted by the municipalities.

                            While the plans were developed, it is not clear if they were adopted. Therefore, the efficacy of this PDO is
                            assessed as modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            On balance, efficacy was assessed as substantial, with moderate shortcomings, given that one outcome was
                            not realized and a few critical activities were not completed when the project closed.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis conducted at appraisal for the road and bridge infrastructure
works, was updated at the time of the first project restructuring when the project scope was expanded. These
works accounted for 92% of the appraisal estimate and 95% of the actual cost. The cost-benefit analysis
followed a traditional analysis assessing the benefits and costs of project activities using the Highway
Development and Management Model (HDM - 4). The benefits of road sector investments were assumed to
come from savings in vehicle operating costs. The benefits from constructing the bridges were assumed to
come from reduced transport costs due to the modal shift from roads to inland waterways. The benefits from
road safety measures were not factored in the economic analysis.

The project activities showed a Net Present Value (NPV) of Brazilian Real of 1,080 million using a 12% discount
rate when the project closed, as compared to the NPV of Brazilian Real of 1,318 million using the same discount
rate. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 25% as compared to the ex ante EIRR of
41.4%.

Administrative and operational issues. There were delays in the initial years of implementation due to the
reasons mentioned in section 2. These factors resulted in extension of the project closing date by two years.
There were safeguard issues following the significant changes introduced in the first restructuring. The new road
segments caused some unforeseen social safeguards issues regarding lengthy expropriations and
compensation cases.

In sum, although there were some operational issues which led to the extension of the closing date, efficiency is
assessed as substantial in view of the economic justification of the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     92.00
 Appraisal                                                 41.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     95.00
 ICR Estimate                                              25.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated substantial. Efficiency is assessed as substantial, in view of the economic
justification for the project. Overall efficacy is substantial, with moderate shortcomings, given that one outcome
was not realized and a few critical activities were not completed when the project closed. Overall outcome is
assessed as moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Sustainability risk. The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that sustainability of the road assets created under the
project is assured by the fact that DER (the State Road Agency responsible for the administration of road
improvement) has maintenance plans. According to the clarifications provided by the team, these
maintenance plans are funded by the State Legislature and implemented with the help of local entities. The
team also clarified that the State of Sao Paulo has a long and successful record of funding these
plans. The ICR that there is a small risk that the State may not provide adequate budgetary allocations for
road maintenance in an event of fiscal constraints. Further, there is the risk that the road maintenance
activities could be compromised due to the restrictions in the wake of the COVID pandemic.

Government commitment. There is the moderate risk to project activities pertaining to environmental
management and disaster risk management, given that draft of the environmental management is yet to be
enacted.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experience from the Bank-financed - Sao Paulo State
  Feeder Road Project (ongoing when this project was prepared). Lessons incorporated at design included:
  (i) replicating the implementing arrangements (centralizing the fiduciary management in DER), which
  proved to be satisfactory under the ongoing project. and (ii) articulating an integrated approach with a civil
  works component and two institutional strengthening activities that were important in the country context.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. The state entered into a subsidiary agreement with
  the DER. A dedicated implementing unit of DER was responsible for implementing the project.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal. These included fiduciary risks, given that the project's three
  components were to be implemented by five agencies (with one agency not familiar with Bank
  procedures), and social and environmental risks. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included
  centralizing administrative responsibilities with DER, and training DER staff. With mitigation measures,
  the overall project risk was assessed as moderate at appraisal. The arrangements made at appraisal for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, there were M&E design shortcomings
  (discussed in section 9), and two, the Bank also underestimated the safeguards management of capacity
  of the DER.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted twice-a-year supervision missions on average and there were fourteen
 implementation support missions during the project lifetime. The missions had multi-disciplinary Bank
 teams comprising of procurement, financial management and environmental and social specialists. The
 project maintained adequate supervision, including proactive identification of opportunities to changing
 conditions, appropriate follow ups and resolution of implementation issues and appropriate adaptation to
 changing conditions. The ICR provides no details on the continuity of leadership during the lifetime of the
 project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Of the six critical PDO indicators, only three indicators were appropriate for monitoring the project
 achievements.

 1. Reduction in fatalities in 100 most critical spots was substantially relevant and adequate for measuring
 the road safety aspects of transport efficiency of the PDO.

 2. The number of contingency plans in a sample of DER's local representations for traffic management was
 relevant for monitoring the PDO of enhancing the State's capacity to manage disaster risk.

 3. The reduction of average delay for licensing transport works was relevant for the objective of enhancing
 the State's capacity for environmental monitoring.

 4. The indicator associated with roads in good and fair condition as a share of the total classified roads
 lacked relevance since most of the roads considered where outside the scope of the project. It would have
 been more appropriate to monitor the condition of the road network in project intervened areas.

 5. Improved transport management capacity measured by the increased proportion of State road network
 managed by performance although relevant, the indicator measured results that could not be attributed to
 the project.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



 6. The original indicator "Increase in the proportion of exported biofuel transported by waterway was
 appropriate for increased inter-modality and hence logistics efficiency but lost relevance due to the
 government's changed priorities on biofuel. The indicator that replaced it did not directly measure inter-
 modality, but reduction in vehicle operating cost.

 The M&E implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the baseline data for monitoring collected
 by the time of approval.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was modified during implementation. The indicator associated with percentage of
  biofuel on the Tiete river was replaced with the new indicator on changes in the vehicle operating cost on
  the project roads. This indicator was appropriate as it was directly attributable to the project. The revised
  PDO indicator "number of fatalities on the 100 most critical spots of the State road network was
  attributable to the project. The PDO indicator to assess "good and fair condition as part of the classified
  road network" added a supplement considering only project roads to better reflect the reality of the
  improvements caused by the project. The data collection and reporting was adequate during
  implementation.




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used to inform management and for decision-making.

  In sum, M&E is assessed as modest, given the shortcomings in M&E design and the lack of adequate
  correction during restructuring,



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank safeguard
   policies, triggering seven safeguard policies at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Forests (OP/BP4.36); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Physical Cultural
   Assets (OP/BP 4.11); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); and (Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). No
   additional safeguards were triggered during implementation.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



  The Sao Paulo State conducted an Environmental and Social Assessment at appraisal to evaluate the
  potential benefits and risks of activities and identify ways for enhancing the positive impacts while
  minimizing the adverse impacts.

  Environmental safeguards. The project did not envision significant adverse environmental
  impacts. Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) were prepared and publicly-disclosed at
  appraisal to address environmental issues (PAD, paragraph 47).

  The team clarified that there was compliance with the environmental safeguards, although small adverse
  environmental impacts were not resolved by project closure. According to the clarifications provided by the
  team, although some minor works were still ongoing when the ICR was prepared, the State has adequate
  capacity and procedures in place to address the expected environmental impact mitigation measures as laid
  out in the Post-Closing Safeguards Action Plan.

  Forests and Natural Habitats. The ESMP included measures to address issues pertaining to forests and
  natural habitats. The team clarified that there was compliance with the safeguards on forests and natural
  habitats.

  Pest management. Given that there was the possibility that chemicals could be used for vegetation
  clearing in some localities, the ESMP included measures for addressing pest management safeguards. The
  team clarified that there were no issues with the safeguards on pest management.

  Physical cultural assets. The ESMP included measures to address chance finds of physical cultural
  assets in the project-intervened areas. The team clarified that there were no issues pertaining to the
  safeguards on physical cultural assets.

  Involuntary resettlement. The project envisioned acquisition of 14 small strips of rural land (on average
  around 0.139 hectares) and relocation of 15 informal structures. A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared
  and publicly-disclosed to address involuntary resettlement issues. The ICR notes that there were around
  500 cases of expropriation, including some physical relocation of informal small business. At project
  closure, 95% of the cases were resolved. There were about 16 pending expropriation cases of small plots
  along some of the road works financed by the project. The ICR notes that the impacts of the COVID-19
  pandemic and related lockdowns since March 2020 significantly slowed the judicial procedures for the
  resolution of pending resettlement cases for several months.

  Indigenous peoples. The PAD (paragraph 48) notes that none of the project roads were located in areas
  occupied by indigenous peoples. However, since some of the roughly 3,000 individuals living in the 33
  indigenous lands located throughout the state could be affected by land use planning and environmental
  enforcement project activities, an Indigenous Peoples Plan was prepared and publicly-disclosed to address
  indigenous peoples issues. The ICR notes that the indigenous people were not affected by the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. DER was in charge of financial management. DER had executed previous Bank-
  financed projects and was familiar with Bank policies. The Bank conducted a financial management


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



   assessment of the road agency and found the financial management arrangements to be satisfactory.
   Financial risk was rated as moderate at appraisal.

   The ICR notes that financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory when the project closed.
   The ICR notes that there were no cases of ineligible expenses and that the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Roads agency and the Unidade de Coordenacao de Projectos were in charge of
   managing procurement, Both the agencies had executed Bank-financed projects and were with the Bank's
   procurement policies. The Bank conducted a procurement of the two agencies at appraisal, and found the
   procurement arrangements to be satisfactory. Procurement risks were rated as moderate at appraisal.

   The ICR notes that procurement was rated as moderately satisfactory. The ICR does not report any case
   of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   The project mobilized US$300 of private financing from Banco Santander covered by a Multilateral
   Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) Non-Honoring of Sovereign Financial Obligations (NHSFO)
   guarantee for component one activities as a credit enhancement instrument. This additional financing from
   an international private lender allowed the scope of activities under the project's physical component to be
   scaled up and accommodated additional road rehabilitation and upgrading works.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG reports the following main lessons that the ICR draws from the experience of implementing this
project, with some adaptation of language.

1. The World Bank Group's guarantee products can help in leveraging public investments
and maximizing finance for development. This project included Multilateral Investment

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)



Guarantee Agency's (MIGA) guarantee as credit enhancement instrument which allowed additional
private financing at favorable conditions. This additional financing from international private
lenders allowed the scope of activities to be scaled up. Such instruments can be helpful to
secure additional resources for Bank's client countries with access to funding from international
sources.

2. A multi-sector project can deliver better results in the long term but requires greater
coordination and capacity by the implementing agencies. Although most of the investments in
this project aimed to rehabilitate roads, this was a multi-sector project that included critical aspects
of road safety, environmental management and disaster risk management. The project had as many
as five implementing agencies. Burdensome bureaucratic processes of n some of the implementing
agencies contributed to substantial delays during execution. The lesson is that centralizing in one
Project Implementation Unit can help in avoiding the bureaucratic delays (In this project only the
fiduciary responsibilities were centralized with the Road Agency.

3. Investment projects that close before civil works are fully completed or with pending
safeguards issues require a post-closing plan and a commitment from the client to carry it
out. In this project, this requirement was made to the Sao Paulo State and the Bank continues to
monitor progress on the pending safeguard issues.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. The ICR provided a clear description of the country context when the Bank prepared the
project. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly shows the causal links between the project activities,
their outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR adheres to the guidelines. The ICR draws reasonably good
lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

The ICR provides little details on the continuity of leadership during the project lifetime.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)




                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
