     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022803

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127508                                   NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13557,TF-13665                         30-Nov-2018                                         24,918,956.35

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jan-2013                               15-Nov-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          31,000,000.00                                    31,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           24,918,956.35                                    24,918,956.35

 Actual                                       24,918,956.35                                    24,918,956.35




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Fernando Manibog             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. v) and the Financing Agreement of April 30, 2013 (p.
   4), the objective of the project was “to enhance government capacity to mitigate climate related hazards by
   improving the accuracy and timeliness of weather and flood forecasts and warnings for climate-vulnerable
   communities, as well as developing agricultural management information system services to help farmers
   mitigate climate-related production risks.”



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component A: Institutional Strengthening, capacity building and implementation support of the
   Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM) (appraisal estimate US$5.1 million, actual US$3.35
   million) was to finance three sub-components:

   Sub-component A.1: This sub-component was to finance: i) DHM institutional development and strategic
   planning, ii) development and/or strengthening of a legal and regulatory framework for DHM operations,
   including development of standard operating procedures, assessment of new business models and
   enhancing public private partnerships; and iii) “twinning” operational support from advanced National
   Weather Services (NMSs) and World Meteorological organization (WMO).

   Sub-component A.2: This sub-component was to finance capacity building including: i) development and
   implementation of a DHM capacity building program including DHM personnel training and retraining,
   professional orientation for DHM senior staff; education in universities and training in WMO regional training
   centers; and ii) Implementation of training activities for major users (i.e., agriculture, water resources
   management, health, energy, transportation).

   Sub-component A.3: This sub-component was to finance systems design and integration, project
   management and monitoring including: i) provision of support for detailed design, procurement and
   implementation of DHM systems; ii) project management, reporting, monitoring and evaluation for
   Components A, B and C; iii) development of a needs assessment and design for air quality, water quality
   and sediment monitoring networks; iv) development of design documents for reconstruction/refurbishment
   of DHM’s headquarters and regional offices; and v) support for environmental and social due diligence and
   protection.

   Component B: Modernization of the Observation Infrastructure and Forecasting (appraisal estimate
   US$16.45 million, actual US$13.99 million): This component was to finance the following sub-
   components:

   Sub-component B.1: Technical modernization of observation networks including: i) rehabilitation and
   technical re-equipment of the hydrological network; ii) improvement of the environment of the hydrological
   stations (bank stabilization, improvement of flow conditions, engineering works, etc.); iii) special equipment
   for hydrological stations (current meters, sediment samplers, tracer laboratory equipment, training, staff
   gauges, boats); iv) delivery and installation of weather radar for detection of heavy precipitation and other
   meteorological phenomena; v) renewal of temperature-wind sounding of the atmosphere; vi) upgrading and
   expansion of automated surface observing systems for aviation safety; vii) surface meteorological and
   lightning detection networks; viii) glacier and snow monitoring (equipment and surveys); ix) establishment of
   DHM calibration facilities; and x) vehicles to support DHM field operations, maintenance and inspections.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



Sub-component B.2: Modernization of DHM’s Communication and ICT Systems including: i) communication
equipment; ii) archiving and data base development; and iii) Satellite receiving system, remote sensing and
GIS laboratory.

Sub-component B.3: Improvement of the Numerical Hydrometeorological Prediction System including
modern computer equipment for numerical weather prediction.

Sub-component B.4: Design and pilot operation of an environmental monitoring network including piloting
operation of air quality, water quality, and sediment monitoring networks.

Sub-component B.5: Refurbishment /reconstruction of DHM offices and facilities including access to
uninterrupted power supply.

Component C: Enhancement of the Service Delivery System of DHM (appraisal estimate US$3.45
million, actual US$1.61 million): This component was to finance:

Sub-component C.1: Introduction of a public weather service including: i) forecaster workstations; ii)
specialized communications instruments including TV studio, radio alert services, internet websites; and iii)
development and operationalization of a forecast accuracy verification system and survey of forecast utility.

Sub-component C.2: Strengthening of Disaster Risk Management (DRM) operations including piloting of
“end-to-end” early warning systems in two river basins in the western and eastern parts of Nepal including:
i) development of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), early information protocols and signals agreed
with all basin and DRM stakeholders including Emergency Operations Centers and District Development
Committee/Village Development Committee (DDCs/VDCs); ii) forecaster workstations, communication
systems and software development; and iii) operational training and drills with government stakeholders,
non-government stakeholders and communities.

Sub-component C.3: Improvement of service delivery (i.e., warnings and advisories) to communities
including introduction of mobile applications.

Sub-Component C.4: Establishment of a national climate service including: i) computer systems to access
climate information; ii) support for the development of a National Framework for Climate Services and
sectoral working groups; iii) development of a digital library of climate-relevant information from all sectors
for Nepal; iv) software development to downscale climate forecasts and v) operational support and
information exchange between water resources, public health and climate databases.

Component D: Creation of an Agriculture Management Information System (appraisal estimate
US$6.0 million, actual US$5.97 million): This component was to finance the following sub-components:

Sub-component D.1: AMIS Portal, Hardware and Software including: i) detailed design of the AMIS Portal
and assessment of information requirements; ii) acquisition and installation of AMIS Portal (e.g., software,
data and web server, computer, monitor, printer, digital color scanner, plotter) at the Ministry of Agriculture
and Livestock Development (MoALD); iii) rehabilitation of the offices of the MoAD Geographical Information
System (GIS) Section to facilitate communication with the AMIS Portal; iv) acquisition of vehicles and motor
bikes to support field operations including outreach to farmer communities and data collection; v) acquisition
and installation of communication links to district level extension offices and outreach stations of the Nepal



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



  Agriculture Research Council (NARC); and vi) Agriculture Management Information System (AMIS)
  infrastructure (software and hardware) at NARC’s central office.

  Sub-Component D.2: Information Products including: i) agricultural and spatial data digitizing and archiving;
  ii) development of agriculture monitoring products and decision support tools such as mapping of climate-
  vulnerable farming communities and establishment of a crop monitoring system; and iii) exploratory
  research to develop financial risk transfer instruments for the agriculture sector, such as agricultural
  insurance.

  Sub-component D.3: Information Dissemination including: i) development of mobile applications based on
  data from AMIS; ii) production and dissemination of advertisements for mass media (FM radio, TV
  channels); iii) production and dissemination of publications; and iv) feasibility studies for AMIS Portal
  product dissemination.

  Sub-component D.4: Capacity Building including: i) provision of training to staff of selected agencies in
  weather data analysis, including short term training and advanced degrees; ii) provision of training to staff of
  selected agencies at the regional, district and community level in the use of AMIS Portal tools and in
  awareness of climate resilience; iii) building partnerships with farmers to raise awareness and capacity,
  including provision of basic thermometers and rain gauges to selected farmers; and iv) organization of agro-
  climate workshops at the regional and district levels.

  Sub-component D.5: Support for project management and monitoring, and for social outreach,
  communication, and evaluation activities under component D.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$31.0 million. Actual cost was US$24.9 million.

  Financing: The project was to be financed by a Trust Fund of US$16.0 million (of which US$12.96 million
  was disbursed) and a Trust Fund of US$15.0 million (of which US$11.96 million was disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$300,000. Actual contribution was US$2.34
  million.

  Dates: The project was restructured twice:

        On August 14, 2018 the project was restructured to change the project’s loan closing date from
         November 30, 2018 to December 31, 2019 to allow for the completion of project activities of
         components A, B and C which were being implemented by DHM. Implementation of these activities
         had been delayed due to several events such as the 2015 earthquakes, trade blockade on the
         Indian border, flooding in Southern Plains, and delays due to 2017 three-tier elections as well as
         some internal procurement delays and lengthy governmental approval processes.
        On December 10, 2019 the project was restructured to change the project’s closing date from
         December 31, 2019 to November 15, 2020 to allow for various specialized training packages being
         awarded, which had been delayed because of low budget estimation by the implementing agency,




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



          Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM), compared to the significantly higher quoted
          budget by prospective vendors.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, Nepal made marked gains in eradicating poverty, but remained one of the poorest
countries in the world. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita remained low at US$712 (2011) and
poverty varied widely across geographic location, ethnicity, caste and gender. The population was largely
rural and heavily dependent upon agriculture. According to the PAD (p. 1) at the time of project appraisal
about 82 percent of the population (estimated at around 26.6 million) lived in rural areas and agriculture
contributed 35 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Poverty was much more severe in
rural areas (27 percent) compared to urban areas (15 percent) and especially severe in mountainous areas
(42 percent).

According to the PAD (p. 2), in 2011 the global risk analysis firm Maplecroft ranked Nepal the 4th most
climate-vulnerable country in the world due to its extremely varied and challenging geography, its poor,
resource dependent population, and its weak institutional capacity. Also, climate projections for the country
had been predicting increases in temperature and in the frequency of extreme events. The impacts of
climate change have started to negatively impact economic growth, food security, and wildfires.

The PAD further stated (p. 3) that food security was further threatened since climate change was expected
to affect agricultural productivity through three primary channels: i) rising temperatures, ii) climate variability
and related changes in the timing, intensity, and volume of rainfall, and iii) rising carbon dioxide levels. The
threat of climate change on Nepal’s rich biodiversity changed agro-ecological zones, prolonged dry spells,
encroachment of alien and invasive species, and increased prevalence of disease and pests.

Especially, the poor population was largely dependent upon subsistence agriculture for its livelihoods. At
the time of appraisal, recent records in Nepal showed increasing incidents of droughts, floods, hailstorms,
landslides and crop disease. As a result, the need for a well-functioning early warning system was identified
as a key priority in the government’s National Strategy for Disaster Risk Management.

The project’s objective supported the government’s 2020 Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC
II), which reinforces the government’s commitment to developing and implementing adaptation policies,
plans, and actions. Also, the objective of the project was in line with the government’s Disaster Risk
Reduction National Strategic Plan of Action for 2018-2030 (DRRNSPA), which aims to expand and
modernize the real-time weather observation systems and real-time water level and rainfall observation
systems in major flood-prone river basins.

According to the ICR (p. 7), the project was one of five program components identified in Nepal's Strategic
Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR). The SPCR was developed by the government with support from
the Bank, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and
approved in June 2011.



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



               The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               for Nepal (FY19-23) which aims to increase resilience to natural disasters and climate change under focus
               area three. The Bank had been engaged in the sector since 2011 through the Building Resilience to
               Climate Related Hazards (BRCH) Project, which was one of five program components identified in Nepal's
               Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance government capacity to mitigate climate related hazards by improving the accuracy and
                             timeliness of weather and flood forecasts and warnings for climate-vulnerable communities, as well as
                             developing agricultural management information system services to help farmers mitigate climate-related
                             production risks

                             Rationale
                             Outcome 1: Improved accuracy and timeliness of weather and flood forecasts and warnings

                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as the development
                             of the DHM’s legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks, development and implementation of a capacity
                             building and trainings program as well as design and implementation of an integrated hydromet system were
                             to result in the following outputs: A hydromet bill and regulation being drafted, capacity building and training
                             programs being developed and implemented, as well as an integrated hydromet system being developed and
                             implemented. These output activities were to result in the higher-level outcome—critical for Nepal—of
                             improved accuracy and timeliness of weather and flood forecasts and warnings for climate-vulnerable
                             communities.

                             Outputs:

                                        The project supported the drafting of a hydromet bill and regulation (“development of legal and
                                         regulatory framework of DHM operations”) as well as the standard operation procedures (SOPs) for
                                         DHM on hydromet services. The hydromet bill and regulation envisioned a cost recovery mechanism
                                         through fees levied on civil aviation for providing aviation weather services to enable continued
                                         upgrading of the DHM aviation forecasting capability. The project did not completely achieve its target
                                         of supporting DHM’s mission and implementing fully functional DHM regulations and operational
                                         guidelines.
                                        The percentage of DHM professional staff being trained increased from 22 percent in 2015 to 72
                                         percent in 2020, not achieving the target of 100 percent. Some of the trainings envisioned by the


                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



        System Integrator (SI) were incomplete such as weather presentation system, hydromet workstation,
        aviation meteorology, quality management system, and nowcasting.
       16 synoptic stations of DHM were transmitting all of the surface synoptic observations from its central
        database to the World Meteorological Organization’s (WMO’s) Global Telecommunication System
        (GTS) / WMO Information System (WIS), resulting in a 94 percent data transmission rate, almost
        achieving the target of 95 percent.
       The percentage of automated weather stations (AWSs) operating in line with the hydromet services’
        Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) of DHM increased from 10 percent in 2013 to 100 percent in
        2020, surpassing the target of 90 percent. The project installed and operationalized 88 AWSs.
       The percentage of hydrological stations operating in line with the hydromet services’ SOPs of DHM
        increased from 10 percent in 2013 to 100 percent in 2020, achieving the target of 80 percent.
       The percentage of stations providing reliable and uninterrupted real-time information in an appropriate
        form to users increased from 10 percent in 2013 to 80 percent in 2020, achieving the target of 80
        percent.
       A National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS) was prepared by the Asian Disaster
        Preparedness Center through a parallel project (“Climate Adaptation and Resilience to South Asia
        (P171054)) but remains to be adopted by the government. Also, an assessment of climate impact by
        sector was not started. Therefore, the project did not achieve the target of conducting a climate impact
        assessment by sector.

Outcomes:

     The financial sustainability of DHM operations increased from 40 percent in 2013 to 100 percent in
      2020, achieving the target of 100 percent. This achievement meant DHM budgeted sufficiently for
      O&M expenditure. The allocated total DHM operational budget for FY2019-20 was US$2.7 million and
      for FY 2020-21 it was US$8.9 million. Annual maintenance and reinvestment costs were estimated at
      US$1.44 million. According to the ICR (p. 28), these budget allocations were sufficient to cover 100
      percent of the Operations & Maintenance needs of the DHM. It is not entirely clear how the financial
      sustainability of DHM operations reflects improvement in accuracy and timeliness of weather and flood
      forecasts and warnings.
     The accuracy and timeliness of DHM’s weather forecasts—a skill measured between zero and one for
      weather forecasts of 24 hours lead time--was 0.47, not achieving the target of 0.75. The weather
      forecast verification skill score for 2019-2000 was computed by the DHM for a 24-hour lead time
      forecast using a complex formula. The ICR (p. 11) stated that the target was not achieved since the
      forecast verification system was not updated with a more advanced automated system by the end of
      project implementation as was originally planned.
     User satisfaction remained at its baseline of 51 percent, not achieving the target of 65 percent.
      However, user satisfaction surveys reported a five percent increase compared to the baseline in
      terms of the timeliness, adequacy, and accuracy of DHM’s services. In flood prone communities such
      as in Sunsari, Saptari, Mahottari, Rupandehi, Banke, and Kailali districts where the DHM provides
      early warnings for extreme weather events, the CUSI score was 43 percent compared to the end
      target of 65 percent, indicating that the DHM needs to further improve the accessibility and quality of
      its services.

Outcome 2: Availability of AMIS services for farmers to mitigate climate-related production risks



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



                            Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as the development
                            of an Agriculture Management Information System (AMIS) , the provision of AMIS interface infrastructure to
                            users, the development and dissemination of agromet information products to users in pilot districts as well as
                            training of technical agency staff and farmers on agromet information interpretation were to result in the
                            following outputs: an AMIS being developed, an AMIS interface infrastructure being delivered to targeted
                            farmers as well as AMIS information products being developed and disseminated. These outputs were to
                            result in the outcome of staff farmers capacity to interpret agromet information being improved.

                            Outputs:

                                  The linkage between AMIS and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) AMIS was improved by
                                   linking 100 percent of AMIS products to the WMO AMIS, surpassing the target of linking 80 percent of
                                   AMIS products to the WMO AMIS.
                                  100 percent of farmer groups and cooperatives in all 26 pilot districts were provided with AMIS
                                   infrastructure (software and hardware) to interface with AMIS, achieving the target of 100 percent. A
                                   total of 1,263 sets of smart mobile phones, rain gauges, and thermometers were purchased and
                                   distributed to 1,263 selected farmers and cooperatives in the pilot districts. Also, one central-level and
                                   52 district-level Kisan Call Centers (KCCs) were established in the District Agricultural Development
                                   Offices and District Livestock Services Offices to be later transferred to 51 Agriculture Knowledge
                                   Centers (AKCs) and 47 Veterinary Hospital and Livestock Service Expert Centers (VHLSECs) under
                                   the provincial government to improve the interface with farmers and cooperatives using local dialect
                                   and facilitate information exchange with agromet experts. However, at the time when the ICR was
                                   written (p. 14), the KCCs in all pilot district offices were not functioning due to an unclear
                                   administrative structure within these offices.
                                  72 percent of DHM staff received technical and professional training, not achieving the target of 100
                                   percent of staff. According to the Bank team (December 7, 2021) a full‐fledged capacity
                                   building activity could not be undertaken as originally envisioned due to procurement related issues
                                   between the DHM and System Integrator.
                                  The percentage of users who were satisfied with AMIS main services increased from 28.03 percent in
                                   2015 to 40.7 percent in 2019, not achieving the target of 65 percent.

                            Outcomes:

                                  Access to AMIS was improved by monthly updates and improvements of the AMIS portal, achieving
                                   the target of monthly updates and improvements.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



  Achievement of the first outcome was Modest since the target for the accuracy and timeliness of weather
  forecasts provided by the DHM and the target for user satisfaction were not achieved. Achievement of the
  second outcome was Substantial due to improvements achieved in the access to AMIS by monthly updates
  and in the AMIS portal, as well as an increase in user satisfaction for AMIS services. Taking everything
  together, the overall efficacy rating is Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 18) assessed the economic efficiency of the project through two different methodologies: a
benchmarking methodology and a sector specific methodology. While the PAD’s analysis indicated that the
project was a worthwhile investment, the analysis is outdated since it was done ten years ago.

The ICR (p. 15) conducted an ex-post economic analysis, which quantified benefits such as those arising from
reduced asset losses from natural hazards due to improved hydromet and EWS services (components A, B, C).
improved agricultural productivity due to improved agromet services (component D), and improved productivity
in other weather-sensitive sectors due to improved hydromet services (components A, B, C).

The ICR made several assumptions that were adequate (see ICR p. 53 for a detailed list). Also, the ICR
identified the differences to the analysis conducted at appraisal. These differences included: i) actual costs
instead of projected costs; ii) costs were presented in economic rather than financial prices; iii) the ICR used an
annual discount rate of 9 percent while the ex-ante methodology at appraisal did not apply discounting; iv) a
gradual, rather than a sudden, stream of project benefits was assumed due to the lagged adoption of new
services by the beneficiaries; and v) changes in Nepal’s GDP and agricultural output during the 15-year
economic life of the project (2013–2027) were incorporated into the analysis rather than presuming them as
constant. The ICR’s use of economic costs, a discount rate, and a gradual onset of benefits were distinct
improvements compared to the PAD assumptions.

The analysis calculated a benefit-cost ratio ranging from 2.8 to 14.0. With a discount rate of 9 percent, the
analysis calculated an Expected Net Present Value (ENPV) of US$42.2 million and an Economic Internal Rate
of Return (EIRR) of 40.4 percent. The analysis did not include non-quantifiable benefits. Therefore, the ICR
assumed that actual benefits were higher.

However, the ICR's economic analysis did not take into account that several significant outputs/outcomes were
not achieved. For example, the accuracy and timeliness of DHM’s weather forecasts was not improved, and the
target for user satisfaction was not achieved. Also, as stated in the section above, it is not entirely clear how the
financial sustainability of DHM operations measures improvement in accuracy and timeliness of weather and
flood forecasts and warnings. Therefore, the ICR’s economic analysis was overly optimistic.

Operational efficiency:



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



According to the ICR (p. 16), the project was able to obtain cost savings of more than US$2.3 million by
practicing competitive selection processes for most of the project’s procurement packages. However, the project
was extended twice for a total of two years due to a slow implementation start, the late arrival of the System
Investigator, lengthy procurement process for high-value packages, frequent staff turnover and exogenous
factors such as earthquakes, Terai unrest and fuel crisis in 2015-2016 as well as the Covid-19 pandemic.

Given the overly optimistic Economic analysis as well as implementation delays, the project’s overall efficiency is
rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given the project’s objective alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Nepal (FY19-23), which aims to increase resilience to natural disasters and
climate change under focus area three. Efficacy was Modest due to the project not being able to improve flood
and weather forecasting and warnings for disasters. Efficiency was Modest due to an overly optimistic Economic
analysis and operational inefficiencies. Taking everything together, the project’s overall outcome rating was
Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the project’s outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: According to the ICR (p. 26), the hydromet bill and regulation to establish the
DHM as legally authorized agency for hydromet services had not been promulgated by the parliament by the

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



time the ICR was written due to frequent changes of the Irrigation Secretary in the MOEWRI in 2021. In the
absence of the bill’s promulgation, it has not been possible to establish a cost-recovery mechanism for the
O&M of hydromet infrastructure, which is critical to ensure the sustainability of the project outcomes.

Financial resources: The government continues to be committed to the project’s objective as demonstrated
by the government allocating sufficient budget to the DHM for FY20/21 to implement activities that could not
be finalized by the end of project implementation. Activities that had been completed since project closure
included trainings on the hydromet workstation, and the development of a web portal for public web service.
According to the ICR (p. 26) the DHM made provision to its annual budget since project closure to allow for
O&M equipment to be installed. However, the DHM’s recurring budget was not increased sufficiently for
continuous O&M. Also, the MOALD moved the AMIS over to the AITC which became responsible for the
O&M of the system, upgrading of modules, and conducting capacity building activities for the operation of the
AMIS portal. However, the annual budget of US$26,000 for FY20/21 might not be sufficient to maintain all
functions of the AMIS without negatively impacting the quality of the agromet information and services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 12), the project was built on lessons learned from previous Bank engagement in
  the country and from other projects on sustainability of hydromet modernization activities in developing
  countries. These lessons learned identified the importance of designing a system with equipment well-
  suited for the local geography, needs and capacities. Also, according to the ICR (p. 19) these lessons
  learned emphasized the importance of the DHM being transformed into a modern service-oriented
  agency aiming to deliver products to other government agencies and the importance of sound
  coordination among ministries. The ICR (p. 25) stated that the project conducted a sound analysis and
  consulted extensively with various stakeholders resulting in strong ownership within the government.

  The Bank team also identified relevant risks related to procurement, governance, and capacity of
  implementing agencies. The Bank’s mitigation measures were inadequate in relation to the recruitment of
  the System Integrator (SI) and procurement consultants at the PMUs and lack of capacity of the DHM
  PMU in managing the deliverables of the SI. As a result, the project experienced implementation delays.

  The project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings (see section 11a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 26), the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions, field visits, high-level
 discussion with the government and technical meetings with the implementing agencies and development


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



 partners. On a monthly basis, the Bank team conducted progress review meetings and every three months
 the Bank team conducted technical missions to provide support and monitor implementation progress.

 However, the Bank team did not revise the Results Framework during the two project restructurings even
 though it would have been beneficial for measuring implementation progress towards the project’s
 objective.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the PAD (p. 15), the DHM and MoAD were to be responsible for monitoring and reporting on
 the progress of their respective components. The project’s M&E activities were to include: i) trimester
 monitoring and preparation of implementation progress reports (IPRs); ii) bi-annual reporting on IRIs and
 annual reporting on PDO-level indicators; iii) bi-annual compliance monitoring based on the
 ESMF progress reports and/or field verification; and iv) program-level reporting by the Ministry of Forests
 and Environment (MOFE).

 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs would lead to the intended outcomes
 were sound and adequately reflected in the Results Framework.

 However, the project’s M&E had several shortcomings. First, the objective of the project was overly
 complex and complicated. Second, the selected indicators were often not sufficiently specific, clear,
 measurable and relevant for measuring the achievement towards the objective. For example, PDO
 indicator four (“introduction of a sustainable AMIS”) was measured by a Composite User Satisfaction Index
 (CUSI) instead of a set of system features and as a result not measuring progress towards the
 achievement of the objective.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 22), the PMUs produced Implementation Progress Reports (IPRs) on a regular
  basis and the two agencies’ focal points were trained on methodology and processes for program and
  project reporting. The project supported the establishment of two technical committees, which
  collaborated with the PPCR to mainstream M&E into regular DHM and MOALD processes to allow for
  monitoring of project outcomes after project closure.

  When the project was restructured twice, the Results Framework’s shortcomings were not addressed
  despite challenges with the selected indicators as discussed in the section above. The end-term surveys

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



  were integrated into the DHM and MOALD’s 2018 procurement plans, which resulted in reporting on the
  indicators included in the Results Framework. However, since the end-line surveys were completed only
  in 2019, they did not fully capture the results of the project implementation.

  According to the Bank team (December 7, 2021), the M&E data was reliable and of good quality.
  However, the PMUs struggled to produce consistent data for complex and technical indicators (e.g. IRI 3
  and 6) due to ambiguities in the indicator definition and unit of measurement. Also, the Bank team stated
  that It is likely that the agencies continue to carry out some of the M&E functions as they continue to
  benefit from the SPCR Program and CARE Regional Project. However, the capacity of PMUs could be a
  bottleneck for the continuation of the full M&E processes.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 22), M&E data was used to prepare IPRs and bi-annual/annual reports as well
  as to inform the PPCR annual reporting. Also, M&E data was used for the Implementation Status and
  Results Reports (ISRs) and to inform decision making such as the need to extend the implementation
  period twice. Furthermore, the project closely coordinated with the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
  (PPCR) to assess the overall impact of climate adaption-related projects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), and OP/BP 4.36 (Forests) due to the potential
   impact that the proposed sub-projects (such as hydrological and meteorological stations, and the DHM
   building) might have on people and local land and water resources. According to the ICR (p. 23) the DHM
   prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which required each sub-project
   to undergo environmental screening and biannual compliance monitoring. Also, two audits/evaluations were
   to be conducted in the second and last year of implementation. Furthermore, an environmental specialist
   was to be hired to support the development and implementation of the Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs). The ICR (p. 23) stated that the consultant ensured that all hydromet stations
   and building sites’ constructions complied with the ESMPs and performed the planned environmental
   screening. Field staff at the regional offices received hazardous waste management training to ensure that
   hazardous waste from dismantled stations was dealt with appropriately. The project also complied with
   occupational health and safety procedures during the construction of the DHM building.

   The project also triggered two social safeguard policies OP/BP 4/.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OP/BP
   4.10 (Indigenous People) due to the potential adverse impacts during the construction phase of investments
   such as loss of land or structures, loss of income or access to areas for livelihood support, and public safety
   issues. In order to address these issues, the ESMF included a Resettlement Policy Framework, a



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



   Vulnerable Community Development Framework, and a Gender Development Framework. According to the
   ICR (p. 24) the project complied with the Bank’s social safeguard policies.

   Furthermore, the project established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) which comprised information
   officers at the PMU level and grievance redress cell at the district level. During implementation only one
   grievance was submitted, which was addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 24), the PMUs had adequate systems of accountability with well-defined
   procurement and decision-making responsibilities. Also, the PMUs developed and maintained records of
   all procurement and contract documents. Furthermore, even though procurement audits were not
   performed in the country, the Office of the Auditor General assessed procurement decisions during the
   regular accounts’ audit.

   However, the project faced several procurement related challenges. The PMUs lacked an effective
   complaints management system to review and resolve complaints at the different stages of the
   procurement cycle. To mitigate this issue the Bank and the PMU performed post reviews of technically
   complex contracts and monitored high-value contracts on a regular basis. Also, the PMU did not publish
   contract award details, maintenance of contract implementation documentations, and submission of
   complete evaluation reports. Furthermore, the DHM lacked capacity to manage contracts and was
   responsible for delays in contract awards and payment as well as initial low disbursement.

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 25), the project complied with all the financing agreement’s legal covenants.
   However, the project experienced several issues related to financial management. Interim unaudited
   financial reports and audit reports were not always submitted on a timely manner. Also, the PMUs did not
   address issues such as weak internal controls and delayed payments to contractors in a timely manner
   since the project did not have a dedicated financial officer throughout the implementation period.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 28) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        For highly technical and complex projects such as hydromet and early warning
         services projects, it is critical to provide substantial technical support and to consider
         a multi-phased long-term engagement. This project required capacity building, especially
         in the DHM, during the initial years resulting in slow implementation progress. Also, a longer-
         term multi-phase approach taking into account the cascading implications of the key
         elements of the hydromet value chain would have been more appropriate.
        Considering a SI for hydromet programs to bring together a group of key technical
         providers to support system design, implementation planning, procurement, and
         capacity building can be challenging. In this project, the hiring of a SI was challenging for
         several reasons such as immaturity of the System Integrator (SI) market, lack of SIs’ local
         presence and client engagement, lack of clients’ capacity to manage a big consultancy, and
         the requirement for high-level approvals of the SI contract within government. An alternative
         option for providing technical support could be developing prototypes that can be scaled up
         gradually and leveraging innovative technologies.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. It was internally consistent
and concise. The ICR included lessons learned for future Bank engagement in this field. Finally, the ICR was
sufficiently outcome driven. However, the economic analysis did not take into account that the project did not
achieve key outcome targets, which might have resulted in an overestimation of the ENPV and benefit-cost
ratios. Taking everything together, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NP: PPCR: Climate Hazards (P127508)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
