     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022773

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P117365                                    NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48930,IDA-58810,IDA-D1280             31-Dec-2015                                       152,362,760.03

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Apr-2011                               31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            90,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                           159,498,402.74                                             0.00

 Actual                                       152,362,760.03                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Wendy Schreiber Ayres      Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective, as stated in the Financing Agreement dated May 12, 2011 (page 6), was
   to increase access to sustainable water supply services and to improved sanitation services in some urban
   areas in the Recipient’s territory.

   The Project Development Objective as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (page 4) was identical
   to that in the Financing Agreement.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project is comprised of three components (PAD pages 5 to 6):

   Component 1. Urban water supply (cost at appraisal: US$68.70 million, actual cost: US$132.21 million).
   This component focused primarily on the expansion of distribution networks and the development of social
   connections and standposts to serve the most vulnerable in the cities of Niamey, Agadez, Arlit, and Tahoua,
   as well as in 18 secondary centers. The component included support for social connections and standposts
   in other cities and secondary centers. This component also included works to improve water storage in
   Niamey and water production, transmission, and storage across the remaining aforementioned urban areas.
   Finally, it contained support for water treatment facilities in five towns (Gazaoua, Goudoumaria,
   Guidanroumdji, Matankari, and Tessaoua) where groundwater quality did not comply with drinking water
   standards due to excessive fluorine, iron, or nitrates.

   Revised component 1. Following the cancellation of the construction of household latrines and washing
   and soakaway facilities under component 2, US$7.75 million was transferred to component 1 to undertake
   additional water supply works. These included works to improve water production, storage, transmission,
   and distribution capacities in the semi-urban towns of: (a) Tillaberi-Sakoira-Diambala-Namarigoungou and
   eight neighboring villages, (b) Gothèye-Kakassi-Koulikoira and two neighboring villages, (c) Galmi with
   extension to neighboring villages, and (d) Famalé. Through the Additional Financing (AF), activities totaling
   US$55.76 million in IDA financing were added to component 1. These included: works to improve water
   production, storage, transmission, and distribution capacities and construct social connections, institutional
   connections (to schools and health centers), and standpipes within the cities of Agadez, Zinder, Tillaberi,
   Niamey, and three secondary centers.

   Component 2. Urban sanitation (cost at appraisal: US$18.0 million of which $17.2 million IDA and $0.8
   million from beneficiaries [10 percent share of onsite sanitation facilities], actual cost: US$19.47 million).
   This component aimed at supporting the construction of household and school latrines, public sanitation
   facilities, household washing and soakaway facilities in Niamey and Dosso, and a fecal sludge treatment
   plant in Niamey to provide an environmentally-sound disposal solution to septage haulers. With respect to
   household latrines, the component intended to scale up a pilot on-site sanitation program that was
   successfully tested in Niamey under the previous Bank-financed Water and Sanitation Project, which
   included the training of local masons and contractors. The component also included support for Information,
   Education and Communication (IEC) activities to promote behavior change, including media campaigns and

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



  hygiene education, as well as the preparation of bidding documents and the supervision of works for the
  fecal sludge treatment plant.

  Revised component 2. Under the Project’s first restructuring, component 2 activities related to the
  construction of household latrines and washing and soakaway facilities were cancelled. With this
  cancellation, the beneficiary contribution of US$0.80 million, which consisted of a 10 percent share of the
  cost of onsite sanitation facilities, was no longer required. The associated IDA financing was reallocated to
  component 1. Through the AF, additional activities totaling US$10.02 million in IDA financing were added to
  component 2. These included the construction of school latrines and handwashing stations, and the
  implementation of sanitation awareness and demand creation campaigns, in the cities of Niamey, Dosso,
  and Tillaberi. The construction of a second fecal sludge treatment plant and the development of a fecal
  sludge management service chain were also added.

  Component 3. Institutional strengthening and capacity building (cost at appraisal: US$4.10 million,
  actual cost: US$8.51 million). This component included institutional support to the urban water sub-sector to
  consolidate sector reform, including through assistance to update the subsector financial model and
  capacity building of Water Assets Holding Company (Société de patrimoine de l’eau du Niger, (SPEN)) and
  the Multi-Sectoral Regulatory Authority (Autorité de Regulation Multisectorielle) staff in project management,
  regulation, procurement and financial management. The component also contained capacity building and
  support to the project implementation agencies responsible for urban water supply and sanitation within the
  Ministry of Water, Environment, and Fight against Desertification (Ministère de l’Eau, de l’Environnement et
  de la Lutte contre la Désertification). The component included capacity building and training in environment
  and social management to entities involved in applying World Bank safeguards procedures. Finally, the
  component included support for coordination and project management.

  Revised component 3. Under the AF, US$4.22 million in IDA was allocated to component 3 to further the
  same activities included in the parent project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$90.8 million. With the AF, the original estimated
  project cost was US$160.0 million. The actual cost at completion was US$152.4 million.

  Financing: The project’s cost was financed through an IDA Credit of US$160 million equivalent. Funds from
  beneficiaries declined from an estimated US$0.80 million to US$0 due to the cancellation of the
  construction of household latrines and washing and soakaway facilities.

  Borrower Contribution: No Borrower’s contribution was foreseen.

  Restructuring:

  First Restructuring. The project was restructured on May 23, 2013 to cancel the household sanitation and
  hygiene activities, because procurement of a delegated management firm could not move forward because
  the first-ranked firm was partly owned by a member of parliament, who was prohibited by the Niger
  Constitution to participate in public procurement. Because this rule is inconsistent with the Bank’s
  procurement rules, the project team could not then select the second-ranked firm. The Borrower requested
  that the activities related to the onsite sanitation be cancelled and that the funds be reallocated from

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



   component 2 to component 1 to support additional urban water supply activities. Other changes included
   revisions to the results framework to align with the activities to be supported and to modify indicator targets.

   Second Restructuring. A second restructuring on March 26, 2015 extended the closing date by one year to
   December 31, 2016 to allow time to complete the works added to component 1. It took more time than
   initially anticipated to prepare the technical studies for these works and to complete bidding processes to
   award the civil works.

   Third Restructuring. A third restructuring on June 9, 2016 provided an additional grant of US$60 million and
   an additional credit of US$10 million to undertake additional activities and expand the project’s development
   impact and extended the closing date by three years and six months to June 30, 2020, to allow for
   completion of the additional works financed by the AF. Other changes included (a) revisions to the results
   framework to reflect the additional funding and extended implementation period and to add an intermediate
   results indicator to track resolution of complaints, (b) changes in Safeguard Policies triggered, (c) changes
   to disbursement arrangements, (d) changes in disbursement estimates, (e) changes in procurement, and (f)
   changes in implementation schedule.

   Fourth Restructuring. A fourth restructuring on May 12, 2020 extended the project’s closing date by an
   additional six months to December 31, 2020 and added activities to help the government respond to the
   Covid-19 emergency. The results framework was revised to reflect the extended implementation period and
   to modify a PDO-level indicator, from “Restoration of the financial equilibrium of the urban water sector” to
   “Water sector financial equilibrium improved,” as restoration of the financial equilibrium of the urban water
   sector would require a tariff adjustment that was not achievable during the remaining project life; (b) and two
   intermediate outcome indicators were added to capture Covid-19 response: health centers provided with
   water connections and number of hygiene packages delivered in schools, health centers, and refugees’
   sites. Other changes included changes in disbursement estimates and in project implementation schedule
   to reflect the extension in the closing date.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 26, 2011 and became effective on September 1, 2011. The
   project closed on December 31, 2020, five years after the original closing date of December 31, 2015, as
   discussed above under restructuring.

   Split Rating. Since the target values of the sanitation PDO outcome indicators were modified during project
   restructuring, efficacy of the project in achieving objective 2 is assessed against both the original targets
   and the revised targets. Therefore, the review will conduct split rating for objective 2.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal



Niger is a landlocked country with an estimated population of 15.3 million people, with insufficient and
erratic rainfall. Niger is among the world’s poorest countries with a per capita income of only US$340 in

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



2009 and ranks last in terms of its human development index. The access rate to safe water in Niger was
estimated in 2009 at 72 percent in urban areas and 62 percent in rural areas, and to improved sanitation at
38 percent and 5 percent in urban and rural areas, respectively. The urban population was growing at 6
percent a year, and many unserved residents paid up to 10 percent of their monthly income for water. This
situation called for the development of technical solutions that were affordable to the broadest strata of the
population and at the same time ensures the financial viability of the sector. Improving access to improved
sanitation services required focusing on low-cost solutions and strategic planning.

Alignment with Country Priorities

The PDO was well-aligned with Niger’s socio-economic development and water supply and sanitation
sector policies. The project is aligned with Niger’s Vision 2035, as expressed through the Sustainable
Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy, in particular under Strategic Axis 3 “Development of Human
Capital,” through which the government aims to ensure access to drinking water, sanitation, and a decent
standard of living. The PDO also supports (a) Axis 2 “Modernization of the Government” by supporting
capacity building of relevant ministries, departments, and agencies to ensure that citizens enjoy quality
public services; and (b) Axis 5 “Development of a Dynamic Private Sector” by supporting public-private
partnerships in water, sanitation, and hygiene service provision.

The PDO was also aligned with the National Action Plan for Integrated Water Resources Management
2017–2030. This defines the framework for water resources management in the country. It includes five
specific objectives, including notably to improve equitable and sustainable access to potable water supply
and sanitation facilities and to improve good governance in the water sector. In addition, the PDO was
aligned to the Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector Program 2016–2030, which replaced the PN-AEPA.

Alignment with Bank Strategy

The project’s objectives are assessed as highly aligned with the World Bank’s current strategy as laid out in
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for fiscal 2018–2023. The project sought to address the
development problem of lack of access to water supply and sanitation services in urban areas by financing
the related infrastructure investments. The project also aimed to address weak sector institutions to
continue delivering services and expanding services to new customers through provision of technical
assistance and advice. The project objectives correspond to “Objective 9: Improved urban environments for
income generation and growth” under the “Focus Area 3: Better Governance for Jobs, Service Delivery and
Growth (CPF, pp. 26–30). In addition, the provision of water supply, sanitation, and hygiene services is
identified as a prioritized intervention for the Sahel by the Bank’s Africa Sustainable Development Practice
Group.

Previous World Bank Experience.

The World Bank has been a prominent partner in the water supply and sanitation sector since 2001. The
WSP (closed in December 2009) was instrumental in increasing access to piped water, reforming the urban
water sub-sector, and improving its operational performance. The Urban Water and Sanitation Project
(UWSP) was designed to follow-up on the gains from the WSP, safeguard and expand the progress
achieved thus far in the face of increased fragility and conflict and serve as critical support to the
implementation of PN-AEPA in urban areas. Although it was first conceived in early 2009, the UWSP was
not approved by the board until April 2011 when the World Bank decided to resume the extension of new
financing to Niger following democratic presidential elections.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



               However, while the objective remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary response
               to a development gap in Niger, a significant shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the project formulation
               around what outcomes would be achieved through increasing access to sustainable water supply services
               and improved sanitation services. The causal chain between funding and outcomes was clear, albeit with
               most targets at output level, as the objective was closer to the output level, rather than the outcome level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: “Increase access to sustainable water supply services in some areas of the Recipient’s territory.”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs—IDA’s financial and technical assistance
                             support—would directly lead to the achievement of project outputs of (a) expanded and improved water
                             production, transmission, storage, and distribution infrastructure; (b) increased household connections to the
                             water network and community waterpoints; (c) new water treatment plants; and (d) strengthened capacity of
                             the water sector institutions to sustainably provide services.



                             In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of more people in targeted urban centers
                             using safe water that would be supplied sustainably by Société d’Exploitation des Eaux du Niger (SEEN, the
                             Niger Water Operating Company). Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and
                             direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions.

                             The key assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) the construction of a water production,
                             transmission, storage, distribution infrastructure, and water treatment plants would lead to increased
                             availability of potable water; and (b) construction of social connections would lead to an increase in the
                             number of people served.

                             Outputs

                                        1,004 improved community water points (standposts) constructed or rehabilitated under the project.
                                          The revised target set at the AF was 953.
                                        67,850 new piped household water connections were constructed under the project. The original
                                          target set at the AF was 61,100.

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)




      Some 100,000 people gained access to enhanced water supply services (that is water quality
       compliant with standards, increased pressure, increased continuity) under the project. The revised
       target set the AF was 100,000 people.

Outcomes

Compared against the end-project targets

PDO Indicator 1: 929,500 people were provided with access to “Improved Water Sources” under the
Project. The revised target set at the AF was 849,250 people.

PDO Indicator 4: Some 1,029,500 people directly benefited from the project (52 percent female). The revised
target set at the AF was 949,250 people (50 percent female).

PDO Indicator 5: Restoration of financial equilibrium of the urban water supply sector was fully achieved by
project closing. This indicator measured the contribution of the project towards the sustainability of the urban
water sector. The financial equilibrium is considered maintained when SPEN’s revenues cover operating
costs and reimburse debt service while generating a surplus to finance new investments. The project team
worked to include two prior actions in the Bank-financed Second Laying the Foundation for Inclusive
Development Policy Financing (P173113, approved on August 6, 2020). The first was that “the Recipient has
paid arrears due to SEEN and the overdue balance to SPEN up to April 2020.” To meet this prior action, the
government cancelled SPEN’s major debt payments, restoring its financial equilibrium. The second was the
President has issued a decree approving the water tariff adjustment plan in urban and semi-urban areas. To
meet this prior action, the President issued Decree No. 2020‐384/PRN/MH/A of May 19, 2020 approving the
water tariff adjustment plan. Also supporting the sustainability of the urban water sector was the support the
project provided for the renegotiation of the government’s contracts with SPEN and SEEN to include technical
and commercial performance indicators to be tracked, with financial penalties or reductions in remuneration if
select targets are not met.

Overall, efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2 “Increase access to improved sanitation services in some urban areas in the Recipient’s territory”

Rationale
Theory of Change

A direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes. The
activities consisted of (a) construction of household sanitation facilities; (b) Education, and Communication
activities outreach; (c) training of masons and contractors for sanitation infrastructure; (d) construction of fecal
sludge treatment facilities; (e) construction of school sanitation facilities; and (f) construction of public

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



sanitation facilities. The key outputs were household, school, and public sanitation facilities. The main
outcomes were (a) people with access to improved sanitation under the project; and (b) students provided
with access to appropriate sanitation facilities in their schools under the project. Overall, the causal pathways
from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the
project’s interventions.

The key assumption leading to this objective was that the construction of latrines at households and at
schools would lead to people and students gaining access to improved sanitation under the project.

Outputs

      No improved latrines at households were constructed under the project. The target at appraisal was
       23,500.
      No on-site greywater facilities were constructed under the project. The target at appraisal was 5,000.
       As noted above, the household latrines and greywater facilities were cancelled during the first
       restructuring in May 2013.
      3,164 new school latrines were constructed under the project. The revised target set at the time of the
       AF was 3,164.
      20 public sanitation facilities were constructed under the project, matching the target set at project
       appraisal.
      Although not in the results framework, two fecal sludge treatment were constructed under the project.

Outcomes

Compared against the original target

PDO Indicator 2: No people were provided with access to “Improved Sanitation” under the project, which for
this indicator referred only to people benefiting from improved latrines at households.

PDO Indicator 3: Some 86,940 students provided with access to appropriate sanitation facilities in their
schools under the Project. The revised target set at AF was 86,940.

The sustainability of improvements to the sanitation service chain under the Project depends on the effective
implementation of newly established management models and continued engagement of relevant
stakeholders. The Project supported the municipalities in developing public-private partnership arrangements
for the management of the two fecal sludge treatment plants and the public sanitation facilities. Municipalities
are responsible for monitoring and enforcing their provisions and negotiating new contracts in a timely
fashion. In addition, schools must ensure sustained contributions from parents or obtain earmarked budget
allocations for the maintenance of constructed latrines to facilitate the work of management committees.

Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is modest.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)




                              OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              Objective 2: “Increase access to improved sanitation services in some areas of the Recipient’s territory.”
                              (Revised indicators)

                              Revised Rationale
                              Theory of Change (ToC). In the ToC activities and outputs related to construction of improved household
                              latrines and greywater facilities were dropped, along with the associated PDO indicators.

                              Outputs

                              Two output indicators were dropped. These were improved latrines and on-site greywater facilities
                              constructed under the project.

                              Outcomes

                              Compared against the revised target set at the AF, June 9, 2016.

                              PDO Indicator 3: 86,940 students were provided with access to appropriate sanitation facilities in their
                              schools under the Project. The revised target set at AF was 86,940 students.

                              Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is rated substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy for the original objectives is rated Modest. Although the project exceeded its targets for
                            objective 1 of increasing access to sustainable water supply services in some areas of the Recipient’s
                            territory, it did not achieve the targets for objective 2 increasing access to improved sanitation services in
                            some areas of the Recipient’s territory.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                       Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                        Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The objective of increasing access to sustainable water supply services
                            in some areas of the Recipient’s territory was overachieved and is rated high. The objective of increasing

                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



  access to improved sanitation services in some areas of the Recipient’s territory was fully achieved and is
  rated substantial. Overall efficacy is rated high.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

Economic efficiency. An economic analysis of the project was conducted at appraisal, consisting of (a) a cost-
benefit analysis of the urban water component of the proposed project (75 percent of total costs); and (b) an
assessment of the cost effectiveness of sanitation investments (PAD, page 10). The assumptions and
methodology used in the cost-benefit analysis were appropriate. The benefits comprised the profit from water
sales and the consumer surplus measured as increases in volume of water consumed per person. The costs
included the investment costs and the operation and maintenance costs of the water supply network. The net
present value (NPV) of the water supply component was estimated to beUS$2.02 million using a discount rate of
10 percent, and the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated to be 10.5 percent. This is an underestimate,
because the benefits of reduced time spent collecting water, improved health, and other benefits were not
included in the estimate of the NPV and EIRR. The economic analysis of the urban sanitation investments
confirmed that the technical options selected were cost-effective approaches to increase access to sanitation
services.

The economic analysis was updated for the AF, using the same methodology as for appraisal AF Project Paper,
page 37–38). The net present value (NPV) of the water supply component was estimated to be US$8.8 million
using a discount rate of 5 percent, and the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated to be 7.2 percent. (The
discount rate was adjusted from 10 percent at appraisal to 5 percent as per the World Bank guidelines for these
types of development investments.)



The economic analysis was again updated at project completion, using the same assumptions and methodology
as the previous estimates. The net present value (NPV) of the water supply component was estimated to be
US$51.5 million using a discount rate of 5 percent, and the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated to be 10.4
percent. The sanitation component is assumed to have been implemented at minimum cost as a result of
competitive procurement.

Financial assessment. The project sought to improve the sustainability of urban water supply services by
restoring the financial equilibrium of the sector, which was achieved in the last project year. Given the unpaid
water bills of public institutions (that is, recurrent arrears) and with a regulated tariff for service provision,
currently at about US$0.6 per cubic meter, revenues cover slightly more than the O&M costs of the urban water
supply system. Thus, the system is found to be financially viable covering all its O&M costs and limited
investments out of tariff revenues. Investment costs are mostly co-financed for tertiary networks and ordinary
private water supply connections, with major water infrastructure investments financed by the national


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



government through loans and grants. Also, SPEN/SEEN have full financial and administrative independence
with no recurrent subsidies from the government. According to financial statements, its net cash flow has been
positive for the last several years.

Design and implementation efficiency. As noted above, the planned investments in household latrines and
soakaway facilities had to be canceled because of issues with procurement, a significant shortcoming in
implementation efficiency. However, the project team restructured the project early in project implementation
when disbursement was low, which led to an improvement in the efficiency of the project. In addition, not all
contracts were complete by project closing due to the poor performance of contractors. The project closing date
was extended by one year through the March 2015 restructuring because preparation of the technical studies for
proposed new activities and completion of the bidding process took longer than expected. Inadequate
procurement and management of some contracts resulted in multiple amendments and significant delays and
contract cost overruns. Site selection for a fecal sludge treatment plant did not take account of the need to
resettle 116 project-affected persons, delaying construction by more than a year while to allow for preparation of
a resettlement action plan and negotiations with project-affected persons. Despite these challenges, the project
was implemented according to budget (no cost overrun/underrun), implying that there were significant gains
from lower costs for some other contracts, off-setting overruns in others. All major activities were completed, and
the loan was fully disbursed.



Overall, the quantified long-term benefits are substantial in comparison to the costs. However, there were
shortcomings in preparation of technical studies, procurement, contract management, and implementation of
safeguard policies that delayed project implementation. The efficiency of the project is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     75.00
 Appraisal                                                 10.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     80.00
 ICR Estimate                                              10.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets. With substantial relevance of objectives, modest efficacy, and substantial
efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory (3)


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



Under the revised outcome targets for objective 2. With substantial relevance, substantial efficacy, and
substantial efficiency, the overall rating is Satisfactory (5).

A split rating is applied based on the disbursement shares before and after the project restructuring in 2013,
with a disbursement share 7.21 percent (total financing was US$152.36 million). The overall outcome rating is
the average of the weighted value of outcome ratings, that is, 3 (moderately unsatisfactory) x 7.21 percent of
disbursements = .2163 and 5 (satisfactory) x 92.79 percent of disbursements = 4.6395. The weighted average
score is the sum of the two, 4.8558, which translates to Satisfactory. Please see the table below.

　                                 Original Objectives Revised Objectives
Relevance of Objectives         Substantial
Efficacy                        Modest               Substantial
Efficiency                      Substantial
                                Moderately
Outcome Rating                                       Satisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value (a)        3                    5
Amount Disbursed (US$
                                10.98                   152.36
million)
Disbursement (%) (b)                    7.21%               92.79%
Weight Value (a)x(b)                    0.2163              4.6395
Total weights                                4.8558 (rounds up to 5)
Overall Outcome Rating                          Satisfactory (5)
a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is considered to be moderate. The government’s ability to effectively
negotiate new 10-year contracts with SPEN and SEEN, is likely, given the nearly 20-year engagement of
both entities in the sector. A new water sector regulator has been established as an independent entity in
accordance with international best practices. The GoN’s continued support for this nascent structure will be
critical to its success in better enforcing SPEN’s and SEEN’s contractual performance targets and in
anchoring the sector’s tariff setting in sound policy.

Failing to increase tariffs and avoid future arrears is a risk to the financial equilibrium of the water
sector. The project successfully supported the urban water sector in restoring its financial equilibrium
through the GoN’s payment of accumulated arrears. However, for this regained equilibrium to be sustained,
the GoN will need to follow through with its commitments to longer-term change through: (a) the
implementation of the multi-year tariff adjustment plan, with an initial tariff adjustment planned for January
2022 in accordance with a prior action of the second Development Policy Operation; and (b) the
establishment of a mechanism for the timely payment of arrears that may arise in the future. Given the
country’s status as one of the world’s poorest, and domestic and regional conflict and instability, there
remains a high risk that the government may choose to further delay tariff increases and that it may not
allocate sufficient resources to the sector in the face of competing fiscal priorities.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



Failure to place adequate emphasis on commercial performance is also a risk. However, although
SEEN and SPEN have nearly doubled their number of clients, they have maintained high technical
performance and staff productivity, and are regional leaders in service reliability and quality. While not a
focus of the project, the bill collection rate for non-governmental customers has decreased from 96.9 percent
to 87.7 percent during this period, likely due to the overrepresentation of poor and vulnerable communities
among new customers.

The effective implementation of newly established management models will reduce the risk to
development outcomes. With complementary support from the World Bank’s Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility, the project supported the development of a five-year public-private partnership
arrangement between the municipality of Niamey and a private operator for the management of the fecal
sludge treatment facilities, as well as a financial model to help ensure the sustainability of the infrastructure.
The first plant is currently operating at an average capacity of 87 percent, demonstrating a high demand for
such services. The second plant is planned to become operational later in 2021. Niamey’s sanitation service
chain was further strengthened through capacity building activities for the city’s mechanical emptiers and the
newly contracted fecal sludge treatment plant private operators (ICR, page 20). The public-private
partnerships put into place to manage the delivery of water services have been successful and have
provided lessons in how to formulate and manage such contracts, so these arrangements are expected to
succeed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the objective to increase access to sustainable water supply services and to improved
  sanitation services by expanding water and sanitation services in the urban areas in accordance with the
  targets set in Niger’s National Water and Sanitation Program and its poverty reduction strategy (2008–
  2012) was of high strategic priority. Project design built on sector policies, and previous Bank
  engagements and experience. The project’s approach was straight forward, expanding water production,
  storage and distribution capacities, and facilitating access to services through programs for constructing
  social water connections, public standposts, and on-site sanitation facilities; and consolidating the
  achievements of the urban water sub-sector reform and strengthening capacities to deliver and manage
  services. The project provided support to improve the financial performance of the water services
  institutions. The project activities were sufficient to achieve the project objectives. The technical aspects
  of the project were sound. The project supported implementation of proven technologies to address the
  development problem of limited access to water and sanitation services. Economic and financial aspects
  of the project were sufficiently assessed justifying the viability of the project. A project coordination unit
  set up under the previous Bank-funded project was responsible for the management and coordination of
  the project, including procurement, financial management, preparation of annual work plans, and
  monitoring and evaluation. The project implementing agencies, SPEN for water and the project
  coordination unit for institutional strengthening and capacity building had capacity and experience to
  implement the project. Although the Directorate of Basic Sanitation of the Ministry of Water, Environment
  and Fight against Desertification did not have prior experience with implementing a Bank-financed
  project, capacity building activities were identified to ensure it could play its role effectively. Further, the
  household latrines and soakaway facilities would be implemented under a delegated management


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



  contract. To ensure the adequate implementation of activities, a project implementation manual was
  prepared. Lessons learned from the recently closed Water and Sanitation Project similar water and
  sanitation projects in West Africa countries, including Niger, were incorporated in the project design, such
  as the implementation procedures for the household sanitation facilities (PAD, page 33). The indicators in
  the results framework were sufficient to measure the project outputs and outcomes.

  However, the quality at entry did have shortcomings. The preparation advance intended to advance
  preparation of technical studies was not used. The capacity weaknesses of the General Directorate of
  Sanitation, which lacked the dedicated staff required for successful implementation, was not adequately
  identified during project preparation. The Bank team could have addressed this issue by requiring the
  agencies to augment their human resources prior to effectiveness. In addition, although most risks were
  appropriately identified, procurement risk was rated moderate. Challenges with procurement led to the
  cancelation of the household sanitation and soakaway facilities and to delays in implementation of other
  activities, and a restructuring of the project.

  Overall, there were moderate shortcomings in the World Bank`s identification, preparation, and appraisal
  of the project to achieve the project objectives. But quality at entry is still rated satisfactory, though
  marginally so.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Three task team leaders led project preparation and implementation. The first two task team leaders were
 based in Bamako. The last task team leader had been part of the Bank team since preparation and was
 based in Niamey, allowing consistent follow up, including weekly meetings with the project coordination unit
 and implementing agencies during the final year of implementation. Such close supervision ensured that
 the implementation teams focused on development impact, such as the need to restore the financial
 equilibrium of the water sector institutions. Some 21 implementation support missions were held during
 project implementation, one every six months. Aide memoires and Implementation Status and Result
 Reports were of high quality and candid, thoroughly covering all key issues and providing practical
 recommendations on how to address challenges. Supervision of safeguard and fiduciary aspects of the
 project was appropriate. The Bank team closely monitored compliance with safeguards and flagged issues
 when required procedures were not adequately followed. Similarly, the project team was actively involved
 in resolving the delays in procurement by bringing the implementing agencies together with Minister of
 Water and Sanitation to discuss the role of the procurement specialist at the project coordination unit in the
 procurement process, which resulted in substantially improved compliance with the Bank’s procurement
 guidelines. The Bank team also proactively introduced a performance evaluation spreadsheet for SPEN to
 use to improve contract management. The task team proactively restructured the project four times to
 extend the project closing date, adjust activities, reallocate funds, and amend the results framework. The
 team’s decision to restructure the project early during implementation when disbursements were low led to
 an improvement in the efficacy and efficiency of the project in achieving the project’s objectives.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory, and the overall Bank Performance is rated
 Satisfactory because of the project team’s proactive actions to improve project implementation and the
 achievement of the project activities while disbursement was low.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was sound, specifying how the key activities and outputs led to the outcomes as
 reflected in the results framework. The project development objectives to increase access to sustainable
 water supply services and to improved sanitation services in some urban areas in the Recipient’s territory
 were clearly specified and reflected in the outcome indicators included in the results framework. The
 intermediate results indicators, measuring outputs such as number of household connections, community
 standpipes, and improved latrines to be constructed under the project were adequate to capture the
 contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs toward achieving PDO-level outcomes as presented in
 the project appraisal document. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-
 bound, with baseline and target values specified for all indicators. The proposed data collection methods
 were adequate for all indicators. Overall, the project coordination unit had the capacity to implement the
 M&E arrangements and the indicators were sufficient to measure the achievements of the project in
 increasing the access to water and sanitation services. However, the design of the results framework had
 two moderate shortcomings. First, despite many potential indicators related to sustainability, only one was
 included in the results framework: the restoration of the financial equilibrium of the urban water sector.
 Indicators measuring the sustainability of services, such as the number of hours of services per day, were
 not included in the results framework, although the ICR in paragraph 49 notes that services were
 maintained at 22 hours per day through the project period. Second, the results framework did not account
 for improvements in the sanitation service chain beyond construction of new latrines. The results
 framework did not capture the construction of new fecal sludge treatment facilities, the first in the country.



b. M&E Implementation
  The impact and performance of the project were effectively monitored through data collection and
  reporting by the relevant entities (SPEN, the Directorate General of Sanitation, and the urban water
  sector regulator), which were then compiled by the PCU. The results framework was revised during each
  restructuring, dropping an indicator related to activity that was canceled, and updating targets to reflect
  additional financing. The data were found to be reliable and of good quality by an independent technical
  audit of all results against the project indicators conducted in 2018. SPEN reported on access and
  financial sustainability indicators for the urban water sector, in compliance with its performance contracts,
  which are verified by the regulator. These are likely to be sustained as long as the use of performance

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



  contracts remains in place. Further guaranteeing reliability and quality of data are the periodic,
  independent evaluations of urban water sector performance by: (a) the technical auditor who periodically
  verifies and validates the values of key indicators submitted by SPEN, SEEN and the GoN under the
  relevant performance contracts, and (b) the financial auditor who annually assesses the reliability of the
  financial model. Joint field visits by the Bank team, the PCU, and the implementing agencies during
  missions verified results achieved and evaluated the quality of infrastructure constructed under the
  project.



c. M&E Utilization
  Indicators were communicated effectively and used throughout implementation to assess project
  progress, identify the need for adjustments and make decisions accordingly. For example, when the
  Bank and government teams noted that the project was exceeding its water access targets, which
  demonstrated the capacity of the SPEN to implement works, it sought additional financing to reach even
  more people. In addition, consistent monitoring of the sectors’ financial situation showed the team that
  restoration of the financial equilibrium was unlikely, which led to the Bank team proactively engaging in
  dialog to include arrears clearance as a prior action in the Bank-financed Second Laying the Foundation
  for Inclusive Development Policy Financing. The M&E data were used to provide evidence of
  achievement of the increase in the access to water and sanitation services, which the government used
  to update its coverage numbers. Finally, the M&E systems helped to improve SPEN’s capacity to assess
  its financial performance. However, the results framework did not include outcome indicators, such as
  time saved for fetching water, so evidence of such achievements is lacking.



  The M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievements of the project
  objectives to increase access to water and sanitation services, but there were moderate shortcomings in
  capturing the sustainability of these services.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal the project was assigned Environmental category “B” because environmental risks and social
   impacts were expected to be minimal and manageable, and, in most cases, reversible. Two safeguard
   policies were triggered during preparation of the project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Two additional safeguard policies were triggered for the AF:
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The ICR reports
   (para. 99–100) that the project closed with a satisfactory safeguards rating. The government prepared an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a resettlement policy framework (RPF)

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



  because the exact location of the works was not known before appraisal. The government had sufficient
  consultation with the concerned populations and local governments in preparing the ESMF and the RPF.
  The ESMF and RPF were disclosed in Niamey and at the Bank’s Info Shop on January 28, 2011. During
  project implementation, work-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) were
  prepared and implemented satisfactorily, although with systemic delays. There were significant challenges
  during the early years of implementation, as environment and social management plans were not yet
  included in bidding documents and contracts and the National Office of Environmental Assessment (Bureau
  National d’Évaluation Environnementale, BNEE) was not fully involved in monitoring, as was designed.



  At the time of the additional financing, the government updated the ESMF and RPF to reflect the additional
  activities. It was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop on May 18, 2016. A Resettlement
  Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and consulted upon as part of the preparatory studies of the sludge
  treatment facilities in Niamey. However, the RAP was not implemented as planned, delaying the
  construction of the first fecal sludge treatment plant for over a year as the government finalized
  compensation measures for project affected households. These issues were corrected by the time of the AF
  with the effective integration of environment and social requirements into terms of reference along with the
  inclusion of environment and social specialists in all relevant consultancies preparing technical studies or
  conducting construction supervision. During this time, the BNEE, in close collaboration with the PCU, took
  the lead in validating environment and social screening and in the monitoring and oversight of associated
  mitigation and corrective measures.

  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The ICR does not report on compliance with this
  safeguard.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project’s implementing agencies complied with the Bank’s fiduciary policies.
  The project benefited from the financial management arrangements set up in the previous WSP, and
  financial management risk during preparation was assessed to be medium. While the PCU had sufficient
  capacity for financial management of the project, SPEN was required to implement recommendations of a
  2009 external audit with support of the project. These recommendations—which included improving its
  fixed asset management and reaching an agreement with the GoN on the treatment of depreciation of
  fixed assets—were successfully implemented as part of the 2011 contract negotiations. The PCU
  submitted the interim financial reports on time. The certified external audit reports were also submitted on
  time (the ICR does not provide information on the audit opinion). There were no known issues of corruption
  or misuse of funds associated with the project. At project close, US$0.53 million dollars remained under
  the parent project and was returned to the Bank. All project funds were accounted for at project closing.
  The project’s financial management was compliant with the World Bank’s requirements.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



   Procurement. Lengthy delays in procurement slowed implementation of the project, particularly in its
   early years. Procurement capacity was low at SPEN and especially at the General Directorate of
   Sanitation, which was compounded by a lack of dedicated project staff. Further, the PCU lacked a
   procurement specialist for more than a year following the resignation in 2015 of their procurement
   specialist (ICR, paragraph 100). At the start of the project, implementing agencies did not permit the PCU
   procurement specialist to participate in relevant processes, resulting in significant delays to address
   instances when procurement process did not comply with Bank policies. The Bank team proactively
   worked with the Ministry of Water and Sanitation and the implementing agencies to improve coordination,
   and performance improved following the approval of the AF.

   Lack of consistency between Bank and national procurement laws and regulations led to the cancelation of
   a major household sanitation contract that had been won by a firm owned by a member of parliament,
   which is prohibited under Niger’s constitution. However, the firm was eligible under Bank procedures. The
   regional procurement specialist advised the team that the Bank would be open to liability and reputational
   risk if the contract were to be awarded to a different firm. To avoid this risk, the Bank decided to cancel the
   activity and reallocate the financing to other investments. The time required to prepare the technical
   documents and complete the bidding process for the new activities led to a one-year extension of the
   project closing date. Changes in Bank and GoN procurement procedures during implementation also
   resulted in delays, arising from the need to take corrective actions to ensure compliance and from
   confusion as to whether GoN procedures or Bank procedures apply, where these are not the same.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   To avoid any unnecessary resettlement, the government identified a site for the second fecal sludge
   treatment plant that respected all necessary setbacks from surrounding villages. This led to construction of
   a small water system with public standposts and a 3-kilometer paved road to serve both the treatment
   plant and five nearby villages.

   The fecal sludge treatment plants will provide an unanticipated source of revenue through the sale of
   treated sludge as fertilizer. The University of Niamey analyzed dried fecal sludge from the first treatment
   plant and determined that it could be used as a safe and effective agricultural fertilizer. The government
   granted the required approvals in late 2020.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

Delegation of water service provision to private companies in public-private-partnership can
be effective in achieving significant and sustained gains in access and service quality. From
the implementation of its affermage model in 2001 to the time the project closed, Niger’s urban water
sector has demonstrated substantial gains in operational performance, while simultaneously
increasing the population served by nearly 220 percent, reaching nearly 4 million customers in 2020,
98.4 percent of the population within SPEN’s service area (up from 73.4 percent in 2011).
Nonrevenue water decreased from 20 percent to 15 percent of water production, and the bill
collection ratio increased by 18 percentage points from 79 percent to 97 percent, before falling to
percent to 88 percent by the time the project closed, likely due to the significant number of poor and
vulnerable communities that started receiving services under the project (ICR pages 2 and 18).
SEEN, a subsidiary of the French transnational company Veolia, has effectively leveraged the vast
global experience of its parent company to introduce improved processes and build staff capacity for
effective water systems management. Meanwhile, performance-based elements are embedded in
the contracts of both SPEN and SEEN and monitored by the sector regulator to improve
accountability and incentivize performance.

The leveraging of complimentary Bank instruments and activities can improve the prospects
of achieving ambitious objectives. To strengthen the financial sustainability of the water service
providers, the project included as a PDO results target, restoration of financial equilibrium of the
urban water sector. This required the government to clear its arrears and to implement a tariff
adjustment plan, but neither the Ministry of Water and Sanitation, nor the implementing agencies
had sufficient leverage to bring this about. The Bank team used the opportunity of the preparation of
the Second Laying the Foundation for Inclusive Development Policy Financing to agree with the
government on three prior actions to strengthen the sustainable delivery of water and sanitation
services. These were (a) the clearance of arrears, (b) the issuance of a presidential decree
approving a water tariff adjustment plan, and (c) issuance of presidential decrees appointing the
director general of the Water Regulatory Authority and the president and members of the Water
Regulatory Council. Similar synergies across the Bank portfolio can allow Bank teams to expand the
scope and impact of projects—including through influencing higher-level government actors—and
should be considered during preparation.



Where government interference in procurement is a significant risk, clear measures need to
be put into place to prevent mis-procurement and consequent delays in project
implementation. Political interference in the procurement process led to significant delays
throughout the project implementation period. In addition, commitments made by the GoN during


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



project preparation were not always respected by subsequent administrations. For example, in direct
opposition to a provision in the subsidiary agreement with SPEN, Nigerien customs authorities
sought to collect custom duties and indirect taxes for project-related expenses during its final year of
implementation. Task teams can incorporate measures in the project design to reduce the likelihood
of political interference and ensure continuity across administrations. For example, this project
helped to reduce the impact of political interference by insisting on a role for the procurement
specialist of the PCU in the procurement decisions of SPEN and the General Directorate of the
Sanitation. Other useful measures included (a) leveraging ministerial general secretaries and other
civil servants in key discussions to preserve institutional memory; and (b) thoroughly briefing new
ministers at the start of their mandate on their responsibilities under the project, financing
agreements, and prior commitments by previous administrations.

Continuous dialogue by the Bank team throughout project implementation is critical to
ensure challenges are addressed as they arise, particularly in fragile and low-capacity
countries. Having members of the Bank’s project task team based in country allows for more
consistent follow up to identify and address challenges. The Bank’s final task team leader, who had
been a team member from the inception of the project, was based in Niamey. He met weekly with
the PCU and implementing agencies during the final year of implementation. This allowed for the
quick identification of challenges and implementation of remedies. For example, the task team
maintained constant dialogue with the government officials to encourage them to take action to
strengthen the sustainable delivery of water and sanitation services through clearing arrears,
agreeing on a tariff adjustment plan, and reestablishing an independent water regulator.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written and consistent with guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s activities,
including a detailed annex summarizing the efficiency analysis. The ICR provides a good theory of change in
regard to the causal links and full results chain, and the reporting is outcome-focused. Its analysis is broadly
evidence-based.

The ICR, however, could have provided information on compliance with safeguards, covenants, and the
condition of disbursement. The ICR does not provide information on whether the external audits were qualified.
Tables 2 and 3 which report on achievements compared to targets should have presented the targets of the
results framework in the respective restructuring papers, not just the final target. In addition, there are some
inconsistencies in the figures presented in different sections of the ICR, for example para. 110 states that SEEN
and SPEN have increased their number of clients by 85.4 percent, while paragraphs 41 and 50, footnote 19,
and the government's comments on the ICR say that the number of clients rose by 96.4 percent. The figures for
key outputs for component 1 on page 41 show the target figures for household connections (61,100) and
community standposts (953), instead of the actuals achieved (67,850 and 1,004 respectively). Finally, the



                                                                                                       Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NE-Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P117365)



figures for actual disbursements in the table in the datasheet (US$147.31 million) does not match the figure for
actual project costs in annex 3 (US$160.00 million).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
