     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022834

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P118023                                 AZ HIGHWAY 3

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Azerbaijan                              Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78890,IBRD-86020,IDA-47230         31-Mar-2015                                        311,285,308.99

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 25-May-2010                             31-Mar-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       241,600,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                        316,418,498.11                                               0.00

 Actual                                    311,285,308.99                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Peter Nigel Freeman         Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated August 11, 2010
   (Schedule 1, page 6) and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6):

   "To contribute to a more efficient and safer Baku-Shamakhi road and higher quality road services as
   part of the general network upgrading to motorway standard, and to improve the management of the
   nascent motorway network ".


                                                                                               Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



   The PDO was revised with the Additional Financing (AF) on April 7, 2016. The PDO as stated in the
   AF Agreement dated April 7, 2016 (Schedule 1, page 6):

   "To contribute to a more efficient and safer Baku-Shamakhi and Yenikend- Shorsulu road and higher
   quality services as part of the general network upgrading to motorway standard, and to improve the
   management of the nascent motorway network".

   The AF expanded the project scope. Therefore, this review is not based on a split rating of objectives.

   The revised PDOs is unpacked for this review as follows: (i) To contribute to a more efficient Baku-Shamakhi
   and Yenikend-Shorsulu road; (ii) To contribute to a safer Baku - Shamakhi and Yenikend - Shorsulu road;
   (iii) To contribute to higher quality services as part of the general network upgrading to motorway standard;
   and (iv) To improve management of the nascent motorway network.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Apr-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, page 7).

   1. Motorway Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$296.0 million. The revised
   estimate with AF was US$419.4 million. The actual cost was US$374.3 million. This component planned to
   upgrade 100 kilometers (km) of the existing two-lane Baku - Shamakhi road to a four- lane motorway
   and related road safety activities. Activities in this component: (i) upgrading the Baku-Shamakhi road; and
   (ii) road safety works.

   The scope of this component was expanded with the project restructuring in 2013. 48 kilometers (km) of
   new motorway construction on the Yenikend - Shorsulu road was added. In parallel, the length of the Baku -
   Shamakhi road was reduced from 100 km to 77 km due the geotechnical issues at the western end of the
   road that was not foreseen at appraisal. The project scope was expanded with the AF, to upgrade 94 km of
   the Baku-Shamakhi road (from 77 Km).

   2. Institutional development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$5.0 million. The revised estimate
   after the AF was US$25.0 million.The actual cost was US$15.6 million. Activities in this component: (i)
   preparing a study to explore policy options on management and financing; (ii) institutional strengthening of
   the AzerRoadService (ARS - road administration unit in the Ministry of Transport (MoT), responsible
   for managing motorways; (iii) establishing guidelines for motorways; (ii) testing an experimental motorway

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



  unit at ARS; and (iii) operations and maintenance pilot on sections of motorways; and (iv) financing traffic
  related equipment, training, and study tours on to the MoT, ARS, and officials from other government
  agencies.

  The scope of this component was expanded with the AF to provide additional support for establishing
  dedicated Regional Maintenance Units (RMUs) for motorway maintenance activities, a Motorway
  Management Unit, constructing RMU offices, road maintenance depots and road maintenance equipment.
  With RMUs, the activity of planned pilot on motorway operations and maintenance became irrelevant and
  was therefore cancelled.

  3. Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.0 million. The revised estimate after
  the AF was US$4.0 million.The actual cost was US$3.2 million. This component planned to support
  the management capacity of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The scope of this component was
  expanded with the AF to increase institutional support to update the road administration's road database,
  and conduct a road user survey.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$356.1 million (inclusive of contingencies). The
  revised estimate with the AF was US$477.8 million. The actual cost was US$394.0 million.

  Project financing. The original Bank financing for the project was US$241.6 million. AF of US$140.0
  million (IBRD loan) was approved on April 7, 2016. With this, the total Bank financing for the project was
  US$381.6 million. The Bank disbursed US$311.2 million. US$64.0 savings realized due to the devaluation
  of the local currency between 2015 and 2017 were cancelled by the Bank at government request. There
  was parallel financing for complementary road rehabilitation activities on the corridors from the Asian
  Development Bank (ADB) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).

  Recipient contribution. The recipient contribution was planned at US$114.5 million at appraisal.
  Their contribution was more than planned at US$153.7 million during implementation.

  Dates. The Bank approved the project on 25 May, 2010, and the project became effective on 8 November
  8, 2010, with an original closing date of 31 March, 31, 2015. AF was approved on 7 April, 2016. The project
  closed on 31 March, 2021.

  Other changes. Besides the AF, there were four Level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime. The
  changes made during the project are listed sequentially as follows.

  The changes made through the first restructuring on 4 December, 2013.

        A new activity - upgrading 48 km of the corridor from Yenikend - Shorsulu - was added. The
         restructuring reduced the scope of the Baku-Shamakhi road from 100 km to 77 km, due to complex
         geotechnical issues that was not foreseen at appraisal. The savings realized from the reduced
         scope of the Baku-Shamakhi road were allocated to funding the Yenikend - Shorsulu road. The PDO
         was revised to reflect the new activity.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



         The government's co-financing share was increased from 20 percent to 25 percent, and the closing
          date was extended by 18 months from 31 March, 2015, to 30 September, 2016, for completing the
          new activity.

   The changes made through the AF approved for the project on 7 April, 2016.

         The PDO was formally revised to reflect the increase in project scope.
         As discussed in section 2d, the project scope of all components was increased (including the scope
          of the Baku-Shamakhi road from 77km to 94 km, and support for establishing the Regional
          Management Units).
         The closing date for the original project was extended by eighteen months from 30
          September, 2016, to 31 December, 2019, to coincide with the closing date for the AF project.

   The Bank supported the following changes through the second Level 2 restructuring on 31
   December, 2019.

         extending the closing date by six months from 31 December, 2019, to 30 June, 2020, for
          completing ongoing activities associated with the RMU.

   The Bank supported the following changes through the third Level 2 restructuring on 5 June, 2020.

         US$64.0 savings realized due to the devaluation of the local currency between 2015 and 2017
          were cancelled at government request.
         The closing date was extended by nine months from 30 June, 2020, to 31 March, 2021, for
          completing the activities relating to establishing the RMUs that were delayed due to the
          restrictions following the COVID-19 pandemic, and for preparing a new project to further develop
          connectivity for about 250,000 people in the Salyan - Bilsuvar area in the southern part of
          Azerbaijan.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The PDOs were relevant to the development challenges facing Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan's economic growth before appraisal was mainly due to the oil and gas boom that was expected
to last for about twenty years. Diversifying into the non-oil sector through developing the natural
resources and the tourism potential of the country was important to the government strategy
for transforming Azerbaijan to a sustainable market economy.

The road mode dominated the transport sector, with roads accounting for 60 percent of freight, and almost
all passenger transport. Although the length of the road network (25,000 kilometers (km) of the country
was adequate, their quality was poor, with only 45 percent of the Major arterial (M) roads, 30 percent of the
minor arterial roads (R) roads, and nine percent of tertiary (Y) unpaved roads in good condition.
The network condition was fragile due to inadequate road maintenance, vehicle axle overloading, and


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



               poor road safety. (Azerbaijan had a poor road safety record and the number of people hurt or killed in traffic
               accidents was expected to increase as car ownership and traffic increased).

               Government strategy. The PDOs were well aligned with the Government strategy, articulated in the "
               State Program for Rehabilitation and Development of Azerbaijan Republic's Road Network for 2006-
               2015" at appraisal. This strategy aimed to develop the main arterial roads to international motorway
               standards for technical and geometrical specifications, traffic safety and signage, road-user amenities and a
               sustainable funding mechanism for road maintenance. The ICR does not provide details on whether this
               strategy was updated.

               Bank strategy. The PDO was well aligned with two pillars of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy
               (CPS) for 2007 - 2010: (i) support sustainable and balanced growth of the non-oil economy; and (ii)
               increase social services and access. The CPF specifically highlighted the need for transport
               infrastructure investments to develop Azerbaijan's non-oil growth potential.

               The PDO was also well aligned with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2019.
               This CPF was current when the project ended in March 2021 (ICR, paragraph 34). The second focus area
               of the CPF articulated the need for improving economic competitiveness through improving connectivity
               along the main highways. The CPF recognized the importance of rehabilitating corridors in allowing
               producers to reach both local and international markets, and underscored the need for introducing modern
               operation and maintenance management practices in the road sector.

               Previous Bank experience. This project was the third phase of the Bank support to the road sector in
               Azerbaijan. The first Azerbaijan Highway project that closed on 2009, rehabilitated parts of the East-West
               Highway, and reorganized road maintenance activities. The second Highway project that closed on 2015,
               aimed to improve transit access and road safety within Azerbaijan's East-West and North South corridors
               through upgrading sections of the Alat -Hasalli road on the Baku-Iran Highway and sections of the Baku-
               Shamakhi road. The scope of this project was similar to the previous highway projects financed by the
               Bank. Accordingly, the relevance of the PDO is assessed as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to more efficient Baku-Shamakhi and Yenikend-Shorsulu roads.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The outputs such as upgrading sections of the two-lane Baku - Shamakhi and Yenikend -
                             Shorsulu roads to four lanes, were expected to improve their quality, reduce road user costs, and aid in

                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



the long-term development outcome of sustaining growth of the non-oil sector. The theory of change assumes
that the government remains committed to motorway reform, including through improving road
maintenance through setting a dedicated mechanism for road maintenance, and that the technical challenges
could be economically solved in the mountainous region. The causal links between project
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (pages 9 - 11 and pages 32- 33).

      94 km of the M4 highway from Baku to Shamakhi (linking Baku with central Azerbaijan) was widened
         from a single carriageway to a dual carriageway, as per the revised target, and slightly short of the
         original target of 100 km. The activities entailed stabilizing slopes in areas prone to landslides, and
         building footbridges and culverts and underpasses. Passenger car speeds along this section of the
         road increased by 40 percent, compared to the pre-project times.
        48 km of the M3 highway from Yenikend - Shorsulu (linking Azerbaijan's northern central and central
         regions with the Iranian border in the south) were upgraded as targeted. The activities included a dual
         carriageway along a new alignment, grade-separated interchanges, and rest areas for road users.
        144 km of roads were constructed, exceeding the target of 142 km.
        The existing bridge over the River Kur was rehabilitated to maintain accessibility for local and non-
         motorway traffic.
        About 25,000 person-months of employment were generated.

Outcomes (ICR, paragraphs 39 and 41).

The outputs were expected to reduce the average journey times and thereby reduce road user costs.

      The average time for road users along the upgraded sections of the Baku - Shamakhi road reduced by
         19 minutes, and the average road user cost reduced by 30%. This exceeded the target of 20%.
      The average journey time for road users on the upgraded sections of the Yenikend - Shorsulu road
       reduced from 52 minutes to 32 minutes, and the average road user cost reduced by 23%. This
       exceeded the target of 20%.
      A road user survey conducted at closure (discussed in detail below) indicated that 79% of the
       respondents were satisfied when the project closed, as compared to 19% at the baseline.

The realized outcomes were attributable to project activities. Therefore, efficacy of this PDO is assessed as
substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to a safer Baku - Shamakhi and Yenikend - Shorsulu road.

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



Theory of change. The outputs of activities, such as improving road safety standards on the
upgraded sections of the Baku - Shamakhi and Yenikend - Shorsulu highways, conducting road safety audits,
were likely to reduce road accidents, and thereby contribute to the PDO of safer roads. The causal links
between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 43 and 44).

      Dual carriageway roads on the Baku - Shamakhi and Yenikend - Shorsulu highways were
       constructed, with traffic segregated by separating carriageways. Both metallic and concrete safety
       barriers were used in the median and at the roadside. Hazardous left turns were restricted, and
       replaced with lanes dedicated to turning traffic. In urban areas, footbridges were constructed, and
       sidewalks installed to separate pedestrians and traffic.
      Road safety audits on design and safety audits on construction were completed as targeted. The ICR
       (paragraph 43) observes that such audits were not routinely used for state budget financed projects in
       Azerbaijan before the project.

Outcomes (paragraph 44).

The outputs of the activities described above, were expected to contribute to the outcome of safer roads.

The ICR (page 19) observes that a World Bank study conducted in Azerbaijan in June 2021 (Socio-Economic
Cost and Human Impacts of Road Accidents in Azerbaijan) estimated the socio-economic cost and human
impacts of road accidents at 1.6 billion Azerbaijani Manat (AZM), equivalent to 2.0 percent of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP). The study also notes that the number of road accidents in 2019 was 14 percent higher than in
2018.

      The number of people killed or injured from road accidents (per 100 million vehicle- km) on the Baku -
       Shamakhi road decreased by 71%, far exceeding the benchmark of 30% when the project closed.
      The number of people killed or injured from road accidents on the Yenikend - Shorsulu road
       decreased by 76%, far exceeding the benchmark of 30%.

This outcome was mainly attributable to the project activities, as the reduction in road accidents on the
project-intervened areas was substantially higher than the national trend, where fatalities due to road
accidents decreased by only 25 percent over the past decade. The ICR (page 43) notes that nationwide road
fatalities decreased by 21% from 2009 - 2019, and by 32% if measured from 2010 - 2020).

The efficacy of this PDO is assessed as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To contribute to higher quality services as part of the general network upgrading to motorway standard.


                                                                                                Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)




Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities aimed at institutional strengthening of the road agency for
preparing policy options on management and financing, and developing guidelines for constructing
motorways, their operations and maintenance, were likely to improve their capacity to provide higher road
quality services. The theory of change explicitly assumes that government would remain committed to
motorway reform including through for funding road maintenance. The causal links between the project
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 34 - 35).

In addition to the activities described above, the following outputs were relevant for this objective.

      Motorway operational guidelines were developed as targeted.
      Motorway management and maintenance strategy was developed as targeted.
      The project aided in developing a road database and providing capacity building support for the road
       agency's in-house data collection unit.

Outcomes.

The activities described above were expected to contribute to higher road quality services.

Roads in the project-intervened areas that were in good condition increased from 55% at the baseline to 90%
when the project closed, exceeding the target of 70%. A Road User satisfaction survey was conducted on
800 residents and road users to provide feedback on the quality of road services, both before and after
upgrading the roads (ICR, paragraph 51). Topics for the survey, included road and sidewalk
condition, signage and markings, drainage condition, pedestrian safety features, and the availability of bus
stops and pedestrian crossings. The main conclusions of the survey are as follows:

      Overall 79% of the respondents expressed satisfaction when the project closed (as compared to a
       baseline of 19%).
      89% percent of the respondents were satisfied with the upgraded Yenikend - Shorsulu road and
       73% with the upgraded Baku - Shamakhi road.
      73% and 72% of the female and male respondents were satisfied with the quality of roads.
      77% of the residents and 80% of the travelers were satisfied with the quality of roads.

The efficacy of this objective is assessed as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve management of the nascent motorway network.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)




Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities described above, together with the outputs such as establishing
regional dedicated regional management units (RMUs) under a central motorway management unit for
maintaining the magistral (motorway) roads, were expected to improve management of the nascent
motorways (until then local units were responsible for maintaining the magistral roads). The causal links
between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear, and the intended outcomes were
monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 47 - 49).

In addition to the outputs described above, the following outputs were relevant for this objective.

      The project provided technical assistance to support the planning and capacity building for
       establishing RMUs and for introducing performance-based service-level agreements (SLA) between
       the RMUs and the Motorway Management Unit of the road administration (MMU). According to the
       clarifications provided by the team, before the setting of RMUs, road maintenance was undertaken by
       more than sixty small locally based maintenance units responsible for the roads passing through the
       respective administrative areas. The reforms removed the specialized task of maintaining the
       motorways from the local units to the RMUs. Each RMU was responsible for the routine, emergency
       and winter maintenance along the corridor. The task team leader also clarified that the RMUs are
       managed and funded independently from the local maintenance units and the Road Agency
       approved designated budgets for each RMU based on the level derived by the project consultants.
      Three priority RMUs were established and operational when the project closed, for maintenance
       planning and budgeting and maintaining Service Level Agreements (SLA) with the MMU for
       maintaining the Magistral roads. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the SLAs require
       the service provider (the RMUs) to undertake maintenance tasks and achieve a defined level of
       service (such as, replacing damaged sections of guard rail within 48 hours and filling potholes within
       seven days). The SLAs also contains penalty clauses that reduce monthly payment if service level
       targets are not met. The ICR (paragraph 48) notes that four more are operational and in the process
       of transitioning to SLAs.

Outcomes.

The outputs of the activities described above were expected to increase the km of roads under SLA with the
MMU.

      774 km of the highway roads of the RMUs were under SLA with the MMU, exceeding the target of 500
       km. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the concept of delivering a defined level of
       service was new to the road sector in Azerbaijan and was in alignment with the way the Government
       intends to manage state-owned enterprises. The team also clarified that to the best of the team's
       knowledge, this way of delivering services was applied for the first time among the state-owned
       enterprises.

Efficacy is assessed as substantial.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The intended outcomes that were attributable to the project activities were realized. Therefore, overall efficacy
                            is assessed as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted at completion separately for upgrading the Baku-
   Shamakhi and the Yenikend - Shorsulu segments of the highways, using the Highway Development and
   Management (HDM - 4) model. These components accounted for 88% of the appraisal estimate and 96% of the
   actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from vehicle operating cost savings, travel time savings
   for road users, and accident savings costs.

   Baku - Shamakhi segment. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 13.2 percent, short of
   the estimated ex- ante EIRR of 14.5 percent. The Net Present Value (NPV) when the project closed was
   US$105.7 million. The NPV at closure is not comparable to the NPV at appraisal, as it was based on different
   assumptions about the cost of capital as the project progressed.

   Yenikend - Shorsulu segment. The ex-post EIRR was 13.2 percent, well short of the estimated ex-ante of 17.3
   percent. The NPV when the project closed was US$13.4 million. The lower than expected returns on the
   Yenikend - Shorsulu road was due to factors such as, low traffic growth along the corridor as the economy
   contracted in 2015-2016 and its slow recovery, compounded by the restrictions on movements following the
   COVID - 19 pandemic. The ICR also notes that with the economy rebounding faster than expected (4.8% during
   January - September 2021), traffic on this road network is likely to increase faster than expected.

   The actual cost was well within the cost estimated at appraisal. The unit cost of upgrading the Baku - Shamakhi
   road was US$2.47 million per km, substantially less than the US$2.96 per km anticipated at entry, due
   to efficiencies that were achieved through engineering design that avoided complex and expensive technical
   solutions in the landslide areas and on sections with steep inclines (ICR, paragraph 57). 94 km of this highway
   were upgraded for a total cost of US$232.0 million, compared to the PAD estimate of US$296.0 (for 100 km)
   (ICR, paragraph 63). The unit cost of upgrading sections of the Yenikend - Shorsulu road was US$2.67 million
   per km, as compared to the estimated cost of US$3.12 million per km estimated in the October 2013
   restructuring paper (ICR, paragraph 57). 48 km of this highway were upgraded for a total cost of US$129.0
   million, US$24.0 million less than estimated in the restructuring paper. The yearly average supervision cost was
   US$121,422 as compared to the US$120,000 estimated at entry. The slightly higher supervision cost was due to

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



a combination of factors including upscaling of the project and the extended implementation period. Total
savings of US$64.0 million were realized due to the devaluation of the local currency vis-à-vis the US$ from
2015 - 2017 and were cancelled at government request.

Administrative and operational issues during implementation. The earlier stages of the project saw less
than optimal implementation efficiency, as evidenced by slower than anticipated disbursement rate. The reasons
for this were: (i) issues with technical design and procurement delays; (ii) the first works contract for the Baku-
Shamakhi road was awarded six months after project effectiveness despite its readiness at appraisal and work
on the subsequent sections (km 45 to 67 and from km 67 to 91) took a further two years to commence; (iii) there
were serious problems due to the poor performance of a contractor, which the Bank was unable to resolve and
the contractor had to be replaced; and (iv) issues relating to the financial capacity of the contractors due to the
sharp devaluation of the domestic currency vis-à-vis the US$ (the devaluation led to steep increases in both
domestic and foreign costs which was problematic because the contracts were denominated in only local
currency and did not include price adjustment provisions. The ICR (page 22) notes that price adjustment
provisions were not used as per the recommendations of the Ministry of Finance to minimize the price escalation
under such contracts. This aggravated the cash flow problems being experienced by most contractors). This
issue was eventually resolved by the Bank.

The delays were exacerbated by adverse external factors over which the project had no control, such as a
banking and economic crisis, currency volatility, country's involvement in a major military conflict, and physical
restrictions following the COVID - 19 pandemic. However, these challenges were addressed and project
activities completed were completed with extension of the closing date (the closing date for the original project
was extended by 18 months and the closing date for the AF project was extended for a cumulative 15 months).

Overall, efficiency is assessed as modest in view of the administrative shortcomings during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      88.00
 Appraisal                                                  14.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      96.00
 ICR Estimate                                               13.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



The overall outcome was moderately satisfactory, based on the substantial ratings for the relevance of the PDO,
efficacy and modest efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. This project supported activities for establishing Regional Management Units
(RMUs) for managing motorways through performance-based road maintenance practices. There is however
a modest risk to the development outcome, as the service level agreements still remain in their early stages
in Azerbaijan, and so the long-term adoption of this approach will depend on the benefits realized by the road
agency. Further, the development outcome is contingent upon support through annual budget allocations.
The ICR notes that given the significant financing needs for post-conflict reconstruction, the state budget for
road maintenance could be undermined due to shifting priorities towards rehabilitating infrastructure in the
reacquired territories (the team clarified that the territories refer to those reacquired in Azerbaijan's during the
country's 2020 conflict with Armenia).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed highway
  project and the ongoing Second Highway project. Lessons incorporated at design included; (i)
  ensuring readiness of works activities at the start of the project. Disbursements in the second Highway
  project had been slow initially, due to unforeseen technical and procurement delays. For the Baku-
  Shamakhi section in this project, a feasibility was undertaken in advance and design documents for the
  first 30 km of this section was ready at effectiveness (since no land acquisition was required for this
  section). Despite this, as explained in section 5, the first works contract for this section was delayed by
  six months due to the technical design and procurement delays; (ii) Limited technical assistance
  activities focused on managing motorways; and (iii) adequate implementation arrangements were in
  place (discussed below) (PAD, paragraphs 29 - 31). The Bank prepared this project in collaboration with
  ADB and EBRD, given the complementary road rehabilitation activities on other sections of the
  corridors financed by these donors.(PAD, paragraph 34).

  The implementation arrangement were appropriate. The AzerRoadService (ARS), under the supervision
  of the Ministry of Transport (MoT) was responsible for project implementation. ARS and the MoT had
  executed Bank-financed projects and were familiar with Bank policies. The Project Implementation Unit
  (PIU), which was executing the Second Highway project, was also retained for this project. Since the
  Second Highway project also entailed upgrading from two lanes to four lanes, the ARS and the PIU were
  familiar with the technical, geographical and safeguard issues (PAD, paragraph 34).



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with the
  weak implementation capacity, fiduciary and safeguards risks. Mitigation measures at design, included
  hiring international consultants to support ARS and the PIU, and targeted technical assistance activities
  to strengthen motorway management. Regarding the mitigation measures, the overall project risk was
  rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 39). The arrangements made at appraisal for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in Section 10).

  However there were minor shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the mountainous section of the M4
  corridor had not been designed in detail at appraisal. This was probably due to the strategic and political
  pressure for the project to proceed before the detailed design had been completed. Nevertheless, a
  major geotechnical design had to be undertaken later; and two, there were some issues with the M&E
  framework (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supervision team conducted supervision missions twice a year, with twenty three missions during
 the project lifetime (ICR, paragraph 118). The continuity of leadership was maintained, with just two Task
 Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime. The TTL or the Co TTL and the procurement, financial,
 environmental and social specialists were located in the field. This helped the team to support the
 Government and the road administration to quickly react to changing circumstances, such as in dealing
 with the issue due to the devaluation of the local currency vis-à-vis the US$ between 2015 and 2017 (this
 issue was problematic, as the contracts were denominated in local currency with no provisions for price
 adjustments. The crisis also hit the banking sector, and aggravated the cash flow problems being
 experienced by most contractors). The Bank team in consultation with the implementing agencies,
 designed measures to support the heavily affected contractors. The team was proactive in making the
 appropriate decisions on project restructuring (such as, strengthening the institutional components of the
 project and adjusting the M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 9). The support provided by the
 team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

 Overall Bank performance is assessed as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear. Of the three key outcome indicators - reduction in road user costs - was
 appropriate for monitoring the PDO of more efficient roads. The second key indicator - the percentage
 reduction in accidents on the roads - was appropriate for monitoring the PDO of safer roads. However, this
 indicator needed modification, as the indicator did not differentiate between fatalities and injuries due to
 road accidents. The third key indicator measured the network condition and did not differentiate between
 improvements gained through capital investment (road construction) or improvements due to better
 managed maintenance.



b. M&E Implementation
  The shortcomings in M&E design were rectified. The indicator pertaining to road accidents combined
  fatality and injury data and used multi-year average numbers (to disaggregate the benefits attributable to
  the project from broader national safety trends).A fourth indicator was introduced during the 2016
  restructuring that was necessary to reflect the increased scope of this project. However, the indicator on
  the percentage of road safety audits was dropped due to weaknesses in the traffic police crash system
  data system (ICR, paragraph 104).

  The PIU was responsible for data collection. The ICR (paragraph 102) notes that as the PIU was initially
  overseeing two Bank projects, a full-time M&E specialist was hired after project restructuring. The
  strengthened PIU since then had the required knowledge for monitoring the project and this enabled
  accurate assessment of the implementation progress. The M&E arrangements were strengthened
  through undertaking a road user satisfaction survey, to assess the public's perception of road use and the
  new facilities. The Bank team also employed a tool to monitor the physical progress of civil works
  activities through the Innovative Project Assessment Tool (PAT). The ICR (paragraph 105) notes that this
  tool efficiently tracked progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 106) notes that data on all indicators in the Results Framework were regularly
  updated and reported in the six-monthly Implementation and Status Results (ISR) reports. These data
  were used for tracking implementation progress and taking remedial actions, and the M&E system was
  sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives.

  Overall, M&E is assessed as substantial. Although there were minor shortcomings in M&E design, they
  were rectified during implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



  The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
  policies, triggering two safeguard policies at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, page 17).

  Environmental Assessment. The PAD (paragraph 54) notes that an Environmental Management
  Framework (EMF), and a Regional Environmental Review (RER) prepared for the first Highway Project in
  2005, were updated in 2009. The EMF outlined the procedures for environmental screening, management,
  consultation, and disclosure of sub-projects. The RER identified the potential environmental risks, and the
  issues to be addressed by the site-specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and the
  Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The EMF and RER were publicly-disclosed. As the detailed
  design had only been developed for 30 km of the road at appraisal, site-specific EIA and EMP were
  prepared for these roads and publicly-disclosed at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 108) reports that site-
  specific EIAs and EMPs were prepared for all road sections and updated during implementation.

  The team clarified that the project complied with environmental safeguards and environmental compliance
  was rated as satisfactory when the project closed According to the ICR (paragraph 108), the site staff
  included a safeguards specialist to oversee environmental issues. Both contractors and consultants were
  contractually required to employ experienced staff to manage the environmental and social safeguards at
  the site level.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 51) notes that for land acquisition was not required for
  most road sections, as the roads could be expanded within the existing right-of-way. Land acquisition was
  however foreseen for 9.75 km of road where the land was owned by private owners, and for constructing
  a new bypass around Shamakhi. Since the exact alignment was only known for the first 30 km road section
  which did not require land, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at
  appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 109) notes that the road administration prepared a Resettlement Action Plan
  (RAP) which was publicly-disclosed during implementation.

  The project complied with the social safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 110) reports that 441 people were
  affected (including fourteen people who were displaced). The affected people were compensated
  from state funds. The PIU ensured that owners and users of the impacted land were fully compensated
  before works commenced. However, the process was lengthy as some landowners could not be traced, and
  a few cases were resolved only after litigation.

  The project established a grievance redress mechanism (GRM), that was monitored by consultants under
  the oversight of the PIU. Resettlement and land acquisition-related grievances were also received directly
  by the land acquisition unit of the road administration. The ICR (paragraph 111) notes that most cases
  (such as accidental damages to irrigation or drainage pipes), were resolved on-site by the contractors, while
  the remainder were addressed by the PIU.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The AzerRoadService (ARS) was responsible for financial management. The
  Bank conducted an assessment of ARS's financial management arrangements. The arrangements were
  deemed to be satisfactory and the financial risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 48).


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



   The project complied with the financial management legal covenants (ICR, paragraph 112). Financial
   arrangements were strengthened during implementation through hiring an additional dedicated financial
   management specialist for the PIU. The financial audits were consistently submitted on time, and all
   payments under the project were completed with no debt remaining when the project closed. The team
   clarified that none of the audits were qualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at
   appraisal. The PIU was already executing the ongoing Bank-financed Second Highway project and had
   demonstrated capacity for managing procurement. The assessment concluded that the procurement risk
   was moderate (PAD, paragraph 47).

   The procurement activities was managed by experienced procurement specialists at the PIU (ICR,
   paragraph 114). Although some evaluation procedures took longer than planned, there were no serious
   issues and the ICR does not report of any misprocurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from implementing this project, with some adaptation of
language.

1. To ensure early disbursement, it is helpful to have more than one high value activity that
can commence at effectiveness or shortly afterwards. This project became effective with the
design and procurement ready completed for 30 km stretch of the Baku - Shamakhi road while other
sections were still under preparation.

2. The introduction of modern management approaches for road maintenance is feasible for
state-owned entities, but requires time. The development objectives of this project were initially

                                                                                                Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)



modest. However, the Bank provided options and engaged with the Government in a long-running
dialogue on the maintenance of roads. The Government eventually adopted the recommendations
on the modernization of motorway management and maintenance, and this led to the Service Level
Agreements between the Regional Management Units and the Motorway Management Unit of the
Road Administration.

3. Implementing agencies should strongly encourage all bidders for works contracts to
reflect their foreign currency costs , regardless of historical exchange rate performance. The
sudden devaluation of the local currency, during project implementation created cash flow problems
for several contractors, as they had priced the work in local currency but had costs in foreign
currencies. While the standard World Bank bidding documents used for the project allowed bidders
to include foreign currencies, none did so as the local currency had previously been very stable.
Consequently, contractors were over-exposed to the effects of currency fluctuations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and laid out with some useful photographs of the "before" and "after" situations. The theory of
change provides a logical elucidation of the causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes. The
quality of evidence provided in the ICR (such as the data on road accidents) is derived from a credible source.
Overall, the ICR is internally consistent and logically links the various parts of the report. It also candidly
discusses the issues facing the contractors due to the unexpected devaluation of the currency and draws good
lessons from the experiences in implementing the project.

One minor issue is the length of the ICR. The main body of the text at 29 pages is almost twice the
recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR would have benefitted from better editing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AZ HIGHWAY 3 (P118023)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
