           Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
           Fiji DPO(P165276)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0022759

   1. Project Data



    Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
    Fiji                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


    Programmatic DPL
    Planned Operations:        0             Approved Operations:          0

    Operation ID                             Operation Name
    P165276                                  Fiji DPO


     L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
     IBRD-88400                             30-Jun-2019                                           15,000,000.00

     Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
     02-Apr-2018                            30-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

     Original Commitment                         15,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Revised Commitment                          15,000,000.00                                              0.00

     Actual                                      15,000,000.00                                              0.00




     Prepared by               Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
     William F. Steel          Judyth L. Twigg            Sengphet Lattanavong            IEGEC


PHPROJECTDATATBL




     Operation ID                            Operation Name
     P168402                                 Fiji DPO2 ( P168402 )



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiji DPO(P165276)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-88400,IBRD-90160,IDA-                07-Nov-2020                                             63,730,092.38
 65000,IDA-65010

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Nov-2019                               07-Nov-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              64,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               64,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           63,730,092.38                                              0.00




2. Program Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Fiji Fiscal Sustainability and Climate Resilience Development Policy Operation (DPO) series consisted of
   two single-tranche loans over two-and-a-half years (2018-2020). Both operations had the same program
   development objectives (PDOs), stated in Program Document 2 (PD2, para. 33) for DPO 2 [IBRD and IDA]
   stated the PDOs as: “to support the government’s effort to: (i) strengthen medium‐term fiscal sustainability; (ii)
   improve the investment climate; and (iii) build climate resilience.” The three pillars are identical to these
   PDOs. These objectives are inter-related in that climate-related natural disasters adversely affect both fiscal
   sustainability and investment, and enhanced private investment is important to help achieve fiscal
   consolidation and greater resilience.

   For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs are taken as those stated in the program document (PD 1, p. iv) for
   the first DPO, and continued in the second DPO:

     1.  Strengthen medium‐term fiscal sustainability
     2.  Improve the investment climate
     3 . Build climate resilience




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The pillars are identical to the three PDOs:

     1.  Strengthen medium‐term fiscal sustainability
     2 . Improve the investment climate


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Fiji DPO(P165276)



  3.   Build climate resilience

The third pillar only had indicative triggers in DPO1, with prior actions only in DPO2. The pillars remained
essentially unchanged, with some minor changes in wording and focus.
Table 1: Pillars, Objectives, and Prior Actions for Fiji Fiscal Sustainability and Climate Resilience DPO Series

  Primary Prior Actions                                   Follow-up Actions
  PDO/Pillar 1: Strengthening medium-term fiscal sustainability
  Revenue-side measures
  PA 1 (DPO1): The Borrower, through its Parliament,
  has: (a) eliminated the dividend taxation regime; (b)
  raised the minimum income tax threshold for its male
  and female residents from F$16,000 to F$30,000 per
  annum; (c) increased the Environment and Climate
  Adaptation Levy from 6 to 10 percent; (d) introduced
  a F$0.10c charge per bag on plastic bags at retail
  outlets; and (e) increased fiscal duties on cigarettes,
  tobacco, and alcohol by 15 percent.

  Expenditure-side measures
  PA 2 (DPO 1): The Borrower, through its Ministry of      PA 3 (DPO 2): The Recipient, through its
  Economy, has approved a new framework to guide           Cabinet, has approved the Government
  the strengthening of fiscal oversight of its             Guarantee Policy for granting guarantees to
  State‐Owned Enterprises (SOEs).                          government entities.

                                                           PA 4 (DPO2): The Recipient, through its Cabinet,
                                                           has approved a Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy
                                                           (MTFS) that strengthens fiscal discipline and
                                                           initiates fiscal consolidation through expenditure-
                                                           side measures, consistent with debt sustainability
  PDO/Pillar 2: Improving investment climate
  Investment measures
  PA 5 (DPO 1): The Borrower, through its Parliament,      PA 6 (DPO 2): The Recipient, through its
  has enacted the International Arbitration Act 2017 to    Cabinet, has approved the draft Fiji Direct
  improve the framework governing international            Investment Bill and an Investment Policy
  commercial arbitration.                                  Statement that provide a simple, transparent
                                                           process for entry of foreign investment and
                                                           establish investor protections.
  Doing Business measures
  PA 7 (DPO 1): The Borrower, through its Parliament,      PA 8 (DPO 2): The Recipient, through its
  has approved a new policy framework for issuing          Cabinet, has adopted a strategy for improving
  building permits to expedite the process for obtaining   the business environment and through its Ease
                                                           of Doing Business taskforce started its


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiji DPO(P165276)



    building permits for non‐residential purposes by          implementation including establishment of online
    businesses and individuals.                               company registration.
    Access to finance measures
    PA 9 (DPO 2): The Recipient, through the Ministry of
    Economy, has established the regulatory framework
    and institutions necessary to allow moveable
    property to be used more securely as collateral for
    credit purposes by: (a) the commencement of the
    Personal Property Securities Act 2017; (b) the
    publication and commencement of the Personal
    Property Securities Regulations 2019; (c) the
    appointment of the Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF) as the
    Registrar and administrator of the Personal Property
    Securities Registry.
    PDO/Pillar 3: Building climate resilience
    Building codes
    PA 10 (DPO 2): The Recipient, through its Cabinet,
    has approved Resilient Building Guidelines that: (i)
    strengthen new single-story schools and residential
    housing on native lands against climate-related risks
    and earthquakes aligned with the National Building
    Code - Fiji requirements; and (ii) form contents of
    training for building practitioners in rural areas.
    Climate change policy
    PA 11 (DPO 2): The Recipient, through its Cabinet,
    has approved the National Climate Change Policy
    (NCCP) 2018-2030 to scale up the Recipient’s
    activities for enhancing resilience of key vulnerable
    sectors.

    Total:
    A total of 7 identifiable subobjectives/clusters of actions, with 18 individual actions/subactions.
    DPO 1: 4 PAs with 8 actions/subactions
    DPO 2: 7 PAs with 10 actions/subactions



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
  The Fiji Fiscal Sustainability and Climate Resilience DPO series consisted of two single-tranche loans over
  two-and-a-half years (2018-2020). DPO 1 was an IBRD loan of US$ 15 million, approved on April 2, 2018,
  fully disbursed and closed on schedule on June 30, 2019. DPO 2 consisted of an IBRD loan of US$ 15
  million, an IDA credit of US$ 29 million, and an IDA scale-up facility credit of US$ 29 million, totaling US$ 64
  million (US$ 63.73 million disbursed), approved on November 7, 2019, and closed on schedule on November
  7, 2020. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) provided complementary financing of US$ 180 million in a


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiji DPO(P165276)



   series of three policy-based loans over 2018-2020, and other World Bank projects provided parallel financing
   (TTL response).




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


   Relevance to country context
     Natural disasters pose a major constraint on achieving Fiji’s development objectives. Tropical storms
     and floods in almost every year over 2008-12 cost an average of 1.3 percent of GDP, and damage
     caused in 2016 by tropical cyclone Winston was estimated to have lowered GDP by 10 to 20 percent
     (PD 1, figure 3). The persistent declines in GDP lowered long-term growth and have had especially
     adverse impacts on the lower-income population. The Fiji Climate Vulnerability Assessment 2017
     estimates that climate change will raise the average annual loss from natural disasters from 2-5 percent
     of GDP to 2.5-6.5 percent by 2050 (PD 1, para. 51). The expenditures needed to recover from disaster
     adversely affect Fiji’s ability to achieve its medium-term fiscal consolidation objectives and to manage
     its public debt (PD 1, paras. 23 and 34). The high risk of extreme weather events is also a deterrent to
     private investment, which tends “to be concentrated in sectors with sensitive ecosystems, such as
     tourism, agriculture or mining” (PD 1, para. 75), compromising the government’s desire to offset its
     limited fiscal space by having the “private sector play a greater role in building and improving roads and
     expanding access to electricity, telecommunications, and health care” (PD 1, para. 43).
     The DPO objectives were highly relevant to addressing these development constraints posed by natural
     disasters and climate change. The emphasis on strengthening medium-term fiscal sustainability
     (through both revenue-side measures to reform taxation and expenditure-side measures to strengthen
     fiscal oversight, especially of SOEs) was appropriate to ensure adequate fiscal space to finance
     periodic recovery efforts as well as infrastructure investments to mitigate risks. Improving the investment
     climate (though greater transparency in arbitrating international investment disputes and reducing the
     time and cost of obtaining construction permits and business licenses) was indirectly relevant to
     increasing the complementary fiscal contribution from private investment (depending on the tax
     structure). Steps to enhance access to finance in ways that would particularly benefit women were
     relevant to reducing the adverse impacts of disasters on marginalized groups. And measures to build
     climate resilience (through application of building codes and greater transparency with respect to
     climate resilient development outcomes) were directly aimed at mitigating the tendency of climate
     change effects to aggravate the fiscal and distributive impacts of natural disasters.

     Relevance to CPF and country development strategy
     The objectives were pitched at an appropriate level, i.e., to address constraints in ways that would
     support higher-level objectives concerning growth, poverty and inequality. The three PDOs were directly
     aimed at “three of the five strategic priorities identified in the SCD [Systematic Country Diagnostic,


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Fiji DPO(P165276)



                2017] to accelerate Fiji’s progress toward the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting
                shared prosperity in a sustainable manner through (a) safeguarding fiscal sustainability, (b) improving
                the business environment, and (c) investing in climate resilience” (ICR, para. 7). These SCD priorities
                “remained central to the objectives and proposed outcomes of the first Country Partnership Framework
                [2018-22] for Fiji that was in preparation during DPO2” (ICR, para. 7). These priorities were also aligned
                with the Government’s 2017 National Development Plan (NDP), and DPO 2 in particular included
                climate change resilience measures relevant to the NDP’s objective of mainstreaming such activities
                across all sectors.




       Rating
       ---

   b. Relevance of Design
         ---



       Rating
       ---


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Strengthening medium-term fiscal sustainability
     (RIs 1-3; PAs 1-4)


    Rationale
    Two of three targets were initially met, though the RIs were not rated as satisfactorily relevant to
    achievement of the objective and the impact was moderated through exemptions. The fiscal deficit target
    was not achieved.

    RI 1 (fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP) actually worsened (to 7.0 percent for 2019-21) rather than
    improved (to 3.0 percent) as targeted, in large part due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and natural
    disasters. Because the indicator was not directly relevant to the tax administration measures under PA 1, the
    effectiveness of those steps toward “the fairer tax system is difficult to measure” (ICR, para. 23), let alone


                                                                                                              Page 6 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Fiji DPO(P165276)



    their impact on the revenue side of the deficit. Since “the MTFS is not operational,” PA 4 to undertake
    expenditure-side measures had no effect.

    RIs 2 and 3 were qualitative and achieved: fiscal risk profiles of SOEs were reported in both 2019/20 and
    2020/21, and their guarantee fees were based on their risk profiles as of 2019/20 – although three of six
    entities were granted exemptions in 2021. However, these were not satisfactory as indicators of progress
    toward the objective of reducing the contribution of SOEs to the fiscal deficit. Subsequent exemptions to half
    of the entities intended to be covered undermined initial achievement of basing fees on risk profiles (RI 3).
    There is no evidence regarding changes in the contribution of SOEs to the fiscal deficit, let alone as to
    whether such changes could be attributed to the PAs.



    Rating
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improving investment climate

    Rationale
    One RI had no progress; two of four RI targets were fully achieved by closing, and one substantially
    achieved. None the four RIs was satisfactory as indicators of achievement of the objectives being sought
    through the PAs.
    The number of EOIs from foreign investors (RI 4) actually fell by 50 percent, against a targeted increase of
    10 percent. The disconnect between this and the associated PAs (5 and 6) makes it impossible to assess
    the extent of improvement in arbitration and process and protections for foreign investment. But clearly any
    improvements were overwhelmed by other more significant determinants of interest in investing in Fiji
    (including risks associated with disasters and climate change).

    The Doing Business score for days to start a business (RI 5) had improved substantially from 40 to 30 as of
    2019-20, and was expected to be well below the target of 25.9 days by 2021 (“following elimination of
    several redundant procedures”; ICR, p. 13). However, this can only partly be attributed to the PAs, because
    “construction permits are not among the 11 procedures for starting a business and the PAs did not address
    these procedures” (ICR, para. 29). The ICR (para. 30) reports some progress in implementing expected
    reforms, although discussions during the ICR suggest that construction permit “reforms are likely to take
    slightly longer to be in effect.” Thus the latest information is that, while the target for the indicator is likely to
    be fully achieved, the underlying reforms have yet to be fully implemented – but are progressing.

    The targets for improvement in the legal rights index (RI 6) and the share of women registering security
    interest in movable collateral (RI 7) were both fully achieved, representing satisfactory progress toward


                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Fiji DPO(P165276)



    increasing access to credit (for women-owned business that tended to lack fixed property as collateral),
    although these do not adequately reveal how significantly credit for investment was increasing in
    volume. From 31 May 2019 to 28 Feb 2022, there have been 67,041 secured interests on moveable
    collateral registered by the Personal Property Securities Registry, of which 18,268 (27.2 percent) filings are
    by women, women-owned or co-owned enterprises.



    Rating
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Building climate resilience

    Rationale

           Among the five indicators for two PAs, one was substantially achieved and three made modest
           progress, which is ongoing and likely to continue. One RI was not achieved, but the associated action is
           no longer considered practical, and there was progress toward the actual objective.

           As of closing in 2020, progress was ongoing toward building new houses and schools on native lands
           that adhere to the National Building Code: 7 houses were built out of 20 targeted (RI 8 Modest) and an
           additional 16 schools out of the additional 20 targeted (RI 9 Substantial). Further progress in 2021 had
           been expected, but was curtailed by extensive curfews and lockdowns due to the second and third
           waves of COVID-19. Six additional new houses and four more new schools were completed in 2021,
           and the Government is restarting activities in 2022.

           Training for rural building practitioners was developed and implemented as expected, though the
           number of people trained (26 as against 100 targeted) and the proportion of women (12 percent as
           against 25 percent targeted) fell short as of closing (RI 10 Modest). Progress in 2021 was curtailed by
           COVID-19 curfews and lockdowns.

           Although PA 11 to approve the National Climate Change Policy 2018-30 (NCCP) had been achieved at
           the Cabinet level, and the expected enactment date of September 2021 was also achieved (ICR, para.
           36 and TTL response), the associated RI 11 regarding the creation of a Cabinet-level oversight sub-
           committee was not achieved and is no longer considered practical because “everything is deliberated at
           the main Cabinet” and the Government no longer has Cabinet Sub-committees (ICR, footnote 44).
           However, actual oversight (which the RI was intended to measure) has been modest at best due to the
           lack of regular Cabinet meetings because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the need to focus on
           emergency issues from recurrent cyclones. The Environment Department has become a Ministry in its


                                                                                                          Page 8 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Fiji DPO(P165276)



           own right and has increased its staff, thus providing potential for improved oversight of Environmental
           Impact Assessments. Although the specific RI was Negligible, progress toward the objective of adopting
           the NCCP and overseeing its implementation can be considered as Modest.

           RI 12 was intended to measure progress in oversight of the NCCP through regular reporting on
           implementation of objectives and strategies in seven areas, including transport and water. As of closing,
           progress was being reported on two objectives, including transport but not water (Modest).




    Rating
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  With the relevance of PAs rated Moderately Satisfactory, and with overall efficacy rated Moderately
  Unsatisfactory, the overall outcome of the operation is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Moderately Unsatisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The sustainability of development outcomes faces several inter-related risks.

  Natural disasters and COVID-19 adversely affect fiscal sustainability and investment. The almost annual
  costs of recovering from cyclones, floods, and other climate-related disasters are likely to continue to impose
  fiscal costs of recovery and risks to investment. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to aggravate this situation
  through restrictions on economic activity and a devastating effect on tourism, which had previously been a
  major driver of economic growth and investment.

  Macroeconomic risk: The adverse fiscal effects of the natural disaster and COVID-19 risks both highlight the
  urgency of the reforms supported by the Fiscal Sustainability and Climate Resilience DPOs and pose an
  ongoing challenge to achieving their objectives. The immediate impact was apparent in the worsening of the
  fiscal deficit during the DPO series, rather than the targeted decrease. The ICR (para. 58) notes that “the
  Government has already taken steps to reduce tourism dependence of the economy….Continued Government

                                                                                                          Page 9 of 14
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Fiji DPO(P165276)



commitment to fiscal discipline and consolidation is expected to sustain the reform momentum. The World Bank
is also expected to continue to work with development partners to monitor macroeconomic risks and provide
policy advice to the Government as needed.”

Institutional risk: The ICR (para. 59) notes that implementation of reforms related to the Investment Act has
been relatively slow, raising “the risk that major aspects of the reforms may not yet affect investor
sentiment.” Furthermore, there is a risk that reforms oriented toward Doing Business indicators may not
address the actual challenges faced by local investors in trying to register and operate a business.

Costs of adoption: The ICR (para. 59) notes the risk that the collateral registry may charge user fees that
could “negatively affect the positive results seen so far.” Likewise, the costs of applying the new guidelines for
more resilient buildings may exceed what rural households are able and willing to pay, without additional
incentives. “These risks are mitigated by continued capacity building, technical assistance, and engagement
with the Government” and support from other development partners.

Political risk: An election in 2022 poses the risks that implementation of politically sensitive actions could be
put on hold and that policy priorities could change if there is a change in administration.


[Note: ICR has a discontinuity in paragraph numbering after para. 59.]


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    ---

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   ---


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  ---

b. Quality of supervision
   ---


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  ---

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Fiji DPO(P165276)



8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
    ---


  Government Performance Rating
  ---

b. Implementing Agency Performance
   ---


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  ---

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
   ---


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
   ---


b. M&E Implementation
   ---


c. M&E Utilization
   ---


  M&E Quality Rating
  ---

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
   ---




                                                                            Page 11 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Fiji DPO(P165276)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
    ---


c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
   The TTL reported anecdotal evidence that many people have migrated from urban areas to rural areas due
   to the COVID-19 pandemic and the cyclones, enabling them to live in less crowded areas in the villages and
   grow their own vegetables, thus improving their access to food.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                              Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                              Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                                      Moderately Satisfactory      ---
Indicators
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 Key lessons that can be drawn from the ICR include:

 A well-designed DPO series can help to maintain reforms and adjust to changing priorities. “The series
 … provided an avenue to prioritize reforms which may have otherwise been sidelined” (ICR, para. 58). It also
 was sufficiently flexible to provide financing needed to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic. Although it was
 “not designed as a COVID-19 response, the DPO series enabled needed flexibility to the response and
 ensured that the Fijian economy was in a better position than it would otherwise have been” by providing
 “access [to] much-needed funding from multilateral and bilateral donors” (ICR, para. 58).


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Fiji DPO(P165276)



Government communication of policy reforms is key to ensuring understanding and uptake by the
general public. Government communication on reforms was particularly important with respect to the
collateral registry, business licensing, and new guidelines for building houses and schools (ICR, para. 59).

Good monitoring depends on clarity on how the data will be collected and using the preparation of
the second operation to track progress toward targets. “At the preparation stage, ensuring that targets
are measurable and clarifying how the data will be collected and by whom and how it will be reported are key
to monitoring. Further, reporting on progress of targets when preparing a subsequent [operation] ensures
tracking of progress, especially in the absence of an ISR” (ICR, para. 61).

The standard ICR format may not be well suited to evaluating an operation under extraordinary
circumstances. “Given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the institutional and policy environment for
both the Government and the World Bank, evaluating an operation within the standard format may prove
challenging. It is not always clear what can be attributable to a shock such as the pandemic…and what may
be due to institutional challenges or reform” (ICR, para. 62). It may be desirable to undertake a systematic
review (or PPAR) of the implications of crisis situations (such as natural disasters and pandemic) for
implementation and effectiveness of DPO series and for ICR formats.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a logical, thorough, yet compact analysis of the context at appraisal, PDOs, results chain,
prior actions, achievement of objectives, other outcomes, Bank performance, risks and lessons. The evidence
provided by the results indicators was supplemented by substantial additional information in 58 footnotes, and
there is adequate critique of the data and the desirability of additional evidence in some areas, as well as
further actions that would be needed to ensure that objectives are fully achieved.

The lessons are relevant and drawn directly from the experience of the series. The ICR is consistent with the
guidelines, although it notes that the guidelines are not necessarily appropriate for evaluation under a crisis
situation such as the COVID-19 pandemic, because it makes attribution more difficult.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Fiji DPO(P165276)




                                                                  Page 14 of 14
