     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022793

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P149526                                    Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                             Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56670,IDA-56680,IDA-56690,IDA-         31-Dec-2019                                         111,846,599.22
 D0710

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jun-2015                                31-Mar-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            121,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             111,310,462.62                                              0.00

 Actual                                         111,846,599.22                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Rocio Manchado              Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Garabito                                                 Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
    According to the Financing Agreements with the three participating countries, the objective of the project was
   to increase access to and use of harmonized community-level services for the prevention and treatment of
   malaria and selected neglected tropical diseases in targeted cross-borders areas in participating countries in
   the Sahel region.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



   The statements of objectives in the Project Appraisal Document and ICR were identical to those of the
   Financing Agreements.

   During a project restructuring in 2018, some outcome targets were revised upwards. As the project scope was
   not reduced, a split rating is not applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improve regional collaboration for stronger results across participating countries
   (Appraisal: US$26.5 million; Revised: US$30.7 million; Actual: US$29.9 million). This component was
   to support countries' efforts to harmonize policies and procedures and engage in joint planning,
   implementation, knowledge exchange, and evaluation of malaria and Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs)
   service delivery. There were three subcomponents:



         Subcomponent 1.1: Regional coordination: The project was to support: (i) the creation of a Regional
          Coordinating Committee (RCC) supported by a technical advisory group (TAG) to harmonize
          technical strategies, implementation, and monitoring across countries; conduct planning of
          campaigns and cross-border evaluations and identify operational research priorities; and
          disseminate lessons learned; and (ii) the establishment of local committees to plan the cross-border
          implementation of interventions and the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities of two or more
          districts from different countries.
         Subcomponent 1.2: Regional research: The project was to support the establishment or
          strengthening of regional networks for research and M&E to increase the usefulness of the
          information generated by countries' M&E systems. This was to be done by: (i) short- and long-term
          training and technical assistance to improve skills and know-how, provided by regional institutions;
          (ii) establishing and upgrading communication networks and data management systems; (iii)
          financing research; and (iv) strengthening the existing network of sentinel sites across the three
          countries.
         Subcomponent 1.3: Regional pooled drug procurement: The project was to support the pooled
          procurement of Amodiaquine and Sulfadoxine-Pyrimethamine (AQ+SP) for Seasonal Malaria
          Chemoprevention (SMC) to facilitate timely delivery of the drugs ahead of the malaria high
          transmission season.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



  Component 2: Support coordinated implementation of technical strategies and interventions
  (Appraisal: US$74.1 million; Revised: US$73.7 million; Actual: US$66.6 million). This component was
  to support countries’ efforts to jointly control malaria and NTDs (schistosomiasis, lymphatic filariasis
  (LF), soil-transmitted helminths (STH), onchocerciasis, and trachoma) through community-based
  interventions in cross-border areas. The project was to finance: (i) hiring of non-governmental organizations
  (NGOs) to implement community-level interventions; (ii) information, education, and communication
  activities (IEC) to ensure demand for and uptake of project interventions and behavior change; (iii)
  acceleration of the introduction and scaling up SMC, giving children ages 3-59 months in eligible border
  areas a combination of two affordable drugs (AQ+SP) during the rainy season; and (iv) community-based
  diagnosis and treatment strategies, scaling up and complementing existing efforts to reach the poorest and
  more remote communities, which meant the integration of malaria diagnosis and treatment into community-
  based primary care approaches; (v) integrated treatment of preventive chemotherapy for NTDs, delivered
  through the community health care system (mass drug administration – MDA); and (vi) the treatment of
  reversible consequences of NTDs, promoting the mobilization of multi-country teams to provide these
  services “campaign style” once or twice a year for in-service training of health care providers.



  Component 3: Strengthen institutional capacity to coordinate and monitor implementation
  (Appraisal: US$20.40 million; Revised: US$16.6 million; Actual: US$15.30 million). This component
  was to support country-level implementing agencies and regional institutions to perform core functions and
  ensure proper project implementation, monitoring, and evaluation. This was to entail: (i) strengthening
  project capabilities in implementing agencies (recruiting and training critical technical and operational staff
  and support operating costs); (ii) training and study tours for critical technical staff in selected NTDs and
  malaria programs and national and regional institutions such as the West Africa Health Organization
  (WAHO), Centrale d’Achats des Médicaments Essentiels Génériques- Burkina Faso (CAMEG), and other
  regional research institutions, and funding of equipment and operating costs for malaria and NTD programs;
  (iii) strengthening routine national health information systems; and (iv) financing for supplemental surveys to
  monitor project implementation, coverage, and access, and for revision of the national medical waste plans
  in Mali and Burkina Faso



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$121 million. The total actual cost was US$111.8 million,
  reflecting US$/SDR exchange rate fluctuations.

  Financing: The project was financed by three IDA credits of US$37 million each to Burkina Faso, Mali, and
  Niger, and a US$10 million grant to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), bringing
  the total planned financing to US$121 million. The credits and grant were fully disbursed. There was no
  planned or actual direct financial contributions from the governments.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 11, 2015 and became effective on January 5, 2016. A mid-term
  review was carried out on December 4, 2017.

  - The first Level II restructuring was approved on August 3, 2018. It reviewed the results framework,
  reallocated funds between expenditure categories and components, and extended the project closing date
  from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Credit proceeds were reallocated to fill a gap created by

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



   having underestimated the cost of drugs purchased through CAMEG for SMC, as well as higher-than-
   expected costs associated with SMC campaigns and treatment of reversible complications of NTDs.
   Changes to the results framework followed recommendations made at the mid-term review in December
   2017. The definitions of some PDO indicators and some outcome target values were revised upwards to
   better measure outcomes and to reflect progress already made.

   - The second Level II restructuring on October 13, 2020. further extended the closing date to March 31,
   2021.

   - The project closed on March 31, 2021, fifteen months later than the original closing of December 31,
   2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were responsive to disease conditions in the Sahel region and in the three targeted
countries. The Sahel region bore the highest morbidity, disability, and mortality burden associated with
malaria and NTDs in Sub-Saharan Africa. Malaria was the primary cause of outpatient consultations,
hospitalizations, and hospital deaths in all three countries. Access and quality of health services were
inadequate, and there were significant disparities, exacerbated by security concerns that caused many
preventive programs to stop their operations. To address this challenge, all three countries adopted and
began to roll out policies that allowed community health workers (CHWs) to diagnose malaria with rapid
diagnostic tests and treat confirmed cases. The project aimed to accelerate the scale-up of disease control
interventions to reach at-risk populations living in border areas with poor access to facility-based health
services.

A regional and cross-border focus was justified, as malaria is not limited to or affected by national borders,
and the countries are contiguous with shared and porous borders. The prevalence of malaria and NTDs
was higher in cross-border areas because of lower access to prevention and treatment services. Limited
disease control in one country may impact a more effective program in another country. The PAD (p. 7)
stated that the total population at risk of malaria living in areas amenable to Seasonal Malaria
Chemoprevention or SMC was 40.1 million people, including 7.8 million children under the age of 5 years.
The project targeted a total of 56 border districts: 20 districts in Burkina Faso, 19 districts in Mali, and 17
districts in Niger.

Objectives were in full alignment with national plans and regional initiatives. For Malaria, ECOWAS
Regional Strategy for controlling and eliminating malaria for 2014-2020 included technical guidance from
the World Health Organization (WHO), and emphasized the intensification of cross-border cooperation,
coordinating inter-country efforts, mobilizing resources to increase efficiency, and strengthening member
countries' national response capacity and performance to control malaria. A Regional Action Plan for
Malaria Control in West Africa supported this strategy. Each of the three countries had National Malaria
Control Programs that developed strategic plans consistent with the ECOWAS Regional Strategy. For
NTDs, WHO/AFRO developed a Regional Strategy and a Plan for 2014-2020 based on WHO's Global Plan



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



to Combat NTDs. The above strategies served as a framework for developing national plans to control and
eliminate NTDs in Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger.

At project closing, the current WBG Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy for
Supporting Africa’s Transformation, FY18-FY23, included support to the prevention and setting-up of
innovative financing of potential regional epidemic outbreaks and cross-border natural disasters, with a
focus on surveillance and piloting innovative financing arrangements.

Similarly, at project closing, development objectives had elements of alignment with the current Country
Partnership Frameworks in the three countries, but, overall, alignment was not full, as project objectives
were not sufficiently reflective of the main thrusts of the proposed Bank engagements in health and human
development, beyond existing engagement:

In Burkina Faso CPF (FY18-23), Focus Area 2 on investing in human capital and social protection system
included objectives to support inclusive, high-quality education and skills development; expand access to
reproductive and child health services and improved nutrition; expand social protection to the most
vulnerable; and expand access to water and sanitation services.

In Niger CPF (FY18-22), Focus Area II on improved human capital and social protection explained the
issues to be addressed and noted that the WBG program in this area is built around three main avenues:
health services, education and social protection, including a focus on forced displacement. In health, the
CPF aims at bringing demographic growth rates down to sustainable levels, improve maternal health and
nutrition, and empower women and girls. Objective 3 on increasing access to quality health services was
associated with SDG3 to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all, at all ages; and with SDG4 to
ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote life-long learning opportunities for all.
Objective 4 pertained to increasing access to quality education and training services, particularly for
women; and Objective 5 pertained to improving social protection system and ability to manage forced
displacement.

In Mali, a new CPF is being prepared, and the CPF (FY16-19) proposed orientations for WBG engagement
in three areas of focus: (i) improve governance by strengthening public resource management at central
and local levels and fostering citizen engagement; (ii) create economic opportunities by enhancing the
productive capacity of smallholders, increasing agricultural value added and diversification to catalyze
transformation, and improving basic services by developing infrastructure and connectivity; and (iii) build
resilience, by developing human capital, strengthening safety nets, improving risk management
mechanisms for the poor and vulnerable and mitigating climate shock.

In conclusion, based on the proposed Bank engagements under the current CPFs and upon balancing
country and regional considerations, this ICR Review concluded that there was almost full alignment
between project objectives and country CPFs and regional initiatives at project closing.




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase access to and use of harmonized community-level services for the prevention and treatment of
               malaria and selected neglected tropical diseases in targeted cross-border areas in participating countries in
               the Sahel region.

               Rationale
               Theory of change

               The theory of change assumed that promoting collective actions to coordinate activity implementation among
               the three participating countries would improve their ability to reach targeted populations. At the national level,
               project implementation would be strengthened by supporting national stakeholders to participate in planning
               and execution of activities starting at the district level, prepare and validate regional plans, and support
               implementation and monitoring of SMC and NTD activities. This would be supported through community-
               based interventions that would contribute to improving the quality and efficiency of community health delivery
               platforms. Strengthening of regular health services in remote communities in border areas would increase
               access to harmonized community-level services (coordinated and synchronized by the three countries) to
               prevent and treat malaria and selected NTDs. The distribution of drugs to remote border areas, community
               mobilization, IEC campaigns, and training of stakeholders would be expected to scale up community-based
               services for SMC and NTDs, raising awareness, and keeping the population informed on prevention and
               treatment. The above actions would enable CHWs to provide routine services, undertake targeted health
               campaigns, and provide malaria and NTD preventive treatments. The result would be increased demand for
               preventive and treatment services, promoting behavioral change to increase the use of community-level
               services.

               Outputs

                     The project funded regional meetings to establish the RCC and TAG. The three countries validated
                      their national action plans, synchronized annual campaigns, and planned activities through regional
                      meetings. Country teams created a collaboration framework that did not exist before, allowing them to
                      overcome obstacles and share knowledge and best practices.
                     In each country, officials of the ministries of health met with key actors to engage in micro-planning.
                      The process was carried out in various workshops that included health districts representation, and
                      integrated the needs and priorities of the most remote communities and their health centers. Cross-
                      border planning and implementation committees were established.
                     Annual Work Programs and Budgets for SMC campaigns were established and validated at the local
                      level. This approach facilitated community planning and contributed to building trust.
                     The three countries carried out four IEC campaigns each year between 2016 and 2020, except for
                      2020 when only three took place. The project financed IEC activities, technical assistance, and
                      training of community health workers and parent/teacher associations. Activities aimed at sensitizing
                      the population and improving service utilization of services by building awareness about malaria and
                      NTDs.

                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)




     The interventions supported each country's specific priority areas and reinforced national efforts
      regarding mass distribution of drugs, surgery camps, and strengthened physical and human resource
      capacity. For instance, the project helped upgrade countries' technical and medical capacity at the
      health district level through specialized training for medical staff. Also, it supported the strengthening
      of community-level services by training, hiring, and supervising CHWs.
     The project supported the acquisition of equipment (vehicles, hardware, and software), furniture,
      medical equipment, laboratory equipment, surveillance kits and equipment, and health and sanitation
      supplies.
     The project carried out operational research on malaria and NTDs, mainly in Mali and Burkina Faso, in
      collaboration with the following institutions: Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé in Burkina
      Faso, the Malaria Research and Training Center based at the University of Science Techniques and
      Technologies in Mali, and L'Institut National de Santé Publique in Mali.

Intermediate Outcomes

     The three participating countries and the regional coordination unit provided their procurement plans
        on time to the regional purchasing agency for the duration of the project.
     The three countries revised and elaborated new standards and guidelines for recruiting and
        retaining CHWs and for drug distribution.
       In 100% of targeted districts, local leaders participated in the planning of campaigns, exceeding the
        target of 75%.
       The percentage of community health agents who received a quarterly supervision visit during which
        registers or reports were reviewed increased from a baseline of 40% in 2015 to 100% in 2020,
        exceeding the target of 70%.
       The percentage of completeness of target district reporting on SMC and NTD drug distribution
        reached 100% at the end of the project.
       The coverage of preventive chemotherapy achieved by project campaigns among eligible populations
        in targeted districts increased from a baseline of 0% in 2015 to 97% in 2020, exceeding the target of
        80%. By the end of the project, the rates at the regional level were: schistosomiasis, 98%; LF, 96%;
        STH, 98%; trachoma, 92%; and onchocerciasis, 100%.
       5,781 trichiasis surgeries were performed, exceeding the target of 2,500. 2,489 hydrocele surgeries
        were performed, not reaching the target of 4,200.

Outcomes

     The percentage of target districts with at least 70% coverage of three or more courses of SMC for
      children under five years increased from a baseline of 0% at the beginning of the project to 100%
      of districts throughout the life of the project, exceeding the original target of 50% of districts and
      meeting the revised target of 100% of districts.
     The percentage of children under five years in the target districts receiving at least three courses of
      SMC increased from a baseline of 0% in 2015 to 100% in 2020, exceeding the original target of 50%
      and the revised target of 80%.
     The percentage of targeted districts providing integrated annual treatment for schistosomiasis and
      STH for school-aged children (5-14 years) increased from a baseline of 0% in 2015 to 100% in 2018,
      exceeding the original target of 80% and achieving the revised target of 100%. In Niger, coverage for
      integrated mass treatment of children ages 5-14 for schistosomiasis and STH increased from 70% in

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



                                       2018 to 100% in 2019 and 2020. The prevalence of LF declined from 17.4% in 2016 to 3.8% in 2020.
                                       Onchocerciasis was eliminated in Niger by project completion, and a committee to achieve
                                       certification of elimination was created. In Burkina Faso, coverage targets for onchocerciasis,
                                       schistosomiasis, LF, and STH were surpassed almost every year. In Mali, coverage rates fluctuated
                                       by year and district.
                                      The percentage of border districts that initiated SMC campaigns within two weeks of the planned
                                       timeline increased from a baseline of 0% in 2015 to 100% in 2018, exceeding the target of 80%.
                                      The percentage of children under five years with fever in last two weeks who had a finger or heel stick
                                       (for malaria diagnosis) in the targeted districts increased from a baseline of 0% in 2015 to 90.16% in
                                       2018, reaching the target of 90%. The three countries increased access to RDT, microscopy, or finger
                                       or heel stick for children under five with fever in the previous two weeks.
                                      The number of direct project beneficiaries increased from a baseline of 0 in 2015 to 23.7 million in
                                       2018, exceeding the revised target of 21.1 million. The percentage of female beneficiaries increased
                                       from a baseline of 0% to 52.6%, exceeding the target of 45%.
                                      The project achieved positive behavior change. There was evidence of a change of attitudes toward
                                       the use of treated mosquito nets, hand washing practices, and other behavioral practices (such as
                                       taking sick children to health posts and regularly visiting health centers). Moreover, the incidence of
                                       malaria and NTDs decreased in all targeted health districts that implemented SMC and preventive
                                       MDA. Malaria incidence in children under five in the targeted regions declined from 556 cases/1000 in
                                       2015 to 2916 cases/1000 in 2019.




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to increase access to and use of harmonized community-level services for the prevention and
                            treatment of malaria and NTDs in targeted cross-border areas was fully achieved. Since the project
                            interventions were the only active ones in cross-border areas, the achievement of the observed outcomes can
                            be plausibly attributed to the project. The level of achievement is consistent with a high rating for overall
                            efficacy.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High


                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)




 5. Efficiency
The PAD (p.136) assessed the economic consequences of malaria and NTDs, together representing an
important share of total lost disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) in Burkina Faso (22.5%), Mali (24.8%), and
Niger (15.3%), especially when compared with Western Sub-Saharan Africa region (19.7%) and globally (4.4%).
Global literature suggests that nations with high malaria incidence also exhibit low levels of economic
development, and that countries lose between 0.5% and 1.3% of GDP growth annually due to endemic malaria.
NTDs also have a negative effect on the economy of households and affect worker productivity (PAD, p. 137).
The PAD discussed the conclusions of the 2013 Lancet Commission on Investing in Health, which noted that
addressing malaria and NTDs could contribute to substantial improvements in health and sizeable economic
benefits in the medium to long run. The Commission estimated that scaling up malaria and NTD control
interventions could prevent 10 million deaths across low-income and middle-income countries through 2035.

The PAD’s economic analysis avoided overestimating the benefits and applied an individual recurrence rate for
malaria episodes at 40 percent, with the assumption of an average 2.5 episodes per year. This rate reflects the
fact that an individual can be exposed to malaria episodes more than once per year. Using a discount rate of 3
percent, the PAD (p. 136) estimated a net present value for the project at US$54.7 million, a benefit-cost ratio
of 1.3, and an internal rate of return of 10%.

The ICR’s analysis focused on DALYs and cost-effectiveness. It estimated that malaria control and treatment
alone were found to avert an excess of 20.1 million DALYs at an average cost of US$2.3 per DALY. Given a
value of DALY for low-income countries at US$ 5,000 (Jamison et al. 2012), this indicates nominal benefits of
approximately US$100.7 billion. As for NTDs interventions, it was estimated that they prevent the loss of one
million DALYs, valuing nearly US$5.2 billion at a cost per DALY of roughly US$68.2. When declared in 2015
constant prices and discounted at 3 percent, the project cost of US$118.30 million yielded US$114.9 million and
US$105.8 million, respectively. This would generate a benefit-cost ratio of 867 and an incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio (ICER) or cost per DALY of US$5 for the project. The large-benefit cost ratio and ICER were
significantly lower than the least of the three countries’ GDP per capita (US$484) for 2015 and suggested that
the project was highly cost-effective (ICR, p. 67).

However, there were moderate shortcomings in operational efficiency: (i) the costs of campaigns were higher
than anticipated. (ii) Long delays in drug delivery and occasional CAMEG reluctance to comply with national
customs procedures were reported. (iii) There were delays in the parliamentary ratification of the financing
agreements and in appointing project coordinators. (iv) Health ministries had difficulties in retaining talent,
leading to implementation slowdowns. (v) There were delays related to a lack of familiarity with Bank fiduciary
requirements; delays in obtaining no-objections for the award of contracts; long procurement processes in all
three countries; lengthy processes for the development of research protocols; and delays in conducting Lot
Quality Assurance Sampling (LQAS) surveys in Burkina Faso and Niger. (vi) Remoteness and security concerns
presented implementation challenges. And, (vii) the COVID-19 pandemic led to lockdowns and border closings
for several months during 2020. The limitation of mobility affected the SMC campaigns and other activities that
required face-to-face interactions.

On balance, given positive returns suggested by the economic analysis, but with adverse aspects of
implementation that reduced efficiency, overall project efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
Appraisal                                                   10.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated Substantial, as there was almost full alignment between project objectives and
Country Partnership Frameworks and regional objectives at project closing. Efficacy is rated High, as
development objectives were fully achieved. Efficiency is rated Substantial, in view of the cost-effectiveness of
project interventions, but with moderate implementation shortcomings that reduced efficiency. The overall
outcome is rated Satisfactory, indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the project’s preparation,
implementation, and achievement.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several factors are likely to negatively affect the sustainability of development outcome. Funding for wide
regional collaboration has not been secured. This may affect the sustenance of joint planning and
synchronized implementation. There are constraints to the international supply of SMC drugs, as confirmed
by UNICEF. Political developments may impact governments' priorities concerning health programming. A
deterioration of the security situation in cross-border areas might negatively affect access to community-
based health services. Likewise, there are mobility limitations due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and many
activities require face-to-face interactions. Overall attention shifted to COVID-19, putting a strain on available
resources and weakening efforts to prevent seasonal malaria and NTDs.

However, strengthened institutional capacities, collaboration with WAHO, and the support of international
partners would be expected to alleviate some of the above risks. According to the ICR, support from




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



international partners would continue, including from the Global Fund, the United States Agency for
International Development, Helen Keller International, and Sightsavers.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Engagement in preparation included the three FCV countries, the Bank and regional institutions.
  Engagement of development partners was not elucidated by the ICR. Preparation was informed by
  lessons from other experience such as the African Program for Onchocerciasis Control and from IEG
  portfolio review on communicable disease. The project complemented existing Malaria and NTDs
  prevention, control, and elimination strategies. The M&E framework was adequate overall with some
  lapses related to PDO indicators and a missing baseline (2018 Restructuring Paper). Preparation
  included arrangements to build national capacities required for implementation. In the case of Niger and
  Burkina Faso, the Bank was already supporting active PIUs. In Mali, the Bank supported the creation of a
  new PIU. Environmental safeguards were prepared.

  In general, risks and mitigation measures were adequately identified, including risks related to political
  instability, institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, fiduciary capacity, and uncertain
  supply of drugs due to the limited number of pre-qualified manufacturers and their production capacity.
  Effectiveness was delayed mainly due to administrative reasons and parliamentary ratification, and
  insecurity issues. But other factors included difficulties in coordinating the actions of ECOWAS
  headquarters in Abuja (Nigeria) with those of WAHO based in Bobo Dioulasso (Burkina Faso). The
  appointment of coordinators at WAHO, Niger and Mali were delayed. The risk of a rise in drug prices was
  somewhat underestimated at entry.

  Readiness was not complete. There was insufficient staffing in some implementation units. Niger and
  Burkina Faso PIUs’ capacities to implement the project with concurrent existing responsibilities may have
  been overestimated. Measures for mitigating coordination challenges arising from differences in
  procurement practices among the three countries and unfamiliarity with Bank processes were insufficient.

  The project planned, under a legal covenant, to make payments to community health workers through a
  service provider, even though this mechanism was disruptive to existing arrangements that functioned
  well for a long time through Community Health Centers. Also, suitable service providers were difficult to
  find. This planned mechanism under the project was not implemented. The legal covenant was
  subsequently revised during the 2018 restructuring, and the previously existing payment system was
  maintained (2018 Restructuring Paper).

  Overall, the design and its implementation arrangements were complex. The project encompassed three
  FCV countries, four implementing agencies, a regional organization governed by different systems, and a
  vast array of peripheral actors and communities. Supervision arrangements were heterogeneous and
  were shared between the Bank Team and WAHO




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank Team reportedly provided continuous support to participating countries and WAHO in addressing
 implementation challenges. Two supervision missions were undertaken every year with a mid-term review
 in December 2017. During the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, the Team continued supervision in a
 virtual manner. The continuity of the Task Team was a point of strength during implementation (ICR, p.
 29). The quality of reporting was not addressed by the ICR, but in-depth interviews were carried out with
 key implementing actors at regional, national and district levels. Health staff at the district level organized
 interviews with local actors. Beneficiaries were eager to participate in the phone calls and were candid in
 sharing their experiences during interviews, and completed beneficiary surveys. Such interviews were
 helpful in capturing local challenges encountered in cross-border areas.

 The Team was pro-active in restructuring the project after the mid-term review, and in providing technical
 assistance. Financial management and procurement specialists worked closely with PIU staff to address
 coordination challenges arising from differences in procurement practices among the three countries.
 Remoteness and security concerns presented challenges to project supervision that were proactively
 addressed by the Bank team. The team remained vigilant of political instability, identifying tailored
 approaches to delivering and administering drugs at the community level in conflict-afflicted areas. The
 team worked with local doctors and teachers to obtain information on drug delivery to the population.

 The ICR (p. 29) reported two shortcomings: the long time taken to provide non-objections in some
 instances, making procurement processes cumbersome; and the lack of continued support to regional
 collaboration to carry out joint planning and synchronized implementation of field interventions, sharing
 know-how, and incorporating the information into the next campaign. Nevertheless, many related issues
 and processing delays encountered during implementation, including those related to insecurity or COVID-
 19 disruptions, were not necessarily under the control of the Bank Team.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated and were reflected by the selected indicators. The outcome indicators
 had lapses that were noted in section 8a, and these were subsequently rectified during implementation.
 The results chain allowed adequate assessment of the links established in the theory of change. M&E
 arrangements were well planned, including data sources, frequency of collection, and quality assessment.
 The health ministries, national malaria control programs, and national NTD programs in all three countries

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



 were tasked with monitoring results in their own countries. WAHO was accountable for gathering the
 countries' information and facilitating regional reporting to the Regional Steering Committee. Data sources
 included district reports, campaign reports, LQAS, regional reports prepared by WAHO, and health
 ministry data.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E activities were implemented as planned. Data were collected and analyzed for every campaign, and
  findings were shared in regional meetings to improve the planning and implementation of subsequent
  campaigns. Communications networks and computerized data management systems were established
  and upgraded. Existing networks of sentinel surveillance sites across all three countries were
  strengthened.

  The results framework was improved at the project restructuring approved in August 2018, following
  recommendations made during the mid-term review in December 2017. The definition of some indicators
  was revised to better measure progress towards the PDOs while some targets were revised upwards to
  reflect the achievements already made. Some challenges affected M&E implementation, for instance, a
  health sector strike in Burkina Faso made data collection difficult in 2019, although this issue was
  ultimately overcome through close follow up with the government.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E information was used for regular project monitoring and for adapting project activities. Strong
  results from activities implemented by CHWs led to a decision to keep CHWs as the key actors on the
  ground versus the proposed use of NGOs. After collecting data on mass SMC and NTD campaigns,
  there were follow-up meetings to analyze the findings that led to commendations to improve subsequent
  campaigns. All three countries performed supplemental LQAS surveys to guide increased coverage and
  monitoring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered Operational Policy (OP) 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and was classified under
   environmental Category B due to the generation of hazardous biomedical waste. The project updated the
   National Medical Waste Management Plan (NMWMPs) in Burkina Faso and Mali to ensure appropriate
   biomedical waste management in cross-border areas. Niger had updated its NMWMP during the Population
   and Health Support Project (P147638) to serve as a safeguard instrument for both projects. Each national
   team prepared strategic plans for medical waste management. National, regional, and community
   communication units elaborated and disseminated educational messages on managing medical waste
   generated by SMC and NTD campaigns. The project funded a nationwide waste management guide for

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



  mass treatment campaigns. It also acquired hygiene and sanitation materials, and monitored and treated
  wastes resulting from the project-provided services during mass distribution campaigns. As per the
  operations portal, the overall safeguards rating was satisfactory throughout implementation and at closing.
  The project did not trigger any social safeguards.

  Nevertheless, the above conclusions may not be fully consistent with the ICR findings on incinerators (ICR,
  p. 28). The ICR stated that there were challenges regarding the correct use of incinerators that caused
  malfunctions. Also, the ICR noted that there were installation challenges. Niger requested more incinerators
  towards the end of project implementation, but these were not acquired, given that already acquired
  incinerators were not in use. The same situation was observed in Burkina Faso where incinerators provided
  by other projects were not fully utilized.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management (FM): The Bank assessed financial management arrangements at appraisal and
  found them to be adequate. The Bank’s financial management team provided close support to the three
  country offices, and helped in addressing bottlenecks when needed. According to the ICR (p. 28), all three
  countries and WAHO complied with FM covenants, submitting quarterly unaudited financial management
  reports in a timely manner after each quarter. Audited financial statements covering each fiscal year were
  also submitted on time. The ICR did not report audit qualifications, and the ICR stated that fiduciary
  compliance during implementation was rated satisfactory by project completion (ICR, p. 28).

  Procurement: Procurement was carried out in accordance with World Bank guidelines. Procedures were
  carried out under the institutional procurement system within the framework of public procurement in each
  country. All three countries prepared and signed cooperation agreements with CAMEG and submitted
  coordinated drug procurement plans to procure SMC medicines and praziquantel. The joint purchase of
  drugs allowed economies of scale and guaranteed the quality of the acquired drugs. According to the ICR,
  most project procurements pertained to the pooled purchase of medicines for SMC. The ICR noted that
  issues encountered were related to unfamiliarity with the STEP system, the slow process in public
  procurement in the countries, and the fact that drug prices for SMC kept increasing every year. The 2018
  restructuring reallocated resources between categories to facilitate the purchase of the required medicines.
  As for the pooled procurement of medicines for SMC, there was a delay in pooled procurement during the
  last year of the project due to the Covid-19 pandemic combined with global supply chain issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
  --



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)




11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  There was almost full alignment
                                                                                  between project objectives and
                                                                                  Country Partnership
                                                                                  Frameworks and regional
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory
                                                                                  initiatives at project closing,
                                                                                  consistent with a substantial
                                                                                  rating for relevance of
                                                                                  objectives.
                                                                                  There were moderate
                                                                                  shortcomings in the Quality-at-
                                                                                  Entry, largely related to variable
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory    readiness and complexity of
                                                                                  implementation arrangements
                                                                                  that is inherent to regional
                                                                                  operations.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 31-32) offered several valuable lessons, including the following adapted by IEG:

Collective and synchronized actions can improve project effectiveness. Joint work plans and
joint supervision between countries was a learning-enhancing experience across the three countries.
The joint approach allowed stakeholders on both sides of the border to engage in fruitful
collaboration. It was the first time for the three countries to plan and implement a WHO strategy in a
coordinated regional manner.

Micro-planning of disease control campaigns can significantly contribute to better
results. Health ministries empowered the local levels to consider and incorporate the needs of
individual districts. This entailed micro-planning activities through workshops that supported and
trained actors at all levels. The inclusive approach strengthened ownership, built trust, and facilitated
information dissemination.

Partnering with other institutions and development partners can contribute to supporting
long-term national and regional policies. The project sought to promote a long-term regional
approach and the countries were able to secure country-specific support from international
development partners to tackle malaria and NTDs.

The engagement and support of community leaders and key local actors such as teachers
can be crucial to the effectiveness of information and education campaigns to influence


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sahel Malaria and NTDs Project (P149526)



population behavior. The participation of community leaders in micro-planning activities
contributed to their close engagement in public education efforts and in gaining the population's
trust. Teachers were key to providing awareness, education, and distribution of information in view
of their status and credibility at the community level.

Long-term procurement contracts for drugs can contribute to cost-containment and can
reduce the time-lapse for delivery. Long-term contracts brought more leverage to negotiate prices
and improve contract terms. CAMEG emphasized the importance of negotiating multi-year contracts
for the pooled acquisition of drugs, although it also pointed out that the need to negotiate contracts
every year diminished the room for lowering drug prices.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough analysis of the project experience. It was concise, results-oriented, and carefully
linked outputs with observed outcomes. The ICR, p. 18, added a third objective on improved regional
collaboration, and the rationale behind the formal selection of three objectives was not clear. Per guidelines,
objectives could have been segregated for access and use, however, based on the theory of change and the
overlap between both objectives, IEG Review opted to summarize the efficacy section with one overarching
objective. The evidence presented was well-referenced, with annexes that included relevant information to
support the conclusions on project achievements. The ICR clearly described main project challenges and their
impact on implementation. Lessons learned were insightful and well-drawn from the project's experience as
described in the main narrative. There were information lapses on costs and financing, and on the quality of
reporting.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
