     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022832

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P125496                                   CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83210                                31-Dec-2019                                        200,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Dec-2013                               31-Dec-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       200,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Samjhana Thapa             J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Loan Agreement (LA, 2014) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2013), the objective of the
   China Integrated Modern Agriculture Development Project was “to develop sustainable and climate
   resilient agricultural production systems in selected areas of Gansu, Hunan, Jiangxi, and Liaoning
   Provinces, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and Chongqing Municipality”.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



   For the purpose of assessing the extent to which the objective of this project was achieved in this Review, the
   PDO will be divided into two parts, and will be referred to in Section 4 as Objectives 1 and 2 as follows:

   Objective 1: Develop climate-resilient agriculture production systems

   Objective 2: Develop sustainable agriculture production systems



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the ICR (paragraph 8), the project aimed to finance investments in 33 counties in Gansu,
   Hunan, Jiangxi, and Liaoning provinces; Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region; and Chongqing Municipality.
   Criteria used to select project areas were clustered arable land with adequate water resources but with
   infrastructure and technology gaps, areas that were vulnerable to climate shocks, had potential for
   agricultural modernization with demonstrative impacts, access to markets etc. To achieve the PDO, the
   project was structured under the following four components:

   Component 1: Irrigated Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement (Appraisal cost: $202.68 million;
   Actual cost: US$204.38 million). This component aimed to improve irrigation and drainage systems for
   reliable and efficient management and delivery of water, including irrigated agriculture and water
   productivity through better water use efficiency, adoption of water-saving techniques and monitoring of
   water use. Activities financed included: (i) dredging and cleaning irrigation and drainage channels, canal
   lining and structures, pumping stations, irrigation wells, and small water storage systems; (ii) high-efficiency
   irrigation systems, such as sprinkler, micro, and drip irrigation systems; (iii) water monitoring, measurement,
   and management through construction/installation of water measurement structures, monitoring of the
   annual amount of groundwater pumped for irrigation in three northern provinces (Xinjiang, Gansu, and
   Liaoning), preparation and implementation of groundwater management plans for six counties in the
   northern provinces, and piloting crop evapotranspiration monitoring in three selected counties; and (iv)
   rehabilitation of farm access roads and on-farm rural power transmission lines.

   Component 2: Enhanced Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (Appraisal cost: US$66.04 million;
   Actual cost: US$65.82 million). World Bank defines Climate-Smart Agriculture as range of interventions -
   policies, practices and innovations - that aim to increase agricultural productivity, promote resilience and
   lower emissions. This component would complement investments in Component 1 on improved irrigation
   infrastructure and water delivery activities by improving productivity of irrigated agriculture with an aim to
   promote resilience and reduce farmers’ vulnerability to adverse climatic events. Activities financed included:
   (a) soil conservation and land management practices such as land leveling, improved tillage practices, use
   of crop residues, improved soil fertility management, development of multi-purpose agro-ecological
   activities (e.g. shelterbelts, greenbelts, and windbreaks) and environmental monitoring; and (b) promotion of

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



  climate-adaptation oriented agronomic techniques, including: (i) integrated pest management; (ii) green and
  non-polluting production systems; (iii) farm-based demonstrations and extension of improved varieties and
  technologies, and green/plastic houses; and (iv) applied research on technical or policy-related measures to
  adaptation for climate change in agriculture.

  Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Appraisal cost: US$28.63 million;
  Actual cost: US$20.75 million) This component aimed to improve the capacity of farmers, farmer
  organizations, and institutions to promote sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture. Activities included: (i)
  training and study tours; (ii) awareness building, education, and communication on climate-smart
  agriculture; (iii) establishment and strengthening of Water Users Associations (WUAs) for improved
  Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of on-farm irrigation infrastructure and water management; (iv) support
  to farmer associations (FAs) and farmer cooperatives (FCs) for improved service delivery, access to
  markets, and farmer-based adaptation to climate change etc.; (iv) provision of technical assistance on water
  conservation, agronomy, horticulture, climate change, research and extension etc., through mobile expert
  teams and provision of equipment to farmers and farmer groups.

  Component 4: Project Management Support (Appraisal cost: US$15.29 million; Actual cost:
  US$14.76 million). This component supported relevant agencies to manage, implement, supervise, and
  monitor project activities and progress. Activities financed included project surveys, design, and
  construction supervision, including project management functions such as the development of a
  Management Information System (MIS) and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project costs: The project cost at approval was US$313.14 million, and the actual project cost at
  completion was US$315.82 million (101 percent of appraised estimate) (ICR, annex 3).

  Financing: Per the Loan Agreement (Feb. 27, 2014), IBRD credit (Loan no. 8321) for US$200.00 million
  contributed to financing the project.

  Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution during appraisal was estimated to be US$113.14 million. At
  project closing, it amounted to US$115.82 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on December 27, 2013 and became effective on May 21, 2014. The Mid-
  term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 12, 2017. The original project closing date was December 31,
  2019, which was extended, and the project was closed on December 31, 2020.

  Restructurings: The project was restructured three times (December 05, 2017, May 21, 2019, and
  November 06, 2019). The details of the restructurings are as follows:

  First Restructuring, December 2017: As per the Restructuring Paper (2017), the MTR mission (April 2017)
  found that the project had been able to achieve cost savings. The two key reasons identified were: (i) the
  competitive bidding process had resulted in cheaper-than-expected contracts for many investments
  (especially civil works); and (ii) depreciation of the RMB vis-à-vis the US dollar since the project became
  effective. When the project was prepared, part of the IBRD loan was reserved for physical contingencies
  and price contingencies—a total of USD 32.18 million. Due to the savings, on both procurement and the
  exchange rate, there were sufficient resources to ensure financing of all project activities, and therefore the

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



   contingency funds could be allocated to finance project investments. Based on these findings, a level-2
   restructuring was recommended. The following changes were made:

         An amount of US$32.18 million contingency resources was allocated towards all three project
          components. Reallocations of resources across expenditure categories were also made, including
          modifying the disbursement percentages for civil works.
         The Results Framework was revised. The PDO-level outcome indicator on “Total farmland area
          served with improved irrigation and drainage services” was downgraded to an intermediate outcome
          indicator. As per the ICR (paragraph 24), this action was pursued because the information
          associated with this indicator was an input to the PDO outcome indicators on water and crop
          productivity. A new PDO-level indicator on “Share of high-standard farmland in selected areas where
          at least two new sustainable or climate-resilient practices or technologies promoted by the project
          have been adopted” was added to reflect the number of farmers adopting a set of climate resilient
          and sustainable agriculture approaches. A few indicator target values were modified to make them
          consistent with the reallocations of proceeds from the loan. On balance, the downgrading of an
          original PDO indicator to an intermediate indicator and the addition of a strong PDO indicator on
          climate-resilient practices meant the level of ambition for the project had been enhanced.

   Second Restructuring, May 2019: The Government reorganization that began in early 2018 transferred the
   responsible agency for the project, State Office of Comprehensive Agriculture Development (SOCAD) from
   the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) (ICR, paragraph 23). The
   government decided that the responsibility for implementation of the Project would remain with MOF, but
   under another MOF institution (Center of Budget Evaluation). This required an amendment of the Loan
   Agreement and the Disbursement Letter (DL) allowing the Center of Budget Evaluation (CBE) under the
   Ministry of Finance to be the new project implementing entity.

   Third Restructuring, November 2019: According to the Restructuring Paper, due to the reorganization of the
   Chinese government, there were significant institutional and staffing changes at national, provincial, and
   county levels, including the transfer of the implementing agency referred to earlier. This led to a delay of
   about one year in project implementation and disbursement, though some planned project activities were
   continued to be implemented. To complete the implementation of critical activities and fully disburse the
   loan, the project’s closing date was extended.

   Despite changes in the Results Framework and PDO indicator, including revision of target values for few
   indicators, this review did not find evidence that the project had reduced its level of ambition. In fact, as
   noted above, the revised targets made the objective more ambitious. Thus, this review will not use
   a split rating methodology. The revised PDO and intermediate indicators will be used against which to
   assess this project’s achievements under Section 4 of this review.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



Country and Sector Context. Since late 1970s, China’s economy grew at an annual rate of about 10
percent and more than 500 million people have been lifted out of poverty. This has been a remarkable
achievement of economic development and poverty reduction. During this period, though the country’s
share of the agriculture sector in total GDP declined (from 30% in 1980 to 10% in 2010), the sector’s role
remained critical for the country’s rural economic growth, rural employment, and poverty reduction. At
appraisal, more than 36 percent (279 million people) of the total labor force were employed in the
agricultural sector which fed about 20% of the world population, with less than 11% of the world’s
agricultural land (PAD, paragraph 1). These successful outcomes were a result of key reforms implemented
in the sector, along with investments in irrigation, and technologies for improved seed varieties and
fertilizers. According to the PAD and ICR, during the last three decades until 2013, China’s agricultural
output grew at a rate of 4.6 percent per year, more than four times its population growth rate (PAD,
paragraph 4; ICR, paragraph 1).

Despite these notable achievements, China is facing new development challenges related to climate
change vulnerability, overexploitation of water resources and low water productivity, overuse of chemical
inputs, and weak farmer organizations (ICR, paragraph 3). The country’s average annual surface
temperature rose by 1.2˚C over the last 50 years, with greater impacts in provinces in the north and
northeast. This has led to extreme climatic events, with longer droughts in the north and more severe floods
affecting the southern part of the country (PAD, paragraph 6). Overexploitation of water resources has
caused low water tables in the north, and water productivity has been low due to inefficiencies in the
irrigation systems and weak capacity of the local institutions. On input use, China has one of the highest
rates of fertilizer and pesticide use in the world which has resulted in soil fertility degradation, water
pollution, and higher emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG), lower profits to farmers and increasing
concerns about food safety (PAD, paragraph 6). Finally, institutions such as the Water User Associations
(WUAs), Farmers Associations (FAs) and Farmers Cooperatives’ (FCs) capacity continued to remain weak.

Government Strategy. At both appraisal and completion, the PDO remained in line with the Government of
China’s development priorities as articulated in the country’s 12th Five Year Plan (2011-2015). According to
the PAD (Paragraph 3), the Plan outlined China’s commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
improve adaptation to climate change. The document described China’s plans to accelerate research,
development, and application of low carbon technologies in several sectors including agriculture. At project
closing, the PDO is found to be well aligned with China’s priorities for the agriculture sector. The ICR
(paragraph 28) stated that in February 2021, the Committee of the Communist Party of China and the State
Council issued its annual policy guideline on agriculture and rural development, known as the “No. 1
Document” titled “Opinions on Comprehensively Promoting Rural Revitalization and Accelerating
Agricultural and Rural Modernization”. The document highlighted the following priority areas: (a) promoting
green agriculture development; (b) developing modern agricultural and rural industries; (c) expanding the
provision of rural infrastructure and public services; and (d) strengthening the governance of rural areas.
Further, at the global level, China has committed to implementing Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC) under the Paris Agreement by adapting to climate change through interventions in agriculture,
forestry, and water resources.

Bank Strategy. The project development objective is well-aligned with the Bank Group strategy in China.
At appraisal, the project was in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy for China (2013-2016) to
support greener growth by promoting sustainable agricultural practices (i.e., improving water and farm
productivity, research, and demonstration of climate-resilient agricultural production etc.) (CPS,
2013). During project implementation, and at closing, the PDO remained relevant and would support the
pillar on promoting greener growth under the Bank’s current Country Partnership Framework (2020-25).

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



               The project contributes towards meeting the following objectives of the CPF: (i) demonstrate sustainable
               agriculture practices and improve food system quality and safety; (ii) decrease air, soil, water, and marine
               plastics pollution; and (iii) strengthen sustainable natural resource management.

               In summary, the project’s objectives were highly aligned with both the Government and World Bank
               strategies and appropriately pitched given the challenges facing the sustainable growth of the agricultural
               sector. The project’s design addressed key development challenges faced by the sector related to climate
               change and implemented relevant sustainable and climate-resilient activities which were then
               mainstreamed in Government policies and programs. This project was a first effort to finance investments in
               climate-smart agriculture on a large scale covering six provinces, with appropriate indicators and targets,
               along with clear implementation structures led by a competent agency. The Relevance of this project’s
               objective to Government and World Bank strategies and the agricultural development challenges in China is
               therefore rated High.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To develop climate-resilient agriculture production systems.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Figure 1 in the ICR provided a retrospective Theory of Change (ToC) for the project. As
                             per the ToC, the PDO would be achieved by carrying out soil conservation and improved land management
                             practices (e.g., land leveling, improved tillage practices, soil fertility management through soil testing, precise
                             or formula fertilizer application, organic fertilizer application, and soil fertility monitoring, shelterbelts,
                             greenbelts, and windbreaks etc.), and by adopting climate smart techniques (integrated pest management,
                             green and non-polluting production systems). Capacity building of farmers’ organizations such as WUAs,
                             FAs, and FCs would be strengthened through technical assistance provided by Mobile Expert Teams,
                             training, study tours and information dissemination on climate-resilient agriculture. These project interventions
                             would improve climate smart agriculture practices of farmers, along with the capacity of the local institutions
                             (WUAs, FAs, FCs) strengthened which would lead to adoption of new climate-resilient practices or
                             technologies by the farmers.

                             The achievement of this PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: (i) successful demonstrations
                             and uptake by farmers; (ii) good training programs and trainers are provided. The stated assumptions were
                             logical, but it would have been useful had the assumption on training been better articulated. It is noted that
                             the original PDO outcome indicator “Total farmland served with improved irrigation and drainage services”,

                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



which was downgraded to an intermediate outcome indicator remained in Figure 1 and not replaced by the
revised indicator “Share of high-standard farmland in selected areas where at least two new sustainable or
climate-resilient practices or technologies promoted by the project have been adopted”.

Outputs

The following outputs were achieved to develop climate-resilient agriculture production systems (ICR, page
35). At project end, all indicators were fully achieved.

      Land area leveled and soil physical conditions improved (Target:38,777; Actual: 53,443 ha)
      Area adopting balanced fertilization (including crop residues returns, organic fertilizer) (Target: 65,369;
       Actual: 87,346 ha)
      Area under integrated pest management or green or non-polluting production (Target: 67,253; Actual:
       98,186 ha)
      Area under shelter and agroforest plantation (Target: 2,218; Actual: 2,522 ha)

The ICR (paragraph 68) noted that at the three stages of project implementation: baseline at the start of the
project, follow-up prior to the mid-term, and at project closing, an impact assessment by an accredited third-
party monitoring agency was conducted in all six provinces. The ICR did not provide details about the impact
assessment but upon request, the project team shared with IEG a consolidated M&E report prepared by the
Government. According to the M&E report, as part of the impact assessment, representative surveys were
conducted of beneficiaries in each project county and simultaneously surveys were undertaken in a non-
project adjacent area as comparison group with similar household characteristics. In addition, the ICR (Annex
7) provided excerpts from a Case Study conducted in one village (Niuwanggong Village, Laoqitai Town, Qitai
County). According to the case study, due to the changes in modern fertilization method promoted by the
project that mainly used flushing with the help of pressurized drip irrigation, farmers were able to save 8 to 10
kg per mu (unit of land measurement in China) of chemical fertilizer and cost per mu decreased by 21 Yuan.

Outcome

The following PDO indicator was monitored, which was achieved:

      Share of high-standard farmland in selected areas where at least two new climate-resilient practices
       or technologies promoted by the project have been adopted (Target: 70 percent; Actual 73.3 percent)

In summary, the project met its output targets and PDO indicator, and the evidence provided in the ICR was
judged to be credible. Thus, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To develop sustainable agriculture production systems.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)




Rationale
Theory of Change. To meet this objective, the ICR (Paragraph 39) stated that the project interventions
included improvements in irrigation and drainage infrastructure by dredging and cleaning, canal lining to
increase water conveyance efficiency, irrigation scheduling, building water storage systems and by
introducing drought resistance crop varieties. Further, high-efficiency irrigation systems such as low-pressure
pipeline water delivery systems, sprinklers, and micro and drip irrigation systems would be developed as per
the demand of farmers based on their land and soil conditions, and investment and operations cost. The
project constructed and installed water measurement structures and facilities for improved irrigation and
drainage systems, including for groundwater monitoring. As per the ToC, these project interventions along
with technical assistance and training to local institutions’ (WUAs, FCs, FAs) for better O&M of on-farm
irrigation infrastructure and improved water management for climate-change resilience would lead to
improved irrigation infrastructure that would contribute towards meeting the PDO outcome indicator on
increased water and agriculture productivity.

The ToC outlined the following key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO: (i) sufficient
funds for infrastructure and O&M cost; and (ii) good training program and trainers provided.

Outputs

The project completed the following outputs in achieving the objective of promoting sustainable agriculture
production systems. Almost all targets were met.

      Overall irrigation water use efficiency (percentage) - LN Province (Target: 70; Actual: 70); GS
       Province (Target: 58; Actual: 61); XJ Province (Target: 64; Actual: 65.6); JX Province (Target: 66;
       Actual: 67); HN Province (Target: 65; Actual: 66); CHQ Municipality (Target: 56; Actual: 57). The
       indicator of “overall irrigation water use efficiency” was achieved through improvements in irrigation
       and drainage infrastructure, including high-efficiency irrigation systems such as drip, sprinkler
       irrigation systems.
      Volume of groundwater extracted Unit Meter (m3) – LN Province (Target: 5,380; Actual: 5,321); GS
       Province (Target: 2,636; Actual: 1,053); and XJ (Target: 4,178; Achieved: 4,045). Groundwater
       management plans were prepared and implemented for six counties in these northern provinces. Crop
       evapotranspiration pilots were also monitored in three selected counties.
      Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (Ha): Target: 98,031; Achieved:
       102,497
      Farm roads constructed and rehabilitated (Km): Target: 2,594; Actual: 2,855

Additionally, the project implemented the following activities aimed at capacity building and institutional
strengthening which were mostly achieved:

      Improved irrigated areas devolved to WUA for Village Committee and O&M (Target: 56,187; Actual:
       59,682)
      Number of WUAs, Farmer Associations (FAs) and Farmer Cooperatives (FC) established (Target:
       390; Actual: 390)
      Number of WUAs supported and delivered services to members (Target: 145; Actual: 156)
      Number of FAs supported and delivered services to members (Target: 25; Actual: 26)
      Number of FCs supported and delivered services to members (Target: 208; Actual: 195)


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)




      Number of farmers (disaggregated by gender) who are members of farmer organizations
       (FAs/FCs/WUAs) (Target: 52,772; Achieved: 57,210)
      Number of farmers trained by the project disaggregated by gender and ethnic minority (Target:
       12,879; Actual: 18,523)

Outcome

At project closing, outcomes for both Water Productivity and Agriculture Productivity were achieved. Water
productivity as well as agriculture productivity were measured for different crops across the regions. The
results were as follows (ICR, paragraph 37 and 38):

Water Productivity (kg per m3)

      Maize: LN Province (Target: 1.90; Actual: 1.91); GS Province (Target: 1.56; Actual: 1.58)
      Wheat: XJ Uygur Autonomous Region (Target: 1.56; Actual: 1.59)
      Rice: JX Province (Target: 1.33; Actual: 1.33; HN Province (Target: 1.30; Actual: 1.36); and CHQ
       Municipality (Target: 1.27; Actual: 1.29).

Agriculture productivity (kg per ha):

      Maize: LN Province (Target: 9,591; Actual: 9,608); GS Province (Target: 8324; Actual: 9,854) ha).
      Wheat: XJ Uygur Autonomous Region (Target: 5,899; Actual: 6,085)
      Rice: JX Province (Target: 6,558; Actual: 6,560); HN Province (Target: 6,505; Actual: 8,475); CHQ
       Municipality (Target: 7,530; Actual: 8,329)

The ICR (Annex 7) reported additional results based on Case Studies conducted in project areas:

      High-efficiency irrigation systems that integrated water and fertilizer led to increased wheat yield from
       300‒350 kg per mu to more than 600 kg per mu and the average irrigation water consumption per mu
       decreased from 600 m3 to 300 m3. The input cost per mu decreased by 33.78 yuan and the net
       income of farmers increased by about 400 yuan per mu. Similar benefits were found with other crops
       (maize, melon, gourd) (Niuwanggong Village, Laoqitai Town, Qitai County)
      With the installation of PE pipe efficient water-saving irrigation system, time to irrigate far-away fields
       in the village reduced from “3-5 days to within a few minutes”. Irrigation cost was saved through
       annual water cost per mu reduced by 50,000 yuan annually (Nantai Township, Jinxian County, Jiangxi
       Province)

The evidence on achievements provided by the ICR on outputs and outcome indicators demonstrate that the
project was successful in achieving Objective 2 to develop sustainable agriculture production systems. Thus,
the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was successful in increasing the share of farmland in project areas to adopt at least two new
                            sustainable or climate-resilient practices or technologies (PDO indicator #1) by 73.3 percent as compared to
                            70 percent (Target exceeded by 105 percent). The project also increased water productivity (PDO indicator
                            #2) and agriculture productivity (PDO indicator #3). By project completion, water productivity increased in the
                            range of 15 percent to 27 percent against targets set in all the provinces while agriculture productivity
                            increased between 12 percent to 44 percent (ICR, paragraph 37 and 38). Finally, most intermediate outcome
                            indicators were met or exceeded. This review therefore concludes that the overall efficacy with which the
                            project's objectives were achieved was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Ex Ante

   At appraisal (PAD, paragraph 55), an economic and financial analysis was conducted based on crop models
   representing major crops for each of the counties covered by the project which were aggregated at provincial
   levels. The benefits quantified in the model included: (i) increase in yields between the “with” and “without”
   project interventions; (ii) an increase in the multiple cropping index for the southern provinces of Jiangxi, Hunan,
   and Chongqing municipality; and (iii) shift in the project area away from wheat and maize in favor of higher value
   crops (fruits and vegetables) in the northern provinces of Gansu and Liaoning, and Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous
   Region. Based on the model, the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was estimated at 18.6 percent for the project.
   Among the provinces covered by the project, the ERR varied from 15.5 percent to 23.3 percent. The financial
   rate of return (FRR) for the project was estimated at 16.7 percent and ranged from 13.4 percent to 20.6 percent
   between provinces. The PAD stated that the project did not quantify other benefits such as those that would
   result from reduced water losses or environmental benefits from less use of fertilizer and pesticides. In this
   respect, the analysis had underestimated additional likely benefits of the project.

   Ex Post

   At project closing, the ICR (Annex 4) stated that a standard cost-benefit analysis was conducted to re-assess
   the economic and financial viability of the project based on the same methodology used in appraisal. The EFA
   analysis used actual project costs, which included both physical infrastructure and institutional strengthening
   activities. Future projections were based on the performance of current operations.

   According to the ICR (Annex 4, paragraph 4), like appraisal, the EFA was also based on the analysis of
   quantifiable benefits generated by the project that included (i) an increase in yield between the “with” and
   “without” scenarios; (ii) an increase in cropping intensity for the southern provinces of Jiangxi, Hunan, and
   Chongqing; and (iii) a partial shift in area away from wheat and maize in favor of higher value crops (fruits and


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



vegetables) in the northern provinces of Xinjiang, Gansu, and Liaoning. One additional parameter included in
the model was the financial benefits from decreased use of agricultural inputs (fertilizer, pesticides) due to land
leveling, improved tillage practices, use of crop residues and mulching, soil testing, and precise/formula fertilizer
application etc. The project achieved these results based on investments in physical infrastructure that improved
water delivery, conveyance, and water use efficiency of irrigation and drainage systems in the project areas.
Climate-smart agricultural practices implemented by the project such as balanced fertilization, improved tillage
practices, organic fertilizer use, and biological pest control decreased the use of chemical fertilizers and
pesticides. The crops selected for each of the provinces, yield increases for the crop types, and decrease in
fertilizer/pesticide use are presented in paragraph 5, 6 and 7 of Annex 4. Benefits of reduced fertilizer use that
had environmental/health impacts and improved service delivery due to institutional strengthening that was not
quantified and was not included in the analysis.

The analysis used a discount rate of 6 percent, which as per the project team’s communication with IEG is in
line with the discount rate recommended by China’s National Development Commission. The time used for
future projection of the project was 15 years. Based on the analysis, the project’s ERR was estimated at 20
percent (compared to 18.6 percent in appraisal). The ERR for the provinces ranged from 17 percent to 25
percent. The financial rate of return (FRR) was found to be 18 percent and ranged between 15 percent to 22
percent among the project provinces.

Administrative and Institutional Efficiency: The project was implemented over a 7- year period and included
three restructurings. For most part of project duration, implementation went smoothly, including on financial
management and procurement matters. However, in 2019, the Government reorganization, institutional and
staffing changes at the national, provincial, and county levels led to a delay of about one year in project
implementation which resulted in the extension of the project’s closing date by one year. Even with the longer
than planned implementation period and monitoring of multiple activities across 33 counties in 6 provinces, the
actual administrative cost for the project of 5 percent (US$14.76 million out of total project costs of US$315.82
million) was reasonable.

In summary, despite the implementation delays the project faced towards the end, the ERR of 20 percent and
FRR of 18 percent is comparable to the rate estimated at appraisal (18.6 percent and 18 percent respectively)
and justify a rating of Substantial for Efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  18.60
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               20.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were highly aligned with both the Government and World Bank strategies, and therefore
the Relevance of Objectives in this project was rated high. The overall Efficacy of the project was rated
Substantial. The project met or exceeded targets for most of its intermediate indicators, and the outcome to
develop sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural production systems was achieved based on the
achievement of its PDO indicators. Efficiency was rated Substantial with an attractive ex-post ERR and FRR.
This review concludes that this project achieved its objectives with minor shortcomings and therefore its overall
outcome is rated “Satisfactory”.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identifies three key risks to development outcomes in the following areas: Technical, Financial and
Government ownership/commitment.

      On technical risks related to investments made by the project to improve the assets of irrigation
       infrastructure, the project was successful in transferring their responsibility to WUAs for periodic
       operations and maintenance financed by farmers’ contributions of cash and/or kind. This practice has
       been successful in similar irrigation projects in the country and therefore poses minimal technical or
       sustainability risks.
      Regarding financial risks, project investments led to higher crop yields with increased land and water
       productivity, thereby increased the profitability from crop production. The ICR foresees profitability to
       be a key factor in incentivizing farmers to continue engaging in sustainable agriculture and irrigation
       practices promoted by the project.
      Finally, the ICR pointed out to strong commitment and ownership from the Government to sustain
       outcomes from the project. There is evidence that project interventions related to sustainable
       agriculture practices (i.e., land leveling, improved tillage practices, soil fertility management,
       promotion of integrated pest management, green and non-polluting production systems etc.) have
       been mainstreamed into several Government’s polices such as Guidelines on the Development of
       Green and Low-Carbon Economic Systems, Guidelines on the Construction for High-Standard
       Farmland for Food Security, and the Technical Guidance and Management for High-Standard
       Farmland Construction. (ICR, paragraph 89)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



  According to the ICR (paragraph 57), the Integrated Modern Agriculture Development (IMAD) Project was
  the first effort to implement climate-smart agriculture (CSA) on a large scale in China, covering six
  provinces across the country from south to north in various agro-climatic zones. The project design
  benefited from extensive consultations with various technical line departments in each province (weather,
  water, agriculture, and forestry), research institutes and local farmers, to identify and design project
  interventions (PAD, paragraph 50). It also learned lessons from a GEF project on Mainstreaming Climate
  Change (CC) in irrigated agriculture which was under implementation during project preparation.

  During project preparation, a comprehensive analysis of risks was undertaken, and an Operational Risk
  Assessment Framework was prepared (PAD, Annex 4). Mitigation measures were well defined and
  appropriate. Most of the risks were of the low to moderate nature, except for external risk identified which
  was associated with climate change uncertainty due to multiple projection models. As per the PAD, the
  country had adequate knowledge on the direction of the change though there was still uncertainty about
  its magnitude in relation to future water availability and demand, droughts, floods etc. In terms of
  mitigation measures, the project would continue to learn from the latest research and application of
  climate smart techniques in agriculture based on work done by the Chinese Academy of Agricultural
  Sciences as well as other applied research institutes on Climate Change adaptation in agriculture and
  water resources sectors in various provinces.

  The project was well aligned with Government priorities. The project selected appropriate implementing
  agency (SOCAD) which had extensive experience implementing Bank projects covering wide geographic
  areas and project interventions at provincial and county levels. Further, the project M&E was found to be
  well designed and had minor revisions related to classification of outcome and intermediate outcome
  indicators (ICR, paragraph 59).

  Based on the above assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the project was closely supervised by the World Bank with a total of 15 missions
 (including virtual ones during the COVID-19 pandemic). The Bank team consisted of senior staff and
 consultants with strong technical background in irrigation infrastructure, climate-smart agriculture, and
 institutional capacity building. According to the ICR (Paragraph 86), the missions were candid and timely in
 reporting progress, highlighting issues, and proposing practical follow-up actions in the form of mission
 Aide Memoires, Management Letters, and Implementation Status and Results Reports. Over the project
 period, there were three task team leaders (TTLs) but their transition was found to be managed well with
 no negative impact on project implementation.

 The first restructuring approved in December 2017 based on the recommendation of the MTR was found to
 be timely and relevant considering the changing operational environment and implementation issues that
 the project had confronted then. Cost savings were identified, and contingencies were allocated and
 reallocated amongst the project components. Towards the end of the project, because of Government
 reorganization, the project faced implementation delays. However, with the strong collaboration between

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



 the Bank and the National Project Management Office, project activities continued to be implemented, and
 the Bank loan was fully disbursed by the end of the restructured project closing date. All along, the World
 Bank team provided adequate technical and implementation support, which was recognized in the ICR
 prepared by the client.

 Overall, the Bank’s performance is rated Satisfactory. This rating agrees with the ICR on its assessment of
 the Bank’s Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision to be Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At project appraisal, a Theory of Change (ToC) was not required, which was developed for the ICR (Figure
 1). The original Results Framework included four PDO outcome and fourteen intermediate outcome
 indicators. Two of the four indicators (Increase in water productivity for major crops in project areas by
 province (kg per m3), Increase in agricultural productivity of indicator crops in project areas by province (kg
 per ha) were outcome oriented and were retained during implementation. Meanwhile, the other two PDO
 indicators [Total farmland area served with improved irrigation and drainage services (ha), Number of
 farmers who are members of organizations such as WUAs, farmers’ associations (FAs), and farmers’
 cooperatives (FCs)], were output oriented and were therefore downgraded to intermediate indicators during
 the project’s first restructuring. Overall, the results framework was sound, targets set were measurable with
 appropriate ambition levels.

 The project’s M&E was well designed, with roles and responsibilities on M&E clearly defined during
 appraisal for each of the implementing agencies at the county, provincial and national level. As per the
 PAD (paragraph 38), an MIS system would be set up to track both physical and financial progress.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of M&E went smoothly during the project period. As planned during project preparation,
  M&E data were collected and analyzed, and reports were prepared on time by County Project
  Management Offices (CPMOs) and Provincial Project Management Offices (PPMOs). The MIS system
  was also effective in tracking physical and financial progress based on data from all project counties.
  Most of the data collected were consistent, except for some inconsistencies that were identified for a few
  intermediate indicators that were included in the World Bank’s Restructuring Paper, the client’s MIS
  records, and the 2018 and 2019 World Bank Implementation Status and Results Reports. According to
  the ICR (paragraph 71), these inconsistencies were corrected in the ICR.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



  Based on M&E design, each of the participating provinces hired external agencies to conduct baselines,
  impact assessments prior to mid-term, and at project closing. Details of these impact assessments were
  not provided in the ICR, but an M&E report prepared by the Government was shared with IEG by the
  project team. Social and environmental safeguards compliances were also monitored through external
  agencies, which were instrumental in conducting on-site monitoring during the COVID-19 outbreak. As
  per the ICR (paragraph 69), local agencies such as the Water Resources and Agricultural Bureaus
  participated in monitoring the project’s implementation progress and quality of work as required by
  government regulations.



c. M&E Utilization
  During project implementation, timely available project M&E data were used to monitor progress on
  project activities. As per the ICR (paragraph 72), the data were helpful in identifying implementation
  bottlenecks as well as in determining reallocations of resources between the various components, an
  action which was taken during the project’s first restructuring. Case studies were prepared to assess the
  effectiveness of project interventions and its contribution towards meeting the project’s development
  objective. The ICR also stated that information collected via M&E were useful in identifying best
  practices that were shared between provinces by organizing workshops.

  In summary, M&E is rated as Substantial. The project’s M&E design was sound, and the project’s MIS
  operated well at all levels of implementation. Under the Results Framework, targets set were achievable.
  Considering that this was a first project to nationally scale up investments in climate smart agriculture,
  the M&E could have benefited from deeper analytical studies which assessed types of climate-resilient
  practices and technologies that have greater impacts on outcomes. Accordingly, such findings could
  have been utilized for the project and for scaling up of such activities in other projects.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Social Safeguards: According to the PAD (paragraph 70), Social Assessment (SA) was conducted to
   facilitate free, prior, and informed consultations among the ethnic minority communities. The project
   activities in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and Liaoning Province would impact ethnic minorities (such
   as Yanqi, Bohu and Fukang counties in Xinjiang, Lingyuan and Zhangwu counties in Liaoning). The ethnic
   minorities were mostly Uygur, Kazak and Mongol, who were recognized within the definition of Indigenous
   Peoples (IP) (OP4.10). At the start of the project, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was
   prepared based on consultations with ethnic minority groups in project areas, which was disclosed locally
   and on the World Bank website. As per the ICR (paragraph 78), third-party teams were commissioned by
   the client to monitor implementation of the EMDP. According to the third-party report, EMDP implementation
   was satisfactory and about 99 percent of the ethnic minorities surveyed were satisfied with the project’s

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)



  activities (ICR, paragraph 79). As stated by the ICR (paragraph 79), “although not quantifiable through the
  project’s results framework or other mechanisms (such as beneficiary surveys), third party monitoring teams
  concluded that the project had generated positive impacts on their livelihoods, such as the provision of
  modern agricultural technologies and facilities for income generation and local community development
  initiatives”.

  Under the project, all activities on infrastructure improvements were designed to rehabilitate existing
  facilities which did not require acquisition of additional land. Nonetheless, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
  was prepared by each of the six project provinces, for any circumstances during project implementation that
  may extend infrastructure to areas outside the villages, in which case the World Bank Policy (OP/BP 4.12)
  on Involuntary Resettlement would be triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: At project appraisal, a financial management capacity assessment was conducted
  and actions to strengthen the project’s financial management capacity were agreed with the relevant
  implementing units (PAD, paragraph 64). During project implementation, the ICR stated that a sound
  financial management system was maintained, and the MIS system functioned as an effective tool for
  monitoring project implementation, including financial management. However, due to the 2018
  reorganization of Government, institutional arrangements were changed. The National Project
  Management Office’s (NPMO) function was transferred to the Center of Budget Evaluation (CBE) which
  negatively affected financial management, particularly project disbursement for a short period (ICR,
  paragraph 82). No significant financial management issues were noted throughout implementation and all
  project audit reports were received with unqualified audit opinions.

  Procurement: Procurement functions under the project were to be carried out by the NPMO, PPMOs and
  CPMOs. During project preparation, a capacity assessment of the different PMOs were conducted to
  assess their experience in implementing projects, staff skills, quality, and adequacy of supporting and
  control systems, and the legal and regulatory aspects (PAD, paragraph 65). The NPMO and most of the
  PPMOs had prior experience with Bank-financed projects. During project implementation, when the NPMO
  was transferred to CBE, the Bank’s fiduciary team carried out another capacity assessment and found the
  new implementing agency to be capable of managing the project (Restructuring Paper, 2019).

  The project activities were guided by a procurement manual and there were no major procurement issues
  reported during project implementation. As per the ICR (paragraph 83), the World Bank team provided
  procurement-related implementation support and hands-on training to staff to ensure compliance with
  World Bank procurement policies and procedures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)




d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR listed five lessons. The following two are highlighted that have broader applicability:

    1. A framework such as Climate Smart Agriculture provides a conducive structure for
       addressing integrated challenges of climate change, food security and capacity
       building of farmers’ skills. The package of interventions that focused on investments in
       irrigation infrastructure, combined with dissemination of knowledge and institutional
       development of farmer organizations (WUAs, FCs, FAs) was critical to yield the results that
       the project achieved. According to the PAD (paragraph 28), projects that focused on one
       dimension (e.g., infrastructure) may be easier to implement, but often do not lead to impacts
       such as improving farmer incomes without additional investments in on-farm technologies,
       and institutional support. Due to the integrated “Climate Smart” model, as stated by the ICR
       (paragraph 89), the project was influential in mainstreaming the integrated approach into
       national government policies and investment programs.
    2. Investments in institutional development of key stakeholders, particularly farmer
       organizations (WUAs, FCs FAs) are essential for the adoption and sustainability of
       technological change in agriculture. One of this project’s key components focused on
       institutional strengthening and capacity building of farmers through trainings, awareness
       building, education, and technical assistance on climate-smart agriculture, and in
       establishment of WUAs for improved O&M of on-farm irrigation infrastructure. As illustrated
       by the case studies (Annex 7), participation and ownership of farmer organizations in project
       interventions were critical in the uptake and adoption of new technologies and climate-
       resilient practices promoted by the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN- Integrated Modern Agr. Development (P125496)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Th outcomes reported in the ICR were found to be credible and were based on the project’s M&E as well as
third-party impact assessments conducted at various stages of the project. Useful case studies that
demonstrated the impact of the project were also utilized (Annex 7).

The ICR summarized well the various activities implemented by the project, and linked evidence to outcomes
though a more comprehensive discussion of the evidence would have been helpful.

The lessons learned included in the ICR were based on project experience. Considering that the project was
the first to implement climate-smart agriculture (CSA) on a large scale in China, this section of the document
could have benefited from further analysis of the evidence based on lessons.

The various sections of the document were consistent, and the narrative was candid. The structure of the
document followed OPCS guidelines.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial since shortcomings were minor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
