     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022833

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P111155                                     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48610,IDA-58430                         30-Jun-2016                                         87,569,846.91

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Feb-2011                                 31-May-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            38,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             90,645,132.28                                               0.00

 Actual                                         87,569,846.91                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11) the
   Project Development Objective (PDO) was to "improve access to urban services and conserve physical
   cultural heritage at one public location within Stone Town."




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



   Additional Financing (AF) in 2016 (see below) rephrased the PDO "improve access to urban services and
   conserve the physical cultural heritage in Zanzibar" removing the specificity of "one public location within
   Stone Town."

   This review will assess the project performance against the following objectives:

         To improve access to urban services in Zanzibar; and
         To conserve physical cultural heritage in Zanzibar



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Institutional Strengthening and Infrastructure Development in the Zanzibar Municipal
   Council (US$31.2 million at appraisal, AF added 44.3 million for a total of US$75.5 million, and US$74.36
   million actual). This component was to finance improvements that would strengthen the institutional capacity
   of the Zanzibar Municipal Council (ZMC) in urban planning by preparing a structure plan and urban
   development policy. This component was also to support the Department of Survey and Urban Planning
   (later renamed the Department of Urban and Rural Planning or DURP). In addition, this component was to
   finance infrastructure investments, including storm water drainage, solid waste collection points and
   equipment, street lighting; and reconstruct and conserve the Mizingani seawall in the Stone Town World
   Heritage Site.

   The AF scaled up activities to upgrade and redevelop the Ng’ambo area, just outside of Stone Town by
   financing the following activities: (i) basic infrastructure, new public green spaces, recreation areas, and
   cultural heritage preservation; (ii) additional drainage investments; (iii) resettlement costs associated with
   the storm water drainage works and sanitary landfill; (iv) additional waste management investments
   including the first sanitary landfill, and updating the Stone Town Conservation and Heritage Management
   Plan. AF also supported the institutional strengthening of the Zanzibar government and the municipal
   council to prepare a solid waste management strategy, an asset management information system,
   community engagement plan, implement the Local Government Revenue Collection and Information
   System (LGRCIS), and prepare feasibility studies for Public Private Partnership or PPP initiatives.

   2. Support to Town Councils in Pemba (US$3.8 million at appraisal, AF added US$6.3 million, for a total
   of US$10.1 million, US$6.34 million actual). This component would finance hands-on training and technical
   assistance for staff of three Town Councils on Pemba Island - Chake Chake, Mkoani, and Wete. This
   component would finance two areas: the first in planning and budgeting, asset management, fiscal

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



  management, IT, community engagement, and procure office furniture and equipment, and vehicles. The
  second area would finance small-scale investment projects with minimal environmental impacts such
  as pedestrian footpaths, small drainage works, office buildings, and local markets. AF expanded these
  activities to include street lighting.

  3. Project Management (US$3.0 million at appraisal, AF added US$4.4 million, for a total of US$7.4
  million, US$5.56 million actual). This component would finance project management, supervision of
  environmental and social safeguards, project monitoring, and reporting. The component would also
  finance other agencies to implement and coordinate their respective components. The AF was to finance
  the preparation for a follow-on urban operation in Zanzibar.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was US$93 million. This consisted of the original US$38 million and AF
  of US$55 million. The project disbursed US$87.6 million, and registered foreign exchange losses of US$5.4
  million for a total disbursement of US$91.7 million or a 98.6 percent disbursement rate (ICR, Table 1).

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) fully financed both the original credit and the
  AF.

  Borrower Contribution: None.

  Dates and Restructuring: The project was approved on February 24, 2011, and made effective on July 11,
  2011. The project was originally scheduled to close on June 30, 2016 but was extended three times during
  three restructurings for a total of 59 months. The project closed on May 31, 2021. There was one level 1
  and 3 level 2 restructurings:

        On June 29, 2016, a Level 1 restructuring provided AF, revised the PDO, revised the Results
         Framework (introduced one new outcome indicator to measure the percentage of beneficiaries who
         feel that the project investments reflected their needs and an almost 70 percent increase in the
         target value of an outcome indicator - from 113,400 to 190,215 people in urban areas provided with
         access to solid waste management services). Components and costs were revised and new
         safeguard policies were triggered by the revised components. This restructuring extended the credit
         closing date by 36 months from June 30, 2016 to June 30, 2019 to accommodate the scaled up
         activities, expansion of geographical coverage, and increase in target beneficiaries.

        On May 15, 2018 (approved on October 15, 2018 per ICR, paragraph 18) a Level 2 restructuring
         extended the credit closing date by 12 months, from June 30, 2019 to June 30, 2020 to complete
         contracted works. At this restructuring, IDA financing was to be used for resettlement compensation.
         Results indicators and target end dates were adjusted to recognize the new credit closing date. An
         intermediate outcome indicator (households with access to infrastructure and services due to
         upgrading in the Ng'ambo area) was deleted. This activity was planned to be undertaken under the
         follow-on Boosting Inclusive Growth for Zanzibar (BIG-Z) Integrated Development Project approved
         on June 10, 2021 (ICR, paragraph 18).




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



         On May 5, 2020 a Level 2 restructuring extended the closing date by another six months, from June
          30, 2020 to December 31, 2020 because of the impact of COVID-19.

         On April 13, 2021, a Level 2 restructuring to retroactively extend the closing date by another five
          months from December 31, 2020 to May 31, 2021 to allow the use of credit proceeds for items that
          were delivered after the December 31, 2020 closing date because of the impact of COVID-19.

   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome will not be undertaken. The text of the PDO was revised in the
   2016 AF from "cultural heritage site in Stone Town World Heritage Site" to "cultural heritage site in
   Zanzibar." The AF scaled up the ambition of the project by adding activities to conserve cultural heritage at
   more than one site, updating Zanzibar's Heritage Master Plan with a greater emphasis on urban upgrading,
   and promoting public-private partnerships (PPP), and revenue mobilization to achieve economic
   development (ICR, paragraphs 10, 15, and 19). According to the guidelines, if the AF expanded the scope
   of the project, no split rating need be applied, and the entire project will be assessed on the revised
   outcome targets and outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were to address the development problem posed by the inadequate urban service
delivery in Zanzibar and a need to revitalize its heritage sites to continue to earn from tourists visiting those
sites. The PDOs focused on the role of urban local governments and tourism in Zanzibar's economic
development. The PDOs were pitched at a level that recognized the limited institutional capacity of the
government, and a lack of coherent decentralization policy while restoring the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) heritage sites that draw tourists. An integrated development
approach linked building capacity while investing in infrastructure improvements and services in targeted
urban areas surrounding heritage sites in the two islands of Zanzibar. However, only one of the
two PDOs "to conserve physical cultural heritage in Zanzibar " was specific, although more at an output
rather than an outcome. The first PDO - "to improve access to urban services", did not adequately
characterize the expected outcomes of the project interventions (see Section 4 Efficacy below). The
components clarified that urban services in the PDO referred to storm water drainage, solid waste, street
lighting; and reconstructing the Mizingani seawall in the Zanzibar Municipal Council area and small scale
infrastructure projects in the three Pemba towns.

Country Context: Zanzibar is a semi-autonomous island archipelago of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Zanzibar consists of two islands, the larger, more densely populated Unguja to the south and the smaller,
more rural Pemba to the north. The Zanzibar Municipal Council (ZMC) in Unguja and three smaller Town
Councils in Pemba (Chake Chake, Wete, and Mkoani) comprise the four main urban areas with about 60
percent of the population. These urban areas, critical to the economy of the two islands, contribute the bulk
of Zanzibar’s gross domestic product (GDP). Tourism is an important economic activity on the islands.
Tourist arrivals increased by 8 percent between 2005 and 2009 or 135,000 tourists in 2009 alone. Most, if
not all, tourists visit or stay for a short period within the ZMC to visit the historic UNESCO World Heritage
Site (WHS) of Stone Town area in the city center. In 2019, about 540,000 tourists arrived in Zanzibar, 88.7
percent of whom came for leisure. The average length of the stay was seven days, two of which were


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 22
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



reported as stays in Stone Town. Fifty percent of the tourists who visited Stone Town walked along the
seawall and spent on average US$5 per day.

Country Plans: Zanzibar developed a roadmap, called Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty
(Mkakati wa Kukuza Uchumi na Kupunguza Umasikini Zanzibar, MKUZA), to meet the objective of Zanzibar
Vision 2020 to eradicate absolute poverty in the islands by 2020. The limited capacity of the local
government to effectively deliver services was a key challenge to achieving this objective. The Zanzibar
Public Service Reform Program (ZPSRP) focused on local government reforms in its five-year Medium-
Term Strategy (2010 to 2015). However, while the government agreed that an effective decentralization and
strengthening of local governments were essential, there was no clear decentralization policy
or implementation plan. Updating the Stone Town Conservation and Heritage Management Plan and
Zanzibar’s Heritage Master Plan formed part of this project. The Stone Town Conservation and Heritage
Management Plan and the Stone Town Safe and Sustainable Mobility Management Plan would
inventory key heritage assets within Stone Town, lay out key issues, and recommend conservation and
improvement interventions. The UNESCO Tanzania National Commission was reviewing these two
documents at closing and will guide investments under the follow-on Boosting Inclusive Growth for
Zanzibar: Integrated Development Project or BIG-Z.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDOs were aligned with the World Bank’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Tanzania 2018–2022. The CPF focused on infrastructure and urban
sectors. At project close, the PDOs were highly relevant and contributed to using urbanization for economic
growth and job creation. The CPF specified improving urban management, planning systems, service
delivery, urban mobility, own source revenue (OSR) collection, and environmental management, all of
which were supported by the project. The CPF has three focus areas: (1) enhance productivity and
accelerate equitable and sustainable growth, (2) boost human capital and social inclusion, and (3)
modernize and improve the efficiency of public institutions. The CPF was aligned with the priorities
identified in Tanzania’s Second Five-Year Development Plan and Zanzibar’s Third Strategy for Growth and
Reduction of Poverty. The CPF interventions will address the rural-urban divide and boost the factors that
would enable poverty reduction such as access to infrastructure, social services and productive jobs. The
CPF will innovate on the role of the private sector to maximize access to finance and generate jobs for
Tanzania’s development.

World Bank Prior Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The World Bank had limited
involvement in the urban and local government sector in Zanzibar before ZUSP, though several
development partners were supporting improvements in urban services. The ZUSP was the Bank’s first
standalone operation in Zanzibar.

Overall, the relevance of objective is rated Substantial. This was the first standalone operation of the Bank
in Zanzibar and was pitched at an adequate level that covered a novel approach to preserving cultural
heritage while improving access to urban services by improving local capacity. However, the PDO
statement did not adequately reflect key project activities and the expected development outcomes. Minor
shortcomings in the PDO formulation - in the first, "to improve access to urban services" - did
not adequately characterize the expected outcomes of the project interventions; and in the second, the
PDO was more output - rather than outcome-oriented, i.e., "to conserve physical cultural heritage." (see
Section 4 Efficacy below).


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve access to urban services in Zanzibar.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change: A theory of change (ToC) was not required at project appraisal. The Results Framework
                (PAD, Annex 1) provided the causal relationship between inputs, 7 outputs, and 2 expected outcomes. At
                closing, a ToC was prepared to replicate the causal linkages between those inputs and outputs established at
                appraisal.

                The project included four types of inputs: (i) reconstruction and rehabilitation of the offices of Zanzibar
                Municipal Council and of three Pemba Town Councils with furniture and equipment; (ii) soft systems such
                as information and communication technology (ICT) development, the Zanzibar Spatial Data Infrastructure
                (ZAN-SDI), geographic information system (GIS)-based property tax revenue collection system, revenue
                enhancement plans, and e-governance; (iii) infrastructure such as the construction of storm water drains,
                sanitary landfill, transfer stations, streetlights along selected roads and procuring solid waste equipment; and
                (iv) feasibility studies to support Public-Private Partnership (PPP) initiatives.

                The outputs were improved working environments for local governments to deliver urban services and
                improved infrastructure such as improved roads, public space, storm drains, solid waste structures, and
                installed streetlights. These outputs would reasonably lead to urban local governments with enhanced
                planning capacity to deliver improved services to its residents reflected in the improved access to basic
                services such as solid waste. The capacity building and infrastructure inputs were specific, measurable, time
                bound, and could reasonably be attributed to result in the expected outputs.

                The infrastructure outputs would lead to outcomes measured by a decrease in the number of households
                with flooded homes (although the ToC only mentioned number of households) and the number of
                beneficiaries with access to regular solid waste management collection. The original two of the three outcome
                indicators - number of households and the number of people benefiting from the project interventions -
                however, were more outputs than outcomes. There were no indicators to capture the impact of reduced
                flooding to productivity gains, or how improved access to solid waste services affected lives and livelihoods of
                beneficiaries, such as improved health due to improved sanitation, jobs or businesses created, increased
                incomes, although some of these were reported. There were no outcome indicators associated with
                enhanced planning capacity or improved service delivery or how the soft system inputs improved local
                resource mobilization and expenditure. The ToC included only one critical assumption - that the waste
                collection was sustained - to ensure that the objective was achieved but this assumption only covered the
                solid waste input of the objective. No other assumptions were provided to ensure the outcome of the other
                outputs.


                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



The output indicator associated with the dropped activity - urban upgrading in Ng'ambo area (part of the
UNESCO heritage site buffer zone) - was included in the follow-on project, Boosting Inclusive Growth for
Zanzibar Integrated Development Project (BIG-Z), approved on June 10, 2021.

OUTPUTS:

The following outputs exceeded or achieved their targets:

      New street lights were installed along 39.55 km of selected roads which included 21.3 km of roads
       (target 11.2 km, target exceeded) in Unguja; and 18.25 km in Pemba (no target because this was
       added at restructuring and determined during implementation). The Pemba streetlights were part of
       the small investments identified and implemented by the three Town Councils in Pemba after the
       activities in the Ng'ambo area was dropped.

      13 (target 4) feasibility studies for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) were completed.

      Storm water drainage was completed. Its design included pedestrian bridges, vehicle crossings,
       bridges, ponds, footpaths, rehabilitated roads, and drainage outfalls. 20.7 km (target 21.8 km) of
       surface drains were completed in the ZMC area outside of Stone Town (ICR, page 43).

      ZMC's Change Management Strategic Plan was implemented, the Zanzibar Heritage Master Plan was
       updated, and the Zanzibar Local Government Revenue Collection and Information System (LGRCIS)
       was operational, all as planned. The project developed the first modern ZMC master plan known as
       the Diagrammatic Indicative Structure Plan for Zanzibar Municipality and its immediate periphery
       and Urban Development Policy for Zanzibar Town or ZanPlan to guide future urban development in
       this fast-growing urban region. The ZanPlan was officially adopted by the Cabinet in 2015 as the
       legally binding document to serve as a road map for priority urban development and investment
       projects in Zanzibar. In addition, the project also financed the development of the local area plan for a
       small yet rapidly growing village of Makunduchi to manage its future growth.

      The first sanitary landfill in Zanzibar was constructed in Kibele, with 425,000 cubic meter
       capacity, three cells, two transfer stations, and 42 collection points, started operation in October 2020.
       By May 2021, the sanitary landfill was receiving about 320 tons of waste per day (original design
       capacity of 180 tons per day) from the ZMC and other areas. A Livelihood Support Plan was prepared
       to support waste pickers in forming a community based organization (CBO), and for them to continue
       utilizing some facilities constructed at landfill such as using washroom facilities at landfills. A
       contractor's camp was furnished with changing rooms, office, medical room, kitchen, toilets, and 20
       individual stalls for authorized pickers to store their materials and keep the landfill clean.

      The three Town Councils in Pemba implemented 14 small investments (targets determined during
       implementation). These included 24 footpaths in Mkoani and Chake Chake, 1.1 km of stormwater
       drainage in Mkoani, 3 office buildings, 1 rehabilitated abattoir in Chake Chake, and a
       rehabilitated community market and nearby bus stand in Wete. The completed market accommodated
       over 100 small vendors.

      The Korea World Partnership Facility Trust Fund co-financed the technical assistance (TA) programs.
       The TA for ICT-based systems and TA to improve municipal finances and e-governance developed a

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



       GIS-based property tax revenue collection system, completed preliminary studies to establish ZAN-
       SDI and assisted the Zanzibar Mapping Initiative and Open Data for African Cities. The project
       provided hands-on and on-the-job training, and a technical deep-dive and peer-to-peer workshop in
       Seoul.

OUTCOMES: This PDO would be achieved by meeting targets for: 3 original and 1 AF-added outcome
indicators:

     At least 3,633 households (3,645 households) were relieved from flooding and associated economic
       losses. Waterborne disease outbreaks and related illnesses were reduced (no data).

     Storm water drainage benefited residents with improved access and living environment. About 63
       percent of respondents to a beneficiary satisfaction survey expressed their satisfaction with benefitting
       from the storm water drainage activities.

     187,200 (baseline, 75,600, original target 190,215, target almost achieved) residents in the ZMC were
       provided with access to solid waste management services. The sanitary landfill also benefited tourists
       (no data) and business owners (no data). 66 percent of respondents to the beneficiary surveys
       expressed satisfaction with the solid waste management services, improved health, reduced
       waterborne diseases, reduced malaria cases, reduced pollutants, reduced medical costs. To sustain
       this outcome, the ICR reports (paragraph 27) that landfill managers, municipal solid waste
       management teams, operators of the collection and transport systems were trained but does not
       provide details. The Zanzibar Urban Municipal Council (ZUMC) updated relevant by-laws to improve
       the efficiency of solid waste management systems. Awareness-raising activities and stakeholder
       engagement were facilitated to deal with how solid waste can be managed from its generation through
       storage, collection, transportation, treatment, and disposal. The ZUMC reported clear and visible
       improvements in the efficiency of municipal collection, transportation, and disposal systems (no data).
       A memorandum of understanding was signed between the ZMC and waste pickers community-based
       organization (CBO) stipulating the responsibilities and obligations of the different parties, and a code
       of conduct for the CBO (ICR, paragraph 27).

     Sixty-two percent of respondents to the beneficiary survey confirmed they benefited from street
       lighting because they increased mobility, extended business operating times, increased recreational
       activities, improved road safety as a result of segregated walkways, and improved security in Unguja
       and Pemba (no data).

     The completion of the market with over 100 small vendor stall holders and a bus stop at Wete
       improved own source revenue (OSR) collection in Pemba (no data), and a conducive working
       environment for small business enterprises (no data). The bus stop encouraged the movement of
       people from the surrounding communities (no data) and stimulated socioeconomic activities of the
       residents (no data). The beneficiary survey found that 65 percent of respondents benefitted from the
       footpaths or walkways in Mkoani and Chake Chake as confirmed by the Bank Task Team in their
       March 11, 2022 email to IEG. They added that these footpaths included at-grade and ramps across
       the neighborhoods, and occasionally stairs or steps as needed to give access to schools and other
       social infrastructure in hilly terrain that was previously difficult to traverse especially during the rainy
       season.



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)




      64 households (baseline 3,645 persons, target 50 households, target exceeded) reported less flooding
       inside homes in the ZMC area.

      The project investments' benefitted 412,914 direct project beneficiaries (original target, 394,765), of
       which 52.02 percent were females (target 52 percent).

      The TA enhanced the capacity of governments entities such as land administration institutions and the
       Property Tax Implementation Unit. The TA activities resulted in: (i) setting up the GIS-based LGRCIS;
       (ii) structured a pilot program in Stone Town and the tourist village of Nungwi in the north of Unguja for
       property tax collection; and (iii) the BIG-Z follow-on project to implement the road map and strategy
       for e-governance using ZAN-SDI.

Overall efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial based on the additional data from
beneficiary surveys and qualitative description of capacity outcomes.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To conserve physical cultural heritage in Zanzibar.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The Results Framework at appraisal provided the causal link between inputs, outputs,
and outcomes. A ToC was prepared at closing replicating this causal link established at appraisal. The World
Heritage core zone of Stone Town was dilapidated, with its historic center that included the seaside Mizingani
Road that was in danger of collapse. This road was also a major transport route and the public face of the
city’s tourist district. Dark streets in the narrow lanes of Stone Town hindered tourist activity, and solid waste
collection rates were low. Due to these factors, Stone Town was at risk of losing its UNESCO World Heritage
Site status.

The inputs included the development of plans that addressed the requirements of UNESCO to retain its World
Heritage Site status and the reconstruction of the Mizingani seawall and promenade in Stone Town. The
inputs were specific, measurable, and time bound. The following outputs - the Conservation and Heritage
Management Plan and the Safe and Sustainable Mobility Management Plan, and rehabilitated seaside
Mizingani Road seawall and promenade - would result in Stone Town retaining its status as a UNESCO
World Heritage site. However, this outcome is output -oriented and did not provide a development outcome
from the inputs provided. Consequences of the inputs were acknowledged to that these would have had
impacts on the tourism industry a majors employment source on the island. There were no indicators to
reflect the impact of retaining the World Heritage Site status on tourism and employment. The ToC included a
critical assumption that the improvements would not affect the Stone Town World heritage site. In sum, this
ToC while valid, providing a causality chain that was logical, with components that were comprehensive,
adequately scaled and properly sequenced, but lacked the development outcome on lives and livelihoods as
a result of the interventions . Inputs and outputs would reasonably achieve the expected outcome, even those


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



                  that were not identified. The critical assumption was appropriate and was considered in making sure the
                  cultural heritage aspect of the site was preserved (see Section 8 Assessment of Bank Performance at
                  Supervision below).

                  OUTPUTS: The following outputs achieved its targets:

                        340 m seawall in Mizingani was rehabilitated (as targeted), including the sea front road, a newly
                         widened landscaped pedestrian promenade, and underground utilities (water, sewer, and electric).
                         Mizingani is a gateway to Stone Town and the upgrade of the seawall and Mizingani Road was
                         according to the 1994 Conservation Plan.

                        The project financed the development of two important planning and policy documents for the
                         conservation and revitalization of Stone Town, to fulfill the requirement of UNESCO and would guide
                         the future conservation and rehabilitation efforts within Stone Town. The two plans were: (i) the Stone
                         Town Conservation and Heritage Management Plan and (ii) the Stone Town Safe and Sustainable
                         Mobility Management Plan. These two plans inventoried the key heritage assets within Stone Town,
                         laid out key issues, and made recommendations for conservation and improvement interventions. The
                         UNESCO Tanzania National Commission were reviewing the two documents at closing and will
                         guide the investments under the follow-on BIG-Z project approved on June 10, 2021.

                  OUTCOMES: The following outcome was achieved:

                        Stone Town retained its UNESCO World Heritage City Status. The reconstructed Mizingani sea wall
                         and promenade conserved the public seafront, protected significant historic structures in Stone Town,
                         improved the aesthetics for tourism, enhanced safety and security of pedestrians, facilitated small-
                         scale business opportunities along the seawall, and created a lively and vibrant public space for
                         residents and visitors. However, there was no data to support these outcome beyond the retention of
                         the World Heritage Status. There was no data to support, for example, new businesses created or
                         retained, rise in new visitors; reduced incidence in crime such as loss of property to support increased
                         safety, although the ICR reported some evidence such as an increase of revenues from tourism
                         attributed to the reconstructed Mizingani seawall (Annex 4,Efficiency Analysis) and additional
                         business generated,

                  Overall efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial because the sole outcome target
                  was achieved in preserving the Stone Town historic seafront and its architecture. However, as noted in the
                  ToC, this was not a development outcome. The ICR reported tourism and local development outcomes from
                  the improvements to the historic town (ICR, Annex 4, Efficiency Analysis) and respondents to the beneficiary
                  survey at completion provided some additional outcomes (ICR, paragraphs 28 and 29). It is plausible to
                  expect that the activities would lead to development outcomes in the tourism sector.



                  Rating
                  Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           Overall efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the project to
           achieve the first objective is rated Substantial based on the additional data from beneficiary surveys. Three of
           the five outcome indicators fell slightly short in achieving their target values though. The efficacy of the project
           to achieve the second objective is rated Substantial after achieving its target indicator, which was rather
           output- oriented. Reported outcome elsewhere in the ICR provided additional information to support the
           substantial outcome under both PDOs and in the tourism sector were likely to be achieved in the future.
           Both PDOs were largely achieved.



           Overall Efficacy Rating
           Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, the economic efficiency of the project used a cost benefit
analysis, using a 12 percent discount rate for the three distinct components: (i) urban infrastructure; (ii) physical
cultural heritage; and (iii) strengthening institutional and fiscal capacity in urban management. Benefits included
(i) reduction in the number of households affected by flooding; (ii) establishment of modern street lighting; (iii)
increase in the number of households accessing regular solid waste collection; and (iv) maintenance of cultural
heritage and the status of Stone Town as World Heritage City (PAD paragraph 43). The Mizingani sea wall had
a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$15.03 million and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 47 percent. Storm water
drain investments had an NPV of US$20.64 million, and an IRR of 7 percent. Street lighting had an NPV of
US$1.3 million, and an IRR of 28 percent. Other benefits were not quantified such as those related to public
health impacts from reduced flooding and solid waste disposal, strengthened ZMC and the three town councils
on Pemba. Direct benefits were based on the following assumptions: value of historic buildings, replacement
cost of infrastructure, replacement cost of the seawall, and value of adjacent buildings.

At AF, the cost benefit analysis used a 6 per cent social discount rate per the Bank's revised guidelines for: (i)
urban sanitation, urban upgrading, and cultural heritage preservation; (ii) support for municipal finance through
own source revenue under different revenue increases scenarios; (iii) small scale investments in Pemba using
values for those implemented under the original project. Results showed that the proposed AF-
financed interventions will positively impact Zanzibar's development because these activities will boost the local
economy and improve the quality of life of its residents (Project Paper for AF, Section IV).

              For urban sanitation, urban upgrading, and cultural heritage preservation, interventions would be viable
                when contributing to at least a 0.34 percent per year increase of tourism activities, which is below the
                historical trend. Assuming a 0.5 percent increase in tourism earnings from the sub-components, the IRR
                would be 12 percent. Sensitivity analysis showed that sub-components would remain viable when
                tourism growth is 0.6 percent per year even if investment cost doubles or project is delayed by up to 5
                years.




                                                                                                                Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



      For support to municipal finance through own source revenue enhancement: OSR needed to increase by
       at least 7.5 percent per year to pay for the sub-component cost. The more realistic scenario was a 15
       percent annual increase in OSR for the first three years. Sensitivity analysis showed that if investment
       costs increase by 100 percent or the project is delayed by four years, the required annual increase of
       revenues is 10 percent to make the investment viable.

      Small scale investments in Pemba. Benefits included (i) better mobility and accessibility for communities;
       (ii) improved safety in steep slopes; (iii) reduced accidents and associated time and cost burdens, using
       "with" and "without" interventions. Analysis showed that benefits were twice as much as the cost
       with an 18 percent IRR.

      The combined analysis showed that with the AF, tourism income would increase by 0.5 percent per year,
       OSR would increase 15 percent per year for the first 3 years, and 6.5 percent per year thereafter; and
       the AF would generate net benefits of US$20 million over the life of the project and a 12 percent IRR.

      The urban sanitation sub-project as a revenue generating investment underwent financial analysis. Four
       scenarios were used to analyze which ones would cover O&M and investment costs, using "with" and
       "without" scenarios. The difference between the incremental revenues and incremental costs from both
       scenarios equaled net cash flow. At the AF appraisal, revenues from waste fees covered 45 percent of
       operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. The results of the four financial options were: (i) if waste fees
       were expanded, all households fully charged, O&M deficit would be reduced by 80 percent. This option
       required careful affordability and willingness to pay and revision of municipal by-laws; (ii) a landfill
       tipping fee of US$10 per ton would cover the O&M deficit, while a landfill tipping fee of US$30 per ton
       would cover both O&M and the investment costs; (iii) if a new levy or entry fee targeting tourists were
       introduced, each tourist would be charged US$2.5 to recover O&M costs or US$7.50 per tourist to
       recover both O&M and investment costs, (iv) if OSR increases were used as described above, these
       would only pay for the O&M deficit but not the investment costs.

At closing, the cost-benefit analysis used at AF was replicated using the same 6 percent social discount
rate. Benefits included avoided damage costs and time savings for drainage interventions, increase of revenues
from tourism for Mizingani seawall, increase of earnings for businesses that benefited from streetlights, and
saving of travel time plus increase of revenue for small investments in Pemba. Actual benefits from the works
went beyond the quantified benefits, such as increased safety in the project areas, improvement of outside
spaces that allow residents to have passive recreation, safer vehicular movement, and increased business
opportunities. The cost benefit analysis concluded that all four types of investments - storm water drainage,
seawall, streetlights, and small investments of the councils in Pemba had IRRs higher than the 6 percent and
ranged from 16 to 42 percent, averaging at 21 percent (ICR, Table 4).

Financial analysis of the Kibele sanitary landfill, now operating and receiving about 320 tons of waste per day
show a nearly doubling of its original design capacity. At preparation, a tipping fee of at least US$10 per ton was
estimated to cover the landfill operation. However, the government has yet to plan and approve an applicable
fee scale knowing that charges may discourage its use, A cost-effectiveness analysis showed that actual costs
were similar to other landfill projects in the country and concluded that the landfill investment was cost-effective.
The estimated benefits on improved sanitation services in Zanzibar include saved costs from reduced
transmission of diseases, increased tourism receipts due to improved attractiveness to visitors.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project was implemented over a 10 year period and was
provided three extensions. The first, as part of the AF expansion and the subsequent ones due to several

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



factors. The storm water drainage works only started five years after effectiveness due to the following: (i) non-
compliance with environmental, health, and safety measures, leading to work stoppage so that the contractor
could take remedial actions; (ii) one of the six drainage systems was redesigned to minimize resettlement
impacts and address severe flooding problems at the Mwanakwerekwe and Sebleni areas; and (iii) design
required additional works, resettlement, and supervision costs. Implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) was delayed but resolved after the project was restructured to allow the use of IDA funds for resettlement
compensation. The installation of streetlights in the ZMC was delayed by 6 months due to the COVID-19
disruption of shipping of materials from abroad, A retroactive extension was granted to resolve delayed
shipments. Some procurement delays also occurred during the AF phase because the PMT lacked capacity
to prepare adequate Terms of References and to evaluate bids. After a two year delay, additional procurement
specialists and technical experts strengthened PMT capacity (see Section 10, Other Issues, Procurement
below). The seawall and drainage subprojects were also affected by increasing prices of concrete and lack of
construction materials because of the scarcity of fine aggregates (sand) that required importation from the
Tanzania mainland. The COVID-19 pandemic restricted travel of international consultants and delayed special
equipment for solid waste management delivery. The project was restructured to extend the closing date by six
months from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020 to complete delayed activities and an exceptional retroactive
extension to May 31, 2021 to pay for two items that were delivered after December 2020.

Overall, the substantial economic efficiency of the project investments were sufficient to overcome the project's
operational inefficiencies. Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              21.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated Substantial. The overall efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives is
rated Substantial. The defined outcome indicators under Objective 1 were substantially achieved and additional
data was provided on the beneficiary surveys that captured a range of interventions. Under Objective 2, in
addition to reporting on the sole indicator at the output level, development outcomes were noted elsewhere in
the ICR (Annex 4, Efficiency Analysis) to indicate plausible impact. Efficiency is rated Substantial. Overall
outcome is rated Satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Operational Risks: The project feasibility studies for the infrastructure investments did not include
       operation and maintenance (O&M) strategies or asset management plans. These required adequate
       funding from the government for the urban drainage system and were instead prepared after the
       completion of the construction works. The O&M requirements were not included in assessing the
       viability of the proposed projects. Government commitment to finance the O&M plans were not
       secured. The Kibele landfill design considered its O&M needs and prepared an O&M plan. Funds
       were used to train the landfill operation team to make sure that there would be sufficient capacity to
       operate the landfill after its completion. However, the ZMC has not yet committed to adopt and
       implement this O&M plan. To mitigate this risk, a World Bank consultant visited in May 2021, found
       that the O&M plan was only partially followed, and recommended that the Government ensure
       environmental and economic sustainability of the landfill outcomes by: (i) streamlining institutional
       arrangements to integrate collaborative planning and strengthen stakeholder engagement (including
       informal workers) to promote ownership; (ii) adopting waste management O&M policy; (iii)
       operationalizing the Management Information System (MIS) to monitor quantity at the two transfer
       stations and the landfill; (iv) collecting waste tipping fees in Kibele landfill; (v) developing a strong
       monitoring and enforcement framework to address illegal dumping and buffer zone encroachment;
       and (vi) reviewing various pricing options in the follow-on BIG-Z project. The operational risk is
       assessed as substantial.

      Technical Risks: Some technical design flaws and defects were observed in the
       completed investments. These included residual flooding in some households along the completed
       storm water drainage systems at Kilimani and Mwantenga in the ZMC. There were some defects
       observed on the renovated office buildings of Chake Chake and Mkoani Pemba Town Councils
       including leakages and cracks in the roof. The daily amount of waste collected and received at the
       Kibele landfill is double the amount used in designing the landfill. To mitigate these risks, the project
       developed an action plan in January 2021 that would be addressed during the Defects Liability Period
       (DLP). A May 2021 follow up visit by a Bank team consultant reported adequate implementation of
       the action plan. The technical risk is assessed as modest.

      Capacity Risks: Turnover of key staff in the implementing agencies may constrain sustainable
       operation of some investments. For example, the Director of the Civil Engineering Department of the
       ZMC who served as the focal person for all project-financed infrastructure investments in the ZMC
       was removed in December 2020 just before the project closed. Looking for a capable replacement
       with technical knowledge and institutional memory would be difficult and would affect the quality of
       technical advice on the sustainability of the infrastructure assets. This shortcoming may be mitigated
       by the follow-on BIG-Z project. The capacity risk is assessed as modest.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was the first Bank standalone operation in Zanzibar and the island's first major urban infrastructure
  project. Design responded to Zanzibar's priorities related to heritage, service delivery, and institutional
  capacity in both Unguja and Pemba’s urban areas. Design anchored capacity enhancement with
  delivering infrastructure services to Zanzibar's urban areas with particular attention to retaining the status
  of a cultural heritage site in Stone Town. Tourism and visits to the World Heritage site formed a major
  source of Zanzibar's economic activity. Recognizing that Zanzibar had little experience with World Bank
  projects and had minimal capacity at the central and municipal levels, the project arranged for the Project
  Management Team (PMT) to be placed under the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP) rather than
  a sector agency or local government because the MOFP had some degree of staffing and oversight
  systems in place. The PMT would coordinate with six other government institutions (Zanzibar Municipal
  Council, the three Pemba Town Councils, the Stone Town Conservation and Development Authority or
  STCDA, and the Department of Urban and Rural Planning or DOURP) who would second technical
  people as subcomponent coordinators, provide technical inputs and supervision during implementation,
  and participate in monitoring of project activities. This Project Coordination Committee (PCC) would
  provide a regular forum to coordinate cross agency and sectoral issues. Designs and safeguards
  documents were completed for all works.

  The drainage subcomponent was appraised on preliminary designs and reviewed at implementation (see
  below). Design was informed by the ongoing drainage and solid waste plans and investments financed by
  the German KfW. In the case of Mizingani seawall, the Aga Khan Foundation had already rehabilitated a
  segment of the seawall and prepared a second phase. However, assessing the implementation risk
  associated with a new entity dealing with its first Bank-financed, multi-sectoral project (heritage, marine
  engineering, sanitation, drainage, electrical engineering, and others), with complex technical and
  safeguards issues such as construction in areas with sensitive heritage assets and dense informal
  settlements may have been underestimated (see below). The PMT was small (six staff), lacked practical
  engineering expertise, and together with other implementing agencies would have benefitted from more
  technical support and staff.

  Overall, the Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of the shortcomings in in
  the results framework and assessing the implementation risk of the project arising from a low capacity
  starting point (see Section 4 Efficacy above, and Section 9 M&E below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supervision team conducted 20 supervision missions accompanied by a team of multidisciplinary
 experts over the course of a 10 year implementation period, the original 5 years, and another 5 under the

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



 AF. Additional technical specialists were dispatched for hands-on support on the technical, fiduciary, and
 safeguards aspects of project. The Bank team reported intensive capacity building efforts to address the
 challenges faced by the weak institutional arrangements due to the limited capacity of ministries and
 agencies, the PMT without authority over the other ministries and agencies to overcome delays, and lack
 of in-house technical experts to support the other agencies in reviewing designs, or supervising works and
 consultancies. The Bank team used the AF to resolve these challenges. Technical experts and advisors
 were hired to support the PMT and appoint focal persons for each participating ministry/agency. Cross
 agency coordination improved. The institutional capacity and inter-agency coordination, initially weak due
 to staff turnover, gradually improved with resources provided under the AF. Candor in reporting was
 evident in proposing corrective measures that would be incorporated in the redesign of investments to
 ensure fiduciary and safeguards compliance. The Bank team assisted in ensuring adequate transition
 arrangements after closing by facilitating the financing of project preparation of the follow-on project, the
 BIG Z project.

 Procurement delays were encountered (see Section 10, Other Issues, Procurement below) because of the
 uneven quality of design consultants and contractors. The task team addressed challenges and worked
 with the government to restructure the project three times, including the AF. Strategic investments provided
 by the AF scaled up impacts. The following design changes improved project outcomes: (i) upgrading the
 original heritage structure of the Wete market would have demolished much of the original building but the
 Bank team and the PMT modified the design to preserve aspects of the original architecture; (ii) the gap in
 the upgraded section of the Mizingani seawall and promenade required pedestrians to walk in the traffic-
 clogged main road upon exiting the ferry so the Bank team and the PMT extended the seawall design to
 improve the pedestrians access. The contractor’s camp was also redesigned to a small park opposite the
 seawall to protect a historic banyan tree; and (iii) The ZMC demolished and compensated one house to
 provide access to a collection point in a dense settlement that collection vehicles could not access and
 where residents disposed their waste in the drain channel. Interventions in community engagement around
 solid waste management were piloted in the same dense area.

 Overall, the Bank performance of supervision is rated Satisfactory. The project was implemented over 10
 years from the original loan period and through the AF period with three extensions due to procurement
 and construction delays and the COVID-19 pandemic disrupting progress.

 With quality at entry rated Moderately Satisfactory and supervision rated Satisfactory, the overall quality of
 Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



a. M&E Design
 The two objectives were simply stated although the first one - to improve access to urban services was not
 specific enough to attribute the project interventions to the project outcomes. Not all indicators
 encompassed the expected outcomes of the project activities. Missing were indicators that would signify
 the impact of the project interventions in the lives and livelihoods of the residents of the urban areas and
 the outcomes associated with the improved physical environs of the local governments and the impact of
 the technical assistance to how these local governments delivered services. A Theory of Change was not
 required at appraisal but the Results Framework (PAD, Annex 1) showed the causal relationship of how
 the inputs would lead to outputs. The original Results Framework included four outcome indicators to
 achieve the two PDOs - three under the first objective and one for the second objective. The outcome
 indicator for the second objective was more of an output, rather than an outcome. There were no
 development outcome indicators associated with the tourist industry affected by the interventions under this
 second objective. Eight intermediate results (output) indicators under the original design — six under the
 Institutional Strengthening and Infrastructure Development in the ZMC Area component and two under the
 component for support to the Town Councils on Pemba Island were not sufficient to capture the
 contributions of the two components and its outputs to the PDO level outcomes. However, only one of the
 two PDOs "to conserve physical cultural heritage in Zanzibar " was specific. The first PDO - "to improve
 access to urban services." did not adequately characterize the expected outcomes of the project
 interventions. The components clarified that urban services in the PDO referred to storm water drainage,
 solid waste, street lighting; and reconstructing the Mizingani seawall in the Zanzibar Municipal Council area
 and small scale infrastructure projects in the three Pemba towns. Baseline data for the selected project
 indicators were collected at the beginning of the project and later traced during the midline and project
 completion evaluations. The acknowledged missing output indicators could not be included during project
 restructuring because the baseline data for the selected indicators had already been collected at the
 beginning of the project (ICR, paragraph 58).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented by a specialist consultant contracted from 2014 to 2019 followed by an Assistant
  Project Coordinator until project close. Baseline data for the selected project indicators were collected at
  the beginning of the project in 2011, a midline evaluation in 2019, and a final evaluation in December
  2020 (ICR, Annex 5). In addition to Results Framework indicators, the PMT used portfolio monitoring and
  contract management tracking systems to monitor physical and financial progress, resolve bottleneck
  issues, and track procurement and contract management performance. Weaknesses in the M&E
  framework were addressed during restructuring by: (i) adding a new outcome indicator, (ii) dropping three
  intermediate results indicators, (iii) adding five new intermediate results indicators, and (iv) rephrasing an
  original output indicator. A key weakness in M&E implementation was the lack of capacity or resources of
  partner institutions — ZMC Department of Solid Waste and Drainage, ZMC Engineering Department,
  STCDA, DOURP, and Pemba Town Councils. The PMT supplemented this gap, with targeted World
  Bank technical support and training to ensure the M&E system was functional and data collected.
  Beneficiaries were involved in community campaigns and shehia or ward meetings to share information
  and encourage good practice on proper use of the drainage facilities and waste collection points. Sign
  boards, fliers, and radio programs were used to increase awareness among the residents. A midline
  beneficiary survey in 2019 showed a significant positive change of behavior on waste disposal (ICR,
  paragraph 55).



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E monitoring reports were shared among implementing partner agencies in special forums. Two
  beneficiary satisfaction surveys were undertaken one at the midterm review and another at project
  completion in December 2020. The results of the midterm review, conducted in 2013, was used to justify
  the AF, extend the project closing date, reallocate funds, scale up activities, expand project scope. M&E
  was used to comply with safeguards policies, and allow for preparing corrective measures such as
  action plans, fund reallocation, and extensions of the closing date. The consolidated M&E data at project
  completion informed project outcomes and impact on beneficiaries as well as lessons for institutional
  arrangements in the follow-on project (BIG-Z).

  Overall, the quality of M&E design is rated Substantial, though with clear shortcomings. There were
  shortcomings evident in the broken linkages between the project interventions and the measurement of
  the outcomes. Not all the indicators were captured - e.g., enhanced capacity, impact from reduced
  floods (which is not the same as access), and development outcomes in lives and livelihoods of
  residents and visitors to the culturally preserved historic Stone Town. While these issues prevented a
  more granular insight into what impacts followed from the project investments, the various surveys filled
  some of the information gaps. Thus, the overall rating is Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: At appraisal, the project was classified as Category "A" based on
   the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the original activities. The project triggered three
   safeguards - Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs),
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
   (ARAP) were prepared. These documents recommended measures to mitigate the environmental and
   social impacts for the Mizingani seawall and the storm water drainage activities under the original
   project. Safeguard risks and cost implications were underestimated at preparation. First, the project
   financed waste collection points and vehicles, but assumed a 5 year use of the existing dumpsite. However,
   community opposition unrelated to the project closed the dumpsite during implementation. ZMC began open
   dumping of waste in Ng’ambo settlements causing an environmental and public health crisis. Second, the
   drainage subproject prepared an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) but underestimated the
   RAP costs and the number of project affected persons (PAPs). These escalated after a design review. The
   additional compensation costs coupled with insufficient financial resources of the government delayed the
   implementation of the drainage civil works. The project was restructured to provide for the use of IDA funds
   for compensation. and the AF included financing for the construction of a new landfill and related



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



  improvements to the waste management system. The Stone Town Conservation and Development
  Authority and other authorities handled three chance archaeological finds effectively.

  AF triggered three additional safeguards policies related to the scaled-up solid waste management
  investments: Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09),
  due to the location of the sanitary landfill in the buffer zone of a protected forest area and potential risks to
  public health and the environment posed by invasive species and pests. An Environmental and Social
  Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared to guide the
  preparation of site, and investment-specific safeguard instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs, and RAPs) and
  management of the environmental and social risks and impacts during the implementation. The project
  prepared necessary ESMPs through a consultative process which was regularly monitored. At AF, because
  the government lacked funds and land was unavailable for land-for-land-swaps, IDA credit was used to
  meet increased resettlement costs due to the updated drainage located in very dense urban areas. This
  resulted in a strong ownership of the RAP process by the local authorities. The government set up a three-
  committee structure for RAP implementation with an independent RAP monitor that led to a stringent
  oversight of the RAP process. AF funds were also used for rural land acquisition as part of a buffer zone for
  the Kibele landfill. The two added activities affected 605 persons and received adequate compensation with
  some delays. A supplementary RAP was prepared for the Kibele landfill buffer zone and affected an
  additional 167 persons, who were all fully compensated except for three persons who were not reachable
  despite all attempts to contact them. After the project closed, the government was notified of its obligation to
  pay these three PAPs in the future.

  The project reported five fatalities and three severe worksite accidents: (i) on April 3, 2016, a trespasser
  breached a security fence to the drainage work site, fell, and drowned; (ii) on November 8, 2019, two
  workers died after soil collapse; and (iii) on March 22, 2020, two motorcycle passengers crashed into a
  dump truck working near the Mwanakwerekwe Pond. After each incident, the PMT collected facts from all
  witnesses, reported back to the Bank, and discussed and agreed on corrective measures to be taken.
  Overall safeguards management, occupational health, and site safety were reported to have improved after
  these measures were taken.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: According to the ICR (paragraph 70), financial management was satisfactory
  throughout the project implementation. Staff consisted of qualified and experienced persons, with previous
  training in World Bank procedures. The project implemented a Financial Management and Accounting
  manual procedure, including internal audit. Reporting requirements were met.

  Procurement: Early procurement experienced some delays but improved over time. The procurement
  experience with the original package was satisfactory but delays were experienced after the 2018
  restructuring due to weaknesses in conducting and concluding quality and timely evaluations and
  increasing lack of capacity both from design consultants, and within the project management team as
  volume of work increased. Procurement challenges, reflected in poor bid evaluations, inadequate technical
  specifications and terms of reference, and responding to Bank comments were resolved after nearly two
  years. Procurement was rated satisfactory at project close after the capacity of the project management
  team was strengthened and additional staff recruited.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Bank performance at entry was
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory (see
                                                                                 Section 8a).
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR listed five lessons based on the operations and are slightly edited here for consideration by
other teams who may designing similar projects in the future:

      Effective institutional arrangements may require engaging key line ministries
         at a high-level steering committee. Early implementing capacity
         weaknesses were strengthened by additional capacity building through training. In this
         project, the implementing agency was under the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP)
         and reported directly to its Principal Secretary. Representatives from key line ministries and
         municipal councils were appointed including the Zanzibar Urban Municipal Council, three
         Pemba Town Councils, Stone Town Conservation and Development Authority, and the
         Department of Urban and Rural Planning. These appointments meant proactive engagement
         and established ownership by relevant sectors/agencies. Technical expertise from the
         different Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and other key stakeholders gave a
         platform to address technical challenges, provided oversight, and regular guidance. The
         Project Coordination Committee (PCC) was established at the beginning of the project and
         was functional throughout implementation. The PCC conducted regular site visits, monitored
         quality, and decided on changes to achieve the PDO. Involving representatives from
         these agencies was proven to be very useful for decision making, capacity building, and
         ownership of the project.

      Challenges to complying with environmental and social safeguards are best met with
         timely responses. In this project, the drainage works were located in densely populated
         urban areas. Occupational and public safety risks were high. Involuntary resettlement was


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



         unavoidable. Complex working environments and weak safeguards monitoring by the project
         team early on led to work sites safety issues hat were later resolved with effective preventive
         and corrective actions. For example, the seawall was no more than 10 meters from the
         Sultan’s Palace, an iconic heritage building of Zanzibar. Vibration at the work site could
         damage the building. The contractor's use of small hand drills instead of large drilling
         machines to prevent any potential damages was strictly enforced. STCDA and other
         authorities handled three chance archaeological finds effectively.

        Credit proceeds may be used to meet unforeseen increasing resettlement costs. In
         this project, IDA proceeds was allowed to be used to meet rising resettlement costs
         because appraisal estimates were not informed by detailed design or feasibility studies. The
         lack of government funding to finance the compensation for project affected persons, was
         met by using proceeds of the credit, not normally used in Bank-financed projects.
         Supervision was strengthened with extra oversight and institutional arrangements for RAP
         implementation. Detailed designs and feasibility studies at project preparation may best
         inform RAP costs. Experience in the region suggests that when detailed RAP costs are
         established during project preparation, it is often possible to reduce costs through design
         reviews during implementation.

        Effective stakeholder engagement processes may help address O&M needs of
         infrastructure assets. In this project, an O&M plan was prepared and discussed together
         with all stakeholders including the ZUMC, MOFP, and community representatives before the
         landfill was constructed to properly and sustainably operate the Kibele landfill.

        Adopting an urban design may help create and avoid encroachment of public
         space. In this project, an urban design approach was adopted to prevent the encroachment
         of and informal uses of public rights-of-way. After the drainage system investment was
         completed, an urban design approach with public space enhancement was proposed and
         implemented. In the Mizingani seawall project, after the contractors camp took over an area
         previously used for unorganized street parking, the space was secured and transformed to
         serve as a small public park around a historic tree, linked to the seawall, and prevented the
         return and encroachment of an informal car park.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise, provided a coherent picture of how the project was conducted and followed the
guidelines, except for exceeding the number of suggested pages (30 instead of 15). The report was internally
consistent and reasonably justified its ratings based on evidence referred to throughout the report although in
some cases, data was missing to support the claimed outcomes. This was particularly the case in achieving the
first objective. There were appropriate references to the outcomes of the project interventions but without the


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Urban Services Project (P111155)



specific data that would have strengthened these claims. The quality of evidence provided through the M&E
system was sufficient to provide a strong analysis of outcome except the lack of data mentioned earlier. The
annexes, particularly Annex 4, provided detailed analysis to strengthen the efficiencies of the project. The
report was results-oriented, highlighted qualitative results. Lessons were based on analysis of the evidence,
such as the use of a multi-sectoral Project Coordination Committee to represent the needs of various
sectors when working in a weak institutional capacity. However, there was no evidence to support the lesson
that preserving cultural heritage complemented urban infrastructure improvements to enhance development
outcomes. A shortcoming in the ICR is the lack of substantive discussion of the development outcomes from
the activities surrounding the preservation of cultural heritage in Stone Town although some aspects were
discussed elsewhere (Annex 4 and surveys) A minor shortcoming is in Annex 3 where project cost by
component is incompletely presented. The actual project costs figures in Annex 3 were different from the ones
presented in Table 1 on page 10. The Bank Task Team in their March 11, 2022 email to IEG clarified that
Annex 3 figures referred to financing by component or the total amount of the credit and were the same as
column 4 of Table 1. Actual spending or actual disbursements were presented in column 5 of Table 1.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
