     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022914

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P133620                                 MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Malawi                                  Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53430,IDA-56100,IDA-59220,IDA-      30-Jun-2018                                       173,908,518.80
 D0450,IDA-D1480

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2013                             30-Jun-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          32,800,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                         177,786,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                     173,908,518.80                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Katharina Ferl            Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                       Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 4) and the Financing Agreement of August 13, 2014
   (p.4), the objective of the project was “to strengthen Malawi’s social safety net delivery systems and
   coordination across programs”.




                                                                                              Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



   When the project received Additional Financing (AF) in November 2016, the PDO was revised to: “improve
   resilience among poor households and to strengthen Malawi’s social safety net delivery systems and
   coordination across programs”.

   This ICR Review will conduct a split rating due to the reduction in a key outcome target.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Nov-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Productive Safety Nets (appraisal estimate US$28.8 million; actual US$153.7 million;
   AF1 US$65.0 million; AF2 US$62.3 million): This component was to finance:

         i. Productive Community Driven Public Works: This sub-component was to finance public works and
             multiple community driven assets through investments in productive community driven public works
             and temporary employment. Community driven productive public works were to create assets and
             provide temporary employment in the same communities for multiple years designed to increase
             impact on household level incomes and food security and reduce households’ exposure to risks
             associated with climate change and other disasters.
         ii. Livelihoods and skills development: This sub-component was to finance livelihoods and skills
             development by providing grants for increasing household level incomes and assets through savings
             and investments in livelihood opportunities through Community Savings and Investment Promotion
             (COMSIP) groups. The grants were to promote investments which were to increase incomes and
             assets of households and reduce risks of food insecurity and promote better nutrition and health.
             The sub-component was also to finance training in nutrition, health and income generating
             enterprises.
        iii. Social Cash Transfer: This sub-component was to support capacity building, technical assistance
             and cash transfers targeted to the poorest, and most vulnerable labor constrained households. The
             sub-component was to strengthen the ongoing process for establishing a unified registry system and
             finance cash transfers to two more districts and cover 21,000 ultra-poor labor constrained
             households in the two districts of Dedza and Nkhata Bay.

   Component 2: Systems and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$4.0 million; actual US$7.7
   million; AF1 US$1.0 million; AF2 US$1.7 million): This component was to finance investments for
   strengthening unified registry, targeting and Management and Information (MIS) systems, capacity

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



  building, technical assistance, training, staff and equipment including for the Safety Net Platform under the
  Local Development Fund (LDF) Mechanism as well as for Social Cash Transfer (SCT).

  Component 3: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$8.0 million; actual US$14.46 million;
  AF1US$1.0 million; AF2 US$6.0 million): This component was to finance the supervision and coordination
  of Bank financed MASAF IV and project management at all levels including community and local levels.
  Also, the component was to finance capacity building for local authorities.

  When the project received AF in November 2016, the scope of the project was expanded to include all
  districts participating in the project in the systems building activities (ICR, p. 13), irrespective of the sources
  of financing of core programs (as other donors were financing cash transfers in various districts).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$177.7 million. The actual cost was US$173.9 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by:

       i. IDA credit (IDA-53430) in the amount of US$32.8 million (of which US$30.40 million was disbursed);
      ii. IDA grant (IDA-D0450) in the amount of US$68.22 million (of which US$67.00 million was
           disbursed);
     iii. IDA credit (IDA-56100) in the amount of US$6.76 million (of which US$6.73 million was disbursed);
     iv. IDA credit (IDA-59220) in the amount of US$22.32 million (of which US$22.34 million was
           disbursed); and
      v. IDA grant in the amount of US$47.68 million (of which US$47.41 million was disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any direct financial contributions.

  Dates:

        On March 26, 2015, the project received AF in the amount of US$ 75.0 million. The purpose of the
         AF was to fill the financing gap already identified at the time of appraisal and negotiations of the
         MASAF IV original project as a prerequisite for the achievement of the project development
         objectives. Given that the full amount of IDA financing required for MASAF IV was not available at
         the time of MASAF IV negotiations, the government requested, and the Bank agreed that an AF
         would be secured soon after MASAF IV effectiveness in order to ensure that the project activities
         could be achieved, and development objectives met. Also, the project was restructured to: i) modify
         the Results Framework to reflect the increase in scope; ii) modify components and cost; and iii)
         adjust implementation schedule.
        On November 8, 2016, the project received AF in the amount of US$70.0 million to expand the
         project scope (including original two and nine new districts under the social cash transfers program),
         irrespective of the sources of financing of core programs. Furthermore, the project was restructured
         to: i) modify the PDO to better capture the extensive work being done under the Productive Safety
         Nets component and to provide a reference point to the efforts of the emergency financing to
         support the vulnerable and improve their coping mechanisms in times of crisis; ii) revise the Results
         Framework to add a sub-indicator on the number of beneficiaries for the emergency Public Works
         Program (PWP) to the first outcome indicator “number of beneficiaries”, add “number of direct

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



            beneficiaries of Social Cash Transfers” and “number of direct beneficiaries of Social Cash
            Transfers“; and iii) change the closing date from June 30, 2018 to December 31, 2019.
           On June 21, 2018, the project was restructured to: i) reduce the target of the indicator “number of
            direct beneficiaries PWP Emergency Response” from 902,000 to 450,000 due to a reassessment
            based on information indicating that the emergency status had been mitigated; and ii) change the
            credit closing date for the second AF from June 30, 2018, to December 31, 2018 (the closing date of
            the whole project remained December 31, 2019).
           On April 10, 2019, the project was restructured to change the loan closing date for the second AF
            date from December 31, 2019 to September 30, 2020 to allow for the utilization of undisbursed
            resources towards the Social Cash Transfer Program (SCTP) under component 1. This balance was
            the result of a nine-month delay in the start-up processes of the SCTP during the rolling out of the
            Unified Beneficiary Registry (UBR), for which the exact implementation timing could not have been
            foreseen at the second AF design stage.
           On July 14, 2020, the project was restructured to extend the closing date of the first AF from June
            30, 2018, to December 31, 2018.
           On March 14, 2021, the project was restructured to extend the project closing date from March 31,
            2021 to June 30, 2021 to allow the completion of project activities, some of which experienced
            delays due to the Covid-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Malawi was a landlocked country with a narrow export base of agricultural products, mainly tobacco, and
was heavily dependent on imports and unpredictable aid flows. According to the PAD (p. 1) at the time of
appraisal, Malawi continued to experience extreme poverty and vulnerability, especially its rural population.
Over half of Malawi’s population lived in poverty. Approximately 22 percent of Malawi’s population was
considered ‘ultra poor’ and 52 percent lived under the poverty line.

Of the 3.4 million ultra-poor, 96 percent were dependent on agriculture, mainly tobacco and maize, for their
livelihood. Over half the total population of Malawi lives in poverty, with one of the lowest per capita
incomes in the world of approximately US$330.

While Malawi experienced strong economic performance during 2005-2010, poverty remained widespread
and concentrated in rural areas. Incomes also remained unevenly distributed showing inequalities in the
access to assets, services and opportunities across the population.

According to the PAD (p. 1), for almost two decades the government of Malawi tried to reduce poverty by
focusing on its flagship safety nets program of cash transfers through the Malawi Social Action Fund Local
Development Fund (MASAF-LDF) public works to 1.6 million of the poor. Social Cash Transfers
program supported by several Cooperating Partners (CPs) targeted the most vulnerable and labor

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



               constrained households. At the time of appraisal, Social Protection expenditure was only 2.6 percent of total
               government spending or 1 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), which was low even by
               regional standards, which average at 2.8 percent of GDP. Food and cash for work programs comprised the
               bulk of social protection programs and benefited approximately 10 percent of the population. Social
               Protection investments include public works and direct cash transfers, although the latter were
               comparatively small.

               However, these key programs worked in isolation of each other, and the delivery of safety nets remained
               fragmented and inadequate. Also, Social Protection benefits to the poorest citizens varied in their scope
               and effectiveness and most of the benefits remained insufficient, inefficient, underfinanced, limited,
               fragmented and donor financed.

               According to the PAD (p. 2) the government approved its Social Protection framework through the National
               Social Support Program (NSSP) in 2013. The NSSP outlined the need for better coordination, targeting and
               a rebalancing of expenditures to make way for a more effective SP system aiming to reduce poverty and
               enable poor households to move out of poverty and vulnerability.

               Malawi Social Action Fund (MASAF) III, the largest public works program in Malawi, which was
               implemented by the LDF mechanism, had reached approximately 1.6 million people through a total of 9,023
               public works subprojects to address various sector gaps including reforestation, roads, and irrigation.
               Furthermore, Community Savings and Investment Promotion (COMSIP) was the largest savings groups
               program in the country. Social Cash Transfers (SCT), The Malawi Mtukula Pakhomo, begun piloting cash e-
               transfers in eight districts.

               MASAF IV was designed as a second generation safety net system and built on 17 years experience of the
               Local Development Fund Mechanism (LDF). The aim was to build a Safety Net platform to harmonize,
               coordinate and deliver safety nets.

               The project’s objective was aligned with Malawi’s national strategic document (2018-2023), which envisions
               an inclusive and dynamic safety net system to better promote resilience.

               At project closing, the project was fully consistent with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               the Republic of Malawi FY21-FY25. In particular, the project was in line with the CPF’s Objective 3.3 to
               “increase access to shock-responsive safety nets” under Focus Area 3: “Strengthening Human Capital
               Development”. Under this objective, the CPF supports the transition towards an inclusive, shock responsive
               safety net system that safeguards assets and human capital while also adopting a livelihood strategy to
               help those in extreme poverty to graduate from social support (CPF, p. 31).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To strengthen Malawi’s social safety net delivery systems and coordination across programs

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as investing in
strengthening a unified registry, targeting and Management Information Systems (MIS) as well as building
capacity, providing technical assistance and training in addition to staff and equipment were to result in the
following outputs: councils implementing targeting instruments to select beneficiaries, information on the
project and project supported investments reaching beneficiaries, and targeting mechanism being adopted
and MIS and M&E being operational. These outputs were to result in the intermediate outcomes of
investments reflecting community needs and improving environment, access to social services being
improved as well as an integrated and functional national safety net delivery system being established. These
intermediate outcomes would plausibly contribute to the achievement of the PDO stated above.

Outputs and intermediate results:

      19 integrated and functional national safety net delivery systems were established, not achieving the
         target of 35 systems. The integrated system had several components: i) operational harmonized
         targeting mechanism; ii) operational MIS; iii) operational M&E system; and iv) harmonized targeting.
         35 local authorities had an operational MIS, achieving the target of 35 authorities. Furthermore, 35
         local authorities had an operational M&E system, achieving the target of 35 authorities. However, 19
         local authorities implemented harmonized targeting instruments to select beneficiaries, not achieving
         the target of 35 local authorities.
        35 local authorities with community safety net plans were developed in a participatory approach,
         achieving the target of 35 groups.
        19 local authorities had an operational harmonized target mechanism, not achieving the target of 35.
        1,192 extension workers were trained in different areas such as harmonized targeting, catchment
         management approach and environmental and social safeguards, and supported with equipment,
         surpassing the original target of 840 workers.
        98.1 PWP beneficiaries, 71.8 percent of livelihood and skills development (LiSD) beneficiaries, and
         87.3 of SCT beneficiaries were aware of project information and project supported investments, not
         achieving the target of 100 percent.

Outcomes:

      25.1 percent of PWP, 21.1 percent of LiSD, and 48.4 percent of SCT registered grievances related to
       delivery were addressed, not achieving the target of 100 percent.
      47.97 percent of people reported improvement in the natural resource and environment and its benefit
       to communities as a result of public work activities, not achieving the target of 60 percent of people.

The ICR also reported:

      The percentage of households that reported improved access to and use of small-scale irrigation
         increased from 5 percent in 2014 to 60 percent in 2021. This indicator lacked a target.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)




      4,510 projects including 4,605 hectares of re-forested, 5,989 roads constructed/maintained, and 773
       small scale irrigation schemes were completed achieving the target of 4,510 projects.
      530 groups/cooperatives accessed grants for investments, surpassing the target of 400 groups.

The achievement of the original objective was Modest since the project was not able to establish 35
integrated and functional safety net delivery systems. According to the ICR (p. 44), the establishment of an
integrated and functional national safety net delivery systems was attained in only 11 districts where the SCT
program was funded by MASAF IV, and in eight districts where the program was funded by other donors.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve resilience among poor households (new objective)

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as delivering cash
transfers through Social Cash Transfer (SCT), implementing Public Works Program (PWP) interventions, and
providing beneficiaries with a livelihoods support package were to result in the following outputs: providing
cash transfers and emergency cash transfers through SCT and PWP, implementing selected sub-projects
and building assets as well as providing livelihoods trainings, and grants. These outputs were to result in the
intermediate outcomes of households having at least three meals per day, being able to cope with external
shocks, and vulnerable households being fully covered by timely support during emergencies. These
intermediate outcomes were to result in the PDO stated above.

According to the ICR (p. 10) the project made the following assumptions: i) the political, governance, and
macroeconomic situation is adequately managed; ii) communities, public sector agencies, civil society
organizations, and the private sector have sufficient institutional capacity; iii) social assistance programs are
independent from political influences; and iv) multiple stakeholders cooperate in a productive manner.

Outputs:

      195,991 people were trained in livelihood development activities, surpassing the original target of
         5,000 people.
        28,720 people were trained in skill development activities, surpassing the original target of 5,000
         people.
        The number of Community Savings and Investment Promotion (COMSIP) and other livelihood groups
         increased from 4,457 groups in 2014 to 18,452 COMSIP and other livelihood groups in 2021,
         surpassing the target of 6,697 groups.
        97.5 percent of PWP beneficiaries and 100 percent of SCT beneficiaries received full entitlement,
         achieving the target of 100 percent.
        50.15 percent of households stayed in the program for a minimum of three years (PWP and SCT
         beneficiaries), not achieving the target of 80 percent.

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)




     The percentage of beneficiaries who felt that project investments/PWP reflected their needs increased
      from 74.1 percent in 2014 to 83.2 percent in 2021, surpassing the target of 80 percent.
     55.7 percent of households reported improved access to social services. This indicator lacked a
      target.
     85.9 percent of people engaged in diversified income-generating activities (off-farm and on-farm),
      surpassing the target of 80 percent.
     The percentage of households owning productive assets increased from zero in 2014 to 57.2 percent
      in 2021, surpassing the target of 25 percent.

Intermediate results:

     The percentage of households having at least three meals per day was 35.3 percent for PWP, 41.3
      percent for LiSD, and 45.3 percent for SCTP, not achieving the target of 70 percent. According to the
      Bank team (March 21, 2022) data were obtained from the October 2020 SCTP Technical Audit report.
      The report did not use a baseline endline comparison but interviewed beneficiary households on their
      current situation. The survey also found the following intermediate outcomes: About 84.3 percent of
      the sampled households indicated that they have acquired pigs after enrolling in the SCTP and
      receiving the transfers. The sampled households also indicated acquiring other livestock types such
      as chickens (82.6 percent), guinea fowls (82.8 percent), goats (79.5 percent), sheep (62.5 percent)
      and cattle (35.3 percent).
     6.7 percent of PWP beneficiary households, 8.4 percent of SCTP beneficiary households, and 7.9
      percent of LiSD beneficiary households reported that asset depletion was prevented as a result of
      transfers, not achieving the target of 40 percent of beneficiary households.
     The Increase in household savings was 43.8 percent, not achieving the target of 100 percent for old
      saving groups and 70 percent for new saving groups. According to the Bank team (March 21, 2022)
      the project was supposed to track the savings separately for old and new saving groups. However, the
      savings for both old and new groups were combined when reported.
     The percentage of participants being paid within the agreed time frame (two weeks for PWP and
      within a month for SCT) decreased from 50 percent for STCP participants and 54 percent for PWP
      participants to 24.4 percent of PWP participants and 45 percent of SCTP, not achieving the target of
      100 percent.

Outcomes:

     The first cycle of MASAF IV PWP used the MASAF III targeting approach and reached 535,635
      beneficiaries. Each of the successive cycle of the normal Public Works targeted 450,000 repeater
      beneficiaries. The number of beneficiaries, which was 307,876 beneficiaries in 2014, increased to
      985,635 beneficiaries (53 percent female) in 2021, surpassing the original target of 730,960
      beneficiaries (among 50 percent female). The total amount of actual transfers to regular PWP
      beneficiaries was US$57.4 million.
     450,000 beneficiaries received emergency response, not achieving the original target of 902,000
      beneficiaries.
     125,680 beneficiaries received Social Cash Transfers (SCTs), surpassing the original target of 21,000
      beneficiaries.




                                                                                              Page 8 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)




                                  The percentage of households with asset value above critical threshold increased from 33 percent of
                                   livelihood and LiSD, 25 percent for PWP, and 4.9 percent for SCT in 2014 to 71.3 percent for LiSD,
                                   62.8 percent for PWP, and 67.9 percent for SCT. This indicator lacked a target.

                            Achievement of the new objective was Modest since it was only partly achieved.



                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Improve resilience among poor households (revised outcome targets)

                            Revised Rationale
                            Outputs:

                                  195,991 people were trained in livelihood development activities, surpassing the revised target of
                                   22,000 people.
                                  28,720 people were trained in skill development activities, surpassing the revised target of 2,201
                                   people

                            Outcomes:

                                  The number of beneficiaries, which was 307,876 beneficiaries in 2014, increased to 985,635
                                   beneficiaries (53 percent female) in 2021, achieving the revised target of 985,635 beneficiaries (of
                                   which 50 percent female).
                                  450,000 beneficiaries received emergency response, achieving the revised target of 450,000
                                   beneficiaries.
                                  125,680 beneficiaries received Social Cash Transfers (SCT), surpassing the revised target of 123,711
                                   beneficiaries.

                            The achievement of the second objective with revised targets was Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



         Achievement of the first objective to strengthen Malawi’s social safety net delivery systems and coordination
         across programs (encompassing the whole project period), was rated Modest. Achievement of the second
         objective to improve resilience among poor households was also rated Modest under the original outcome
         targets. The aggregate achievement under the original outcome targets is consistent with a Modest rating for
         overall efficacy.




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Rationale: Under the revised outcome targets, the achievement of Objective 1 (to strengthen Malawi’s
         social safety net delivery systems and coordination across programs) was rated Modest; and the
         achievement of Objective 2 (to improve resilience among poor households) was rated Substantial under the
         revised outcome targets. The aggregate achievement under the revised outcome targets is consistent with a
         Substantial rating for overall revised efficacy.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

Both, the PAD and the ICR did not include a traditional economic analysis. The PAD (p. 18) only noted the
potential impact of the three key activities (Productive Public Works Program, Social Cash Transfer Programs,
and Community Savings and Investment Promotion) on poverty.

The ICR (p. 22) discussed different analyses that found that Malawi was able to improve the performance of its
social safety nets, providing a strong rationale for future investments. For example, the ICR stated that while in
2013, 21.5 percent of beneficiaries of social safety net programs were from the poorest quintile, it increased to
to 27 percent by 2016/17. Also, structural reforms have shown the effectiveness of safety nets in Malawi in
relation to other interventions: close to 35 percent of humanitarian expenditures in 2015–2016 was allocated to
administrative costs, compared to an average (weighted) administrative cost of 14 percent for safety net
programs.

Implementation efficiency:

According to the PAD (p. 24) the project’s administrative costs were estimated at 7.8 percent of total project
cost, which materialized, and which was comparatively low given that its predecessor’s (MASAF III)

                                                                                                         Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



administrative costs were about 10 percent. The ICR (p. 23) stated that the most recent technical audit of the
SCTP focused on the program’s operational costs across the 11 districts. The audit found that when combining
the operational and administrative costs, the 11 districts’ cost ranged between 9.5 percent and 18.8 percent
(with only two districts being above 15 percent), indicating very good efficiency by international standards.

However, the project’s implementation period was extended by a total of 36 months from June 30, 2018 to June
30, 2021. The extension allowed the project to address several issues such as: i) the longer process of
targeting the STCP; ii) the need to design and complete the Enhanced Public Works Program (EPWP) pilot; iii)
extension of project scope and iv) Covid-19 pandemic. The project also experienced several issues related to
FM and procurement such as procedural delays and timeliness of preparing and processing procurement
actions, frequent staff turnover and political instability impacted the efficiency of project implementation. The ICR
(p. 39) reported that institutional capacity remained limited in some areas of policy development and
implementation.

Given the lack of a traditional Economic analysis and implementation issues, including significant delays that
reduced efficiency, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original PDO/original outcome targets: Relevance of objectives was rated High. Both Efficacy and
efficiency were rated Modest, resulting in an outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Under the revised PDO/revised outcome targets: Relevance of objectives was rated High. Efficacy was rated
Substantial, and Efficiency was rated Modest, resulting in an outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, when a project’s objectives are revised, the final outcome rating is an
average of outcomes before and after the revision of objectives weighted by Bank disbursements under each
set of objectives.



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



 Under this project 31.3 percent of disbursements occurred under the original objectives (US$54.4
million/US$173.9 million) and 68.7 percent (US$119.5 million) under the revised objectives/revised outcome
targets.

• Based on the original objectives/outcome targets with an outcome of Moderately Unsatisfactory (score of 3)
and a disbursement weight of 0.31, the weighted outcome score is 0.93 (3 x 0.31).

• Based on the revised objectives/outcome targets with an outcome of Moderately Satisfactory (score of 4) and
a disbursement weight of 0.69, the weighted outcome score is 2.76 (4 x 0.69).

• The combined weighted average outcome score is 3.69 (rounded to 4) which corresponds to a Moderately
Satisfactory rating for overall outcome.



                                                   Original objectives/outcome Objectives/outcome
                                                   targets                     targets after 2018 revision
Rating Dimension
Relevance of Objectives                           High
Objective 1: To strengthen Malawi’s social safety
net delivery systems and coordination across      Modest                            Modest
programs
Objective 2: Improve resilience among poor
                                                  Modest                            Substantial
households

Overall Efficacy                                   Modest                           Substantial
Efficiency                                         Modest
Outcome Rating                                     MU (3)                           MS (4)

Disbursement (in USD million)                      US$54.4 million               US$119.5 million
Disbursement %                                     31.3 percent                  68.7 percent
Weight Value                                       3 x 0.31 = 0.93               4 x 0.69 = 2.76
Overall Outcome Rating                             Moderately Satisfactory (0.93 + 2.76 = 3.69)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcome can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: According to the ICR (p. 39), the government remains committed to the
objectives of the project and continues to collaborate with the World Bank through the new Social Support for
Resilient Livelihood Project (P169198, US$142 million). The new project aims to improve resilience among



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



the poor and vulnerable population and to strengthen the national platform for safety nets in the Republic of
Malawi.

External shocks: Macroeconomic shocks as well as climate change related disasters might put project
outcomes at risk. According to the ICR (p. 39) recent natural disasters and the Covid-19 pandemic tested
Malawi’s social safety nets. They showed that while the system was able to provide basic response, it lacked
more scalable capacity. Continuing to build capacity to be able to cope with future events will be critical for
ensuring the sustainability of project outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed as a second-generation safety net program and was in line with the Bank’s
  Country Partnership Strategy at the time of appraisal. Project preparation was fast with only six months
  from project conception to appraisal. Also, according to the ICR (p. 28) the project’s design was based on
  a long implementation history, analytical work and technical analysis.

  According to the PAD (p. 16), the Bank identified key risks including fraud and corruption, vulnerability to
  exogenous shocks (weather, fiscal and foreign exchange risk), and limited capacity at the local councils.
  The Bank team mitigated these risks by creating a strong linkage through the participation of
  communities, public sector agencies, civil society organizations, and the private sector to augment
  capacity. Furthermore, the Bank built capacity at the local level with other development partners and
  developed an intensive Information, Education and Communication (IEC) process to ensure transparency
  and accountability and allow for citizens to have full knowledge of MASAF activities. Also, the project
  aimed for regular and continuous monitoring of public works, independent verification and continuous
  audit for cash transfers.

  However, the Bank’s mitigation measures were not sufficient, and the project experienced challenges
  related to Financial Management and procurement. For example, irregularities were found in regard to
  capital expenses (materials and tools), and procurement actions were not prepared and processed in a
  timely manner (see section 10b) for more details.

  Also, the project had M&E design shortcomings discussed in section 9.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



 According to the ICR (p. 38) the Bank conducted regular and timely supervision missions. The Bank team
 filed 15 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) which reviewed the project candidly, identified
 implementation issues and provided actions to address them.

 The Bank team applied for AF to address a financing gap, which had already been identified during
 appraisal and a second AF to address an emergency situation arising from a drought.

 The ICR (p. 38) stated that the Bank conducted two technical assessments to continue the PWP and the
 country office’s procurement specialist provided training for procurement officers, which resulted in a
 network of government procurement specialists.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes
 was sound and reflected in the Results Framework.

 The original and revised objectives were clearly specified. The original objective was revised to better
 reflect the full extent of project interventions and expected outcomes. The extensive number of indicators
 (five PDO indicators and 29 intermediate outcome indicators) encompassed all intended outcomes.
 However, some indicators lacked a target such as PDO indicator 4 “percentage of households with asset
 value above critical threshold”. Also, PDO indicator 5 “establishment of an integrated and functional
 national safety net delivery system” included several elements of the system (i) operational harmonized
 targeting mechanism; ii) operational MIS; iii) operational M&E system; and iv) harmonized targeting
 instruments to select beneficiaries) making an assessment of achievement challenging. Furthermore, other
 indicators lacked a baseline, making it difficult to assess whether this achievement was an improvement
 (intermediate outcome indicator 1 “percentage of households having at least three meals”). Furthermore,
 some indicators would have benefitted from a clearer definition such as the difference between old and
 new saving groups under intermediate outcome indicator 16 “percentage increase in household level
 savings”.

 According to the ICR (p. 33), the local authorities were responsible for the regular monitoring and
 systematic reporting on the status of the implementation of public works activities. The National Local
 Governance Finance Committee (NLGFC) sector ministries were responsible for supporting the local
 council in developing appropriate M&E instruments and providing training and technical assistance. Also,
 the NLGFC was responsible for regularly consolidating the monitoring report from each district and
 conducting impact evaluations when required.



                                                                                                Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



 The project was to introduce annual technical public works reviews on sample public works sub-projects to
 evaluate the technical standards and planning process.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 34) the project conducted a baseline study in 2014, a mid-line survey in 2016,
  and an end-line evaluation in 2019. Other studies included a Beneficiary Assessment Study and annual
  technical audits for the SCTP.

  The ICR (p. 33) stated that the project conducted quarterly systematic results monitoring and updates
  towards the achievement of objectives. The project’s development of the UBR improved the monitoring of
  the beneficiary identification process for the SCTP and the EPWP as well as the evaluation of eligible
  households.

  However, according to the ICR (p. 33), the project’s M&E encountered limited capacity at the district level
  due to few and low skilled M&E staff.

  According to the Bank team (March 21, 2022), the project did not encounter any systemic M&E issues.
  The project’s M&E is likely to be maintained after project closure since it is being used by the new Social
  Support for Resilient Livelihood Project follow-on project.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 34), the government and Bank team used the project’s M&E data to assess
  progress towards achieving project objectives and inform decision making. Also, the project’s M&E was
  used to inform the design of the two AFs, financing needs, extensions, and helped to define the actions
  to address natural disasters and Covid-19 pandemic. However, the ICR (p. 34) also stated that the
  implementing agency was slow in using M&E to identify issues related to the implementation of the PWP
  at the local level.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.11
   (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

   According to the ICR (p. 35), the project developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF), Pest Management Plan (PMP), and Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ICR
   further stated that the EMSF for the project and the two AFS included adequate guidelines and procedures

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



  for assessing the environmental impacts. Furthermore, the ESMF provided guidance on how to reduce,
  mitigate, and offset adverse impacts and enhancing positive ones. The local authorities and communities
  were responsible for preparing environmental and social management plans (ESMPs), developing a
  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), as well as responsible for the overall screening and monitoring. The Bank
  provided support to staff at the district level to build capacity in safeguard monitoring since there were
  capacity issues to include safeguards as part of regular planning and implementation process.

  Furthermore, the Bank provided training to the National Local Government Financing Committee (NLGFC)
  to increase awareness of safeguards and environmental sensitivity. Also, the Ministry of Environmental
  Affairs and Climate Change conducted quarterly monitoring missions to assess the quality and
  effectiveness of the ESMPs.

  In regard to livelihood activities, Community Savings and Investment Promotion (COMSIP) was responsible
  for the oversight of environmental issues. The staff of COMSIP also received training to improve its
  environmental and social oversight activities.

  The project’s overall safeguards rating was Satisfactory at project closing.

  According to the ICR (p. 36) the project had a functioning grievance redress mechanism (GRM) in place.
  Beneficiary communities and individuals who felt that they had been unfairly excluded from the project had
  the opportunity to complain and channel their grievance for redress. When the project closed, the GRM had
  received 94 grievances of which 93 had been successfully resolved. However, this finding is not consistent
  with the results reported by the ICR under Objective 1.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 30), the project experienced Financial Management (FM) related issues,
  especially at the local district council’s level. As a result, the reporting system was changed from Interim
  Financial Reports (IFRs) to Statement of Expenditure (SoE), which limited disbursements to actual
  expenditures on a monthly basis instead of report-based disbursement with six months forecasting.
  Furthermore, the ceiling for the project’s designated account was set at US$ 5 million, which was too low
  and negatively impacted the timely release of the PWP sources which required over US$11 million for a
  single PWP cycle. In addition, district councils reported slowly on the use of resources and did not comply
  with the PWP procedures. Also, questionable expenses were identified, and the MOF had to refund on
  behalf of the councils. As a result, several modifications were made. For example, most irregularities were
  found in regard to capital expenses (materials and tools). As a result, the capital ratio was changed from
  60:40 to 80:20, which reduced the options for PWP sub-project types and might have compromised quality.
  Also, the project submitted several times audited financial statements after the due date.

  During project appraisal the FM’s risk rating was assessed as High due to cases of corruption and fraud in
  the country. To mitigate this risk, the project implemented fraud and anti-corruption measures such as a
  whistleblower arrangement. The project also cooperated with the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) to ensure



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



   that reported cases were investigated. As a result, government officers in local councils who had been
   suspected of mismanagement of public resources were prosecuted.

   According to the Bank team (March 21, 2022), external audits were undertaken every year during the
   project period. All external audit reports were unmodified except for one in 2017, which was related to
   some lack of documentation for expenses and some ineligible expenses at the district level. These were
   subsequently remedied, including through refunds from districts to the project account.

   The project’s FM rating at project closure was Moderately Satisfactory.

   Procurement

   The Procurement and Disposal Unit of the LDF-TST (later the NLGFC) was responsible for the project’s
   procurement. An Internal Procurement and Disposal Committee was responsible for overseeing the
   procurement function.

   According to the ICR (p. 37), the project faced several procurement related issues throughout
   implementation. These issues included the failure to enter documentation in Systematic Tracking of
   Exchanges in Procurement or updating the procurement plan. Also, procurement actions were not
   prepared and processed in a timely manner. Furthermore, the procurement unit experienced a high
   turnover of staff and insufficient capacity to manage the procurement activities appropriately. The project
   was not able to hire a procurement consultant to enhance the capacity of the NLGFC throughout its entire
   implementation. Also, at the local council level the project was not able to hire staff to fill procurement
   positions. According to the Bank team (March 21, 2022), the Bank team addressed this by putting
   continuous pressure on the implementing agency to address this issue. As a result, in early 2016 the
   implementing agency hired 35 locally-based project officers – one project officer in each district. In addition
   to that, an internship program run by the implementing agency provided more hand-on capacity in the
   districts. While the POs and the interns were not procurement specialists per se, especially the POs
   (seasoned professionals) reporting to the implementing agency, were of great help in alleviating
   coordination and management issues at district level.

   The project’s procurement performance at project closure was rated Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)



                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided useful lessons learned (p. 39-41), which were adapted by IEG:

        Linking different core programs that support livelihoods with each other is critical for
         helping the ultra-poor and vulnerable communities. In this project, beneficiaries of safety
         net programs (for example the SCT and PWP) were connected to other programs that aimed
         to enhance their skills, incomes, and livelihoods (for example LiSD/COMSIP) allowing for a
         wider approach to support the ultra-poor getting out of the poverty trap.
        Consolidating accounting and reporting requirements/procedures between different
         developing partners (DPs) would improve efficiency. The multiplicity of accounting
         procedures and requirements of different DP put a burden on project implementors at the
         district and national level. If a program wide e-payment system does not exist, the Integrated
         Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) should be used for financial recording,
         transactions, and reporting by local and national authorities.
        Communicating results and providing information about the GRM is critical for the
         sustainability of a program. In the case of the SCTP many beneficiaries are still not fully
         aware of important processes such as beneficiary targeting and selection procedures
         resulting in doubts of the fairness of the beneficiary list. Also, providing information about the
         GRM would allow communities to raise concerns.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and useful lessons learned
that can be applied to similar future projects. However, the ICR lacked internal consistency, such as stating
different components for the integrated and functional safety net delivery system (para. 40 vs. para. 42) and in
GRM results. Also, the ICR lacked conciseness with the main section reaching 41 pages. Furthermore, the ICR
did not include a traditional Economic analysis and reported on impacts and efficiency gains accruing to the
sector. The ICR is rated Substantial, but only marginally.




                                                                                                       Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MW-Strengtheni Safety Nets System-MASAF4 (P133620)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
