     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022824

1. Program Information



 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Nepal                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                        Approved Operations
 0                                         0

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P160792                                   Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61950                                28-Feb-2019                                       194,864,399.14

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2018                              28-Feb-2019
                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                        194,864,399.14                                           0.00




P168869_TBL
 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Nepal                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P168869                                  Nepal Fiscal and PFM Management DPC II ( P168869 )




                                                                                               Page 1 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61950,IDA-64400                        30-Jun-2020                                            99140708.21

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2019                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         99,140,708.21                                                0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC
 Fard



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDOs) of the Nepal Programmatic Fiscal and Public Financial
Management Development Policy Credit (II) were to support the Government to: (i) establish a framework to
move towards fiscal federalism; and (ii) improve the policy framework for public financial management at all levels
of government.

Objective One: Establish a framework to move towards fiscal federalism

Objective Two: Improve the policy framework for public financial management at all levels of government


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The programmatic series was structured around two pillars (policy areas): (i) establish a framework to move
towards fiscal federalism; and (ii) improve the policy framework for public financial management. Table 1 below
presents the policy actions and triggers for FPFM-DPC1 and FPFM-DPC2.

Table 1: Policy Actions and Triggers for FPFM-DPC1 and FPFM-DPC2

Prior Actions for FPFM-DPC1   Triggers in FPFM-DPC1         Prior Actions for FPFM-DPC2
PILLAR 1: Establish a Framework to Move Towards Fiscal Federalism



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



                                                                        PA2: The Cabinet has endorsed and
                                                                        submitted to Parliament the Federal
                                                                        Fiscal Procedures and Financial
                                                                        Responsibility Bill which governs budget
                                                                        execution and increases fiscal discipline
                                                                        and accountability.
                                   Trigger 1: The Parliament has
PA1:
                                   approved the Federal Financial
To implement fiscal federalism the Procedures Bill which provides
Parliament has approved the        guidance on budget execution.         PA3: “New” The Finance Act 2018 has
Intergovernmental Fiscal                                                 been enacted, which clarifies revenue
Arrangement Act which provides                                           allocation by amending: (i) provisions in
the legal framework for resource                                         Intergovernmental Fiscal Arrangement
allocation among the three tiers of                                      Act related to tax administration and
government.                                                              revenue assignment for motor vehicle
                                                                         tax, land and building registration fee,
                                                                         entertainment tax, advertisement tax;
                                                                         and (ii) provisions in the Local
                                                                         Government Operations Act related to
                                                                         the local tax base for property tax and
                                                                         land tax.
                                                                         PA5: “Changed to” All Local
                                     Trigger 2: Local governments
                                                                         Governments have established Local
PA4: The Parliament has              have (i) Established the Local
                                                                         Consolidated Funds and at least 25
approved the Local Government Consolidated Fund; and (ii)
                                                                         percent of Local Governments have
Operations Act - 2017, which will issued regulations to authorize
                                                                         delegated spending authority to the
govern the operation and             the Chief Administrative Office to
                                                                         Chief Administrative Officer within
management of local                  initiate spending within seven
                                                                         seven days of approval of the annual
governments.                         days of approval of the annual
                                                                         budget as certified by letters issued by
                                     budget by the local assembly.
                                                                         the Ministry of Finance.
                                     Trigger 3: The National Natural
PA6: The Parliament has              Resources and Fiscal
                                                                         PA7: The National Natural Resources
approved the National Natural        Commission has (i) adopted the
                                                                         and Fiscal Commission has (i) adopted
Resources and Fiscal                 framework for the calculation and
                                                                         the framework for the calculation and
Commission Bill which will govern devolution of two grants               devolution of the equalization grants
federal transfers to state and local (equalization and conditional) and and the conditional grants, and (ii)
governments.                         has made the formula for the
                                                                         included forest cover as one of the
                                     equalization grant public; and (ii)
                                                                         indicators in the motor vehicle tax
                                     issued climate resilient
                                                                         revenue sharing formula between Local
                                     infrastructure investment
                                                                         Governments and Provincial
                                     guidelines to the sub national
                                                                         Governments to mitigate carbon
                                     governments.
                                                                         emissions.

PA8: The National Women             Trigger 4: National Women           PA9: “Changed to” The 2017 Federal
Commission has adopted an           Commission has (i) established a    Guidelines for Gender Responsive
integrated platform that provides a 24-hour Helpline manned by          Budgeting have been issued to: (i) the
comprehensive response system trained staff; (ii) established a         Provincial Governments through a letter

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



and coordinates and expands   case processing system to track by the Ministry of Finance and (ii) the
access to services for Gender service provision; and (iii) issued Local Governments through a letter by
Based Violence cases.         protocols and guidelines for        the Ministry of Federal Affairs and
                              survivor support, case              General Administration.
                              prioritization and service access.
PILLAR 2: Improve Policy Framework for Public Financial Management
                                     Trigger 5: To strengthen state
                                     and local governments’ public
                                     financial management, (i) the
                                                                           PA11: “Changed to” To strengthen the
                                     Local Governments have
                                                                           PFM framework: (i) Two-thirds of all
PA10: To strengthen public           adopted the Local Finance
                                                                           Local Governments have adopted
financial management systems, Procedures Bill and its directives
                                                                           Budget Management Legislation
the MoF has: (i) integrated all      and the Local Administrative
                                                                           governing their own budget processes
public financial management          Revenue Bill and its procedural
                                                                           as certified by a letter issued by the
systems onto one platform - Public directives; and (ii) to increase
                                                                           Ministry of Federal Affairs and General
Financial Management                 transparency and support
                                                                           Administration; and (ii) the Financial
Information System and (ii)          citizens’ engagement the
                                                                           Comptroller General’s Office has made
provided access to the PFMIS to government has instituted a
                                                                           the consolidated report of Local
all federal ministries.              system of public disclosure of
                                                                           Governments’ expenditure publicly
                                     local government expenditure
                                                                           available.
                                     reports by making them available
                                     on the website of the FCGO’s
                                     Office.
                                     Trigger 6: To ensure budget
                                     realism at the local level, the local
PA12: To strengthen budget
                                     governments’ council has              PA13: “Changed to” The National
realism: (i) the Recipient has
                                     mandated the preparation of a 3- Planning Commission has issued MTEF
issued guidance to the federal
                                     year MTEF in line with the Local guidelines as part of the Plan
ministries to guide their
                                     Government Development Plan. Formulation Guidelines for Provincial
preparation of the draft three-year
                                                                           Governments and Local Governments
MTEFs for the FY2019 budget
                                                                           that take into account sustainable
cycle; and (ii) the National Natural
                                                                           development goals including climate
Resources and Fiscal
                                     Trigger 7: The Cabinet has            change.
Commission has issued its circular
                                     endorsed and submitted to
to the local governments to guide
                                     Parliament the Fiscal
their preparation of the annual
                                     Responsibility and Budget
budgets, to be part of the Local
                                     management Bill to ensure fiscal
Government Development Plan
                                     discipline and increase
                                     accountability (merged into PA1).
PA14: To improve budget              Trigger 8: To strengthen              PA15: To strengthen expenditure
execution, the MoF has: (i) issued expenditure control: (i) the            controls (i) the Cabinet has endorsed
a decree which requires all new Financial Comptroller General              and submitted to the Parliament the
aid funded and national priority     Office has adopted the new            Audit Bill 2018; and (ii) the Ministry of
projects to have secured project internal control guidelines (2018); Finance has approved the new internal
filter clearance for issuance of     and (ii) the cabinet has submitted control guidelines.
budgetary funds; (ii) adopted the the 2018 Audit Bill to the
System for Automatic Spending

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



Authorization and Program          Parliament for approval.
Approval for all spending units
which will assist in budget
execution from day one of new
fiscal year; and (iii) adopted a
system of payments by account
payee only to expedite payments.
                                   Trigger 9: To strengthen disaster
                                   management response and
PA16: The Parliament has
                                   initiate disaster risk reduction
approved Disaster Risk Reduction
                                   actions, the federal government
and Management Act - 2017,
                                   has (i) established the National
which will govern coordination and                                   PA17: The Ministry of Federal Affairs
                                   Disaster Risk Reduction and
management of all activities                                         and General Administration have issued
                                   Management Centre; (ii)
pertaining to disaster                                               disaster management policy guidelines
                                   approved the disaster
management, disaster risk                                            to local governments taking current risk
                                   management national policy and
reduction, disaster recuperation                                     profiles and future climate change into
                                   plan; and (iii) issued disaster
and disaster response as well as                                     consideration.
                                   management policy guidelines to
monitoring and mitigation
                                   state and local governments,
measures on climate change and
                                   taking current risk profile and
global warming.
                                   future climate change into
                                   consideration.
                                                                     PA19: For revenue data collection: (i)
                                                                     the Ministry of Finance has established
PA18: The MoF has established Trigger 10: The MoF has
                                                                     a Revenue Management Information
the Revenue Management             established the Revenue
                                                                     System at the Provincial Government
Information System at the federal Management Information System
                                                                     level to provide real time information on
level to provide real time         at the state and local level to
                                                                     revenue collections; and (ii) the Office
information on revenue             provide revenue collection
                                                                     of the Auditor General has approved a
collections.                       information.
                                                                     template for revenue data collection at
                                                                     the Local Government level.
c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

This Programmatic Development Policy Operation of two operations was approved for SDR137.3 million
(equivalent to USD 200 million) under the first operation (FPFM-DPC1) on February 20, 2018, and SDR 72.2
million (USD 100 million) under the second operation (FPFM-DPC2) on May 10, 2019. The actual amounts
disbursed were USD 194.9 million under DPDM-DPC1 and USD 99.1 million under FPFM-DPC2. The
difference between the disbursed and the approved amounts is explained by fluctuations in the SDR to USD
exchange rates between the time of project approval and the time of disbursement.

FPFM-DPC1 and FPFM-DPC2 were both financed through the International Development Association (IDA-
61950 and IDA-64400).

FPFM-DPC1 and FPFM-DPC2 closed as scheduled on February 28, 2019, and June 30, 2020, respectively.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 In 2015, Nepal was struck by a severe earthquake which took 9,000 lives and significantly damaged critical
 infrastructure. This was compounded by India's imposition of a trade blockade which prohibited Nepal from
 importing goods from India, leading to an acute shortage of fuel, raw materials and other essential supplies.

 Meanwhile, there was an ongoing transition from a centralized government to a three-tier federal structure
 and a worsening situation with budget under-implementation, most notably, as it pertained to capital
 spending. This was a cause for concern, especially in light of the significant reconstruction needs following
 the earthquake. Government revenues exceeded budget expectations due to one-off telecommunication
 sector collections. The fiscal accounts were consequently in a surplus position for a fourth consecutive year
 and net public debt fell to 22 percent of GDP in FY 2015/16, down from 34 percent of GDP in FY 2011/12.

 The country's exports of primary commodities and manufactured goods, as well as imports, fell due to the
 trade disruption with India along with under-implementation of public capital spending. Growth in remittances
 declined to 1 percent in FY2015/16, from an annual rate of 15 percent, on average, over the preceding five
 years, due to weak economic growth in oil-producing host countries. The weakening of domestic economic
 conditions led growth in Nepal's real gross domestic product (GDP) to decelerate year-on-year to 0.6 percent
 in FY2015/16 in mid-July.

 Nepal’s reconstruction efforts began in FY2017, with gross fixed capital formation rising from 28.2 percent of
 GDP in FY2016 to 37.3 percent of GDP in FY2017 and to 39.5 percent of GDP in FY2018. The fiscal balance
 fell into deficit, leading total public debt to rise to 26.5 percent of GDP in FY2018, from 24.1 percent of GDP
 in FY2016. With additional staff and facilities required for fiscal devolution, total government recurrent
 expenditures increased by 3.3 percentage points of GDP in FY2018. Revenue sharing from the federal to the
 provincial and local governments, as well as from the provincial to local governments started in FY2019.

 The objectives pursued by this program were responsive to the country context which envisaged a shift in the
 responsibility for delivery of public services to sub-national levels, requiring devolution of functions,
 functionaries, and funds. To do so, adequate inter-governmental institutions for fiscal devolution needed to
 be established in earnest, and the devolution of expenditure and revenue required an adequate public
 financial management system at both the provincial and the local government levels.

 Relevance to Government Priorities. The program objectives were relevant to Nepal's development
 priorities.

       Nepal's new constitution envisaged a shift in responsibility for public service delivery to sub-national
        levels, which implied a devolution of functions, public servants and funds. At the time of the appraisal,
        political devolution had largely taken effect, with elected officials in their respective functions across all
        three tiers of government. Administrative devolution was also underway with the approval of the
        Employees Adjustment Act in 2017 through the reallocation of 100,000 existing public servants across
        the three tiers of government. The staffing needs of local governments remained unmet, however.
        Sub-national governments required reliable access to public revenues in order to execute their
        spending responsibilities, along with an effective public financial management (PFM) framework to
        ensure that spending was financed adequately, executed efficiently, and with transparency and


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



       accountability. It was therefore necessary for fiscal devolution to be initiated in parallel to the political
       and administrative devolution that had already been initiated.
      As such, designing inter-governmental fiscal arrangements, developing consensus on such designs,
       enacting umbrella laws, and operationalizing these was needed. While the constitution provided the
       broad architecture for fiscal federalism, the details of the legal framework, intergovernmental fiscal
       relations, such as the unbundling of expenditure responsibility, sharing of federal revenues, assigning
       of revenue-raising powers, adoption of criteria for various grants and transfers, limits of sub-national
       borrowing and so on, had to be agreed upon, legislated and implemented.
      Similarly, while a PFM Information System (PFMIS) existed at the federal government level, such a
       system needed to be institutionalized at the provincial and local government levels as well. The
       PFMIS, which was used at the federal government level, had to be made operational in all provincial
       and local governments such that it delivers reliable and timely fiscal information at all levels of
       government.
      The reforms in fiscal devolution and PFM pursued by this programmatic development policy series
       were also consistent with the government's three-year periodic plan and its 2030 long-term strategy.

Relevance to Bank Group-supported Strategy. The program objectives were consistent with the Bank
Group-supported strategy in Nepal.

The strengthening of Nepal's public institutions constituted one of the three pillars of the Country Partnership
Strategy FY2014-2018, which included support for fiscal devolution, improvement of PFM across all three
levels of government and the restructuring of civil service administration. The DPO series was consistent with
the ongoing World Bank-supported program in Nepal, which included, the Integrated Public Financial
Management project financed by the Multi-donor Trust Fund, the Federalism Implementation Support
Platform and the Federalism Capacity Needs Assessment which provided the building blocks required to lead
the transition to fiscal federalism and ensure that the reforms implemented were sustained over time.




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

There were nine PAs under Pillar I and 10 PAs under Pillar II. There were changes made to four PAs for
FPFM-DPC2 relative to their triggers in FPFM-DPC1, namely, on PA5, PA9, PA11 and PA13. Moreover, PA3
was added to FPFM-DPC2, with no trigger associated to it.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar I - Establish a framework to move towards fiscal federalism

      PA1 established the legal framework which assigned expenditure responsibilities, revenue-raising
       powers, intergovernmental transfers and the authority to borrow for sub-national governments to
       borrow. Furthermore, this PA established an intergovernmental fiscal council tasked with coordinating
       fiscal relations across the three tiers of government. This PA is rated Satisfactory as it lays out the
       legal framework required across the three tiers of government for proper fiscal management.
      PA2 consolidated the budgeting process which includes the preparation of macroeconomic forecasts,
       multi-year plan projections, budget proposals and prioritization, budget execution, accounting and

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



    reporting, as well as implications for extra-budgetary funds, if any. This was intended to replace the
    ad-hoc Financial Directives which were in place prior to the enactment of the law. This PA is rated as
    Moderately Satisfactory as it induced through the passage of a law in Parliament, the voluntary
    submission of budget preparation and execution documents rather than a mandatory submission of
    these documents.
   PA3 established the allocation of revenues for six taxes (i.e., motor vehicle tax, land and building
    registration fee, entertainment tax, advertisement tax, property tax and land tax) which, as per the
    Constitution, were to be shared by the provincial and local governments. The amendments to the
    Intergovernmental Fiscal Arrangement Act and the Local Government Operations Act clarified the
    allocation of revenues for six taxes which were deemed concurrent (i.e., shared by Provinces and
    local governments) as per the Constitution. These taxes include: (i) land and building registration fee,
    levied by provinces and collected by local entities; (ii) entertainment tax, levied by provinces and
    collected by local entities; (iii) advertisement tax, levied by provinces and collected by local entities;
    (iv) motor vehicle tax, levied and collected by provinces to help incentivize a reduction in carbon
    emissions; (v) property tax levied and collected by the local government and (vi) land tax also levied
    and collected by the local government. The amendments, effected through the Finance Act 2018,
    require local entities to deposit 60 percent of the tax collected from (i), (ii), and (iii) at their local
    reserve funds and the remaining 40 percent to provincial reserve funds every month. Additionally, the
    amendments require the creation of the provincial divisible fund for the allocation of the tax collected
    from (iv), whereby 60 percent will be deposited at the provincial reserve fund and 40 percent at the
    local divisible fund. Funds from the local divisible fund will be allocated to the various local
    governments as per formulas developed by the National Natural Resources and Finance Commission
    (NNRFC) and deposited at local reserve funds every month by provincial governments. The
    amendment also clarifies the tax base for the property tax and land tax (levied by local government),
    which the Constitution allocates to local governments under the Local Government Operations Act.
    Given the fact that this PA established the revenue allocation across provincial and local government
    for six taxes, its relevance is rated Satisfactory.
   PA4 mandated the creation of local consolidated funds with provisions regarding the types of deposits
    for the fund. The provisions of this Act effectively ended the existing practice of off-budget activities
    that limited the transparency of funds use. The LGO Act also established institutional processes for
    local governments with regard to tax policy, budget prioritization, expenditure ceilings, spending
    authority, etc. Relevance of this PA is rated Satisfactory as it made a significant contribution to the
    achievement of the objective by establishing guidelines for administrative processes and for tax
    policies for local governments.
   PA5 sought to ensure that local governments relied on local consolidated funds and provided the
    spending authority to the Chief Administrative Officer within seven days of approval of the annual
    budget. PA5 was intended to ensure that the Local Government Operations Act 2017, which
    mandated the creation of local consolidated funds and which was supported by PA4, was effectively
    relied upon by local governments to enhance transparency and accountability. As such, relevance of
    PA5 is rated Satisfactory.
   PA6 established the National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission (NNRFC) as an independent
    body tasked with: (i) advising the government on the distribution of revenue and grants; (ii) overseeing
    the use of the country's natural resources as well as the choice of investments on the extraction of
    these natural resources; and (iii) resolving disputes that may arise among the different tiers of
    government with respect to either revenue and grant allocation and/or uses of natural resources
    and/or investments in natural resources. The NNRFC would facilitate the country’s governance over
    natural resource revenues. It would also help resolve disputes if they were to arise. The creation of


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



       the NNRFC is a key contribution toward establishing a framework to move towards fiscal federalism
       and as such, its relevance is rated Satisfactory.
      PA7 mandated the NNRFC to establish the equalization formula for fiscal transfers and conditional
       grants. This would provide clarity and predictability with regard to the allocation of transfers and
       conditional grants from the federal government to provincial governments. Furthermore, the obligation
       to maintain a certain level of forest cover would help offset some of the carbon emissions from
       vehicles from which vehicle taxes are being collected. The relevance of PA7 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA8 institutionalized an integrated platform at the National Women's Commission to handle gender-
       based violence cases. While important for broader development goals, it is not clear how this PA
       contributes to the achievement of the objective and as such, is rated as Unsatisfactory.
      PA9 ensured that the gender-responsive budgeting (GRB) guidelines used by the federal government
       during budget preparation were adopted by provincial and local governments. This PA supports the
       achievement of the objective to move towards fiscal federalism by ensuring the adoption of gender-
       responsive budgeting in all three tiers of governments. As such, its relevance is rated Satisfactory.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar II - Improve the policy framework for public financial
management at all levels of government

      PA10 required multiple budget management systems to be streamlined under a public financial
         management information system (PFMIS) which can generate real-time data on actual spending by
         the federal government. Given the large reconstruction costs imposed by the earthquake and the
         upward pressure on the public sector wage bill through fiscal devolution, a streamlined database
         providing real-time data on actual spending by the federal government was crucial to ensure that
         expenditures remained on track and that there was sufficient oversight by authorities. As such, the
         relevance of this PA to the achievement of the objective is rated Satisfactory.
        PA11 sought the adoption of budget management legislation (i.e., the Local Budget Appropriations
         Act, the Local Financial Procedures Act and the Local Finance Act) so that local governments could
         access relevant fiscal data and generate consolidated reports in a timely manner which could be
         made public for greater transparency. Given the fact that this PA only targets FY2019, the relevance
         of this PA is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
        PA12 mandated the preparation of medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEFs) at the federal
         government level and provided guidance to local governments on the preparation of their annual
         budgets. This PA was intended to support the sustainability and predictability of federal fiscal
         accounts over time and ensure that the preparation of annual budgets by local governments
         adequately responded to local priorities within the budget envelope that was available to them. As
         such, the relevance of this PA is rated as Satisfactory.
        PA13 mandated the National Planning Commission to share MTEF guidelines with provincial and
         local governments, which would include aggregate expenditure and revenue projections for two years
         beyond the ongoing fiscal year, along with sectoral plans, the achievement of the UN sustainable
         development goals and climate change considerations. While this PA sought to promote the
         sustainability and predictability of provincial and local governments' fiscal accounts over time, the fact
         that it did not impose the adoption of the MTEF guidelines by sub-national governments, warrants a
         Moderately Satisfactory rating on the relevance of this PA. Furthermore, the ICR does not elaborate
         on the substance of the MTEF guidelines which would promote the sustainability and the predictability
         of sub-national governments’ fiscal accounts over time.
        PA14 required the adoption of the following budget execution measures: (i) a system to streamline the
         budget approval and spending approval process such that funds are available from the very first day

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



          of the new fiscal year for all spending units; (ii) a system of payments by account-payee checks only
          to expedite payments; and (iii) the issuance of funds to aid-funded and national priority projects only
          after they had obtained project-filter clearance certifying that they have adhered to the pre-requisites
          for project implementation. This PA aimed to improve the budget execution rate for sub-national
          governments and increase the transparency in local government spending by making the
          consolidated budget execution data available in the public domain. The relevance of this PA is rated
          as Satisfactory.
         PA15 sought to improve expenditure controls, most notably, through annual expenditure audits across
          all three tiers of government. The relevance of this PA is rated as Satisfactory as expenditure audits
          are expected to improve public financial management.
         PA16 required the enactment of the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act to manage and
          coordinate across all government tiers all activities pertaining to disaster management, disaster risk
          reduction, disaster recuperation, and disaster response, as well as monitoring and mitigation
          measures to combat climate change and global warming. Relevance of this PA to the achievement of
          improving the policy framework for public financial management is rated Satisfactory.
         PA17 provided guidance to local governments on the passage of local level laws on disaster
          risk management, the creation of coordinating committees and the establishment of disaster
          risk management funds at the local level. These measures were essential given Nepal's vulnerability
          to natural disasters and the need for local government to have adequate funds and the ability to rely
          on such funds if they are struck by natural disasters. The relevance of this PA is rated Satisfactory.
         PA18 established a Revenue Management Information System at the federal level, which would be
          essential for budget execution and budget preparation, as well as the timely information about
          deviations between revenue collections and budget targets to inform spending, revenue collection and
          borrowing decisions. As such, the relevance of this PA to the achievement of the objective to improve
          the policy framework for public financial management is rated Satisfactory.
         PA19 established a Revenue Management Information System at the provincial and local government
          levels, for budget execution and budget preparation, as well as the timely information about deviations
          between revenue collections and budget targets to inform spending, revenue collection and borrowing
          decisions. The relevance of this PA is rated Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program included 13 Results Indicators (RIs). Pillar included six RIs which were associated to all PAs under
Pillar 1. Pillar 2 included seven RIs which were associated to all PAs under Pillar 2. (Table 1)

RI1 (associated with PA1, PA2, PA3, PA4, PA5, PA6, PA7) (share of the education budget devolved to the
provincial and local governments) has a target of at least 60 percent of the education budget being devolved to
provincial and local governments. The education budget constitutes one of the key spending areas in which local
government knowledge of local preferences could be expected to lead to preference matching and allocative


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



efficiency and is consequently a type of public spending that is often devolved to sub-national governments. The
increase in the share of the education budget devolved to the provincial and local governments would therefore
be one of the key result indicators to measure the extent of the transition to fiscal federalism as it pertains to
public spending on education. The indicator was well defined. Data were available to measure achievement of
the target. This RI associated to the above-mentioned PAs measures progress toward the achievement of the
objective as the devolution of the education budget would allow sub-national governments to be responsible for
delivering education services to their populations. (relevance of RI1=S)

RI2 (associated with PA4, PA5) (consolidated expenditure produced on an annual basis, one fiscal year prior to
the budget) establishes a target for consolidated expenditure statements being produced for all three tiers of
government and for these to be submitted to Parliament along with the annual budget. (relevance of RI2=S)

RI3 (associated with PA1, PA2, PA3) (own revenue sources of provincial and local governments increases by at
least 10 percent) measures the improvement in the provincial and local governments' ability to raise own source
revenue. This RI measures the capacity of provincial and local governments to generate own source revenue to
support the delivery of public services. The indicator was well defined, had a clear target and had data available
to measure achievement of the target. This RI associated to the above-mentioned PAs measures progress
toward the achievement of the objective through a clear and credible results chain as it monitors sub-national
governments’ own-source revenues. (relevance of RI3=S)

RI4 (associated with PA1, PA2, PA4, PA5, PA6, PA7) (share of federal transfers spent by local governments)
measures the extent to which federal transfers was spent by local governments in delivering public services.
This RI is difficult to monitor over time given the fungibility of these resources. This RI measures sub-national
governments’ capacity to execute expenses through federal government transfers. Since it does not measure
the quality of public service provision at the sub-national government level, and the funds are fungible and not
earmarked to the delivery of public services, the relevance of this RI is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.
(relevance of RI4=MU)

RI5 (associated with PA4, PA5) (equalization and conditional grants in FY20 budget made as per the
formula) measures whether or not equalization and conditional grant payments were based on the established
formula by June 30, 2020. This RI is clearly defined and can be monitored over time. This RI associated to the
above-mentioned PAs measures progress toward the achievement of the objective of adhering to the
equalization and grants formula. (relevance of RI5=S)

RI6 (associated with PA8, PA9) (number of provinces that have adopted gender-responsive budgeting) was
changed to align with the change in PA5 under FPFM-DPC2. This RI associated to PA8 and PA9 measures
progress with regard to the adoption of gender-responsive budgeting, which was previously adopted by the
federal government, by provincial governments. This supports the achievement of the objective of establishing a
framework to move towards fiscal federalism by allowing gender-responsive budgeting guidelines to be applied
by provincial governments through the budgeting process in order to promote greater gender equality in the
policies and measures which are being proposed and adopted by provincial governments every fiscal year.. It is
not clear from the ICR document how the adoption of gender-based budgeting is measured in actual fact and as
such, the relevance of this RI is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. (relevance of RI6=MS)

RI7 (associated with PA10, PA11) (consolidated public expenditure data made publicly available within 6 months
of the end of FY) measures the extent to which provincial and local governments have adopted the PFMIS that
is used by the federal government and that consolidated public expenditure data are publicly available to
strengthen transparency and accountability in public financial management. This RI tracks the degree of


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



budgetary transparency of sub-national governments through the public disclosure of expenditure data, thereby
promoting accountability to the population. While the ICR states that “The Treasury Single Account, a
component of the platform, also captures expenditure data at the provincial level”, it is not clear how reliance on
PFMIS by local governments can be verified. For this reason, the relevance of this RI is rated Moderately
Satisfactory. (relevance of RI7=MS)

RI8 (associated with PA12, PA13) (number of provinces adopting the MTEF guidelines) measures the
achievement with regard to the adoption of MTEF guidelines in the seven provinces in Nepal . The adoption of
MTEF guidelines is one input along the results chain toward improving the policy framework for public financial
management, and as such, does not measure the actual output or the outcome associated to the PAs. A result
indicator which measures the extent to which provinces have implemented MTEF guidelines would have been
an appropriate result indicator as it would have measured progress in the adoption three-year spending plans by
provincial governments, which would have led to benefits such as the allocation of resources to priority services,
the more efficient planning and management, a framework within which policy proposals can be assessed, more
transparency in government, a reduction in roll-overs, and a clear demonstration of how fiscal targets will be
met, which would have contributed to the objective of improving the policy framework for public financial
management. As such, this RI is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI8=MU)

RI9 (associated with PA15) (deviation between consolidated revised budget estimates and actual consolidated
spending) monitors the deviation between consolidated revised budget estimates and actual consolidated
spending to measure the efficacy of expenditure controls. This RI is not well defined, nor can it be easily
monitored over time. In order to measure progress toward improving the policy framework for public financial
management, the RI should have focused on measuring the deviation between the estimated and actual
consolidated spending across the provincial and local governments, rather than across all three tiers of
government. Furthermore, as indicated in the ICR document, revised budget estimates data were not available
for all local governments. This would have imposed a significant impediment to measuring this RI over time. As
such, this RI is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. (relevance of RI9=MU)

RI10 (associated with PA1, PA2, PA4, PA5, PA10, PA11, PA14) (proportion of federal capital expenditure
undertaken in last quarter) measures the share of total capital expenditures undertaken by the federal
government in the last quarter of the fiscal. The last quarter is being used as a reference period given the fact
that a substantial amount of capital expenditures is incurred in the last quarter of a given fiscal year, averaging
59.9 percent of actual spending over the FY15-FY19 period. This RI is clearly defined and can easily be
monitored over time. This RI associated to the above-mentioned PAs measures progress toward the
achievement of the objective through a clear and credible results chain from the passage of the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Arrangement Act which provides the legal framework for resource allocation across the
three tiers of governments to the implementation and the adoption of the PFMIS by sub-national governments
which established rules and procedures for executing budgets. (relevance of RI10=S)

RI11 (associated with PA15) (audit irregularities reported by the OAG report) is intended to measure the extent
to which audit irregularities are reported in the OAG report. This RI is clearly defined and can easily be
monitored over time. This RI associated to the above-mentioned PA measures progress toward the achievement
of the objective through a clear and credible results chain as it strengthens the expenditure controls for sub-
national governments through the enactment of the Audit Act 2019, the development of internal control
guidelines for that Act by the Office of the Auditor General (OAG), as well as actual audits being completed in
line with the new Act for each of the three tiers of government. (relevance of RI11=S)




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



RI12 (associated with PA16, PA17) (adoption of disaster risk management by local governments) sought to
measure the adoption of disaster risk management frameworks by local governments in terms of establishing a
Coordinating Committee and a Disaster Fund with funding being allocated to it. This RI is clearly defined and
can easily be monitored over time by establishing whether or not the Coordinating Committee and the Disaster
Fund remain effective. This RI associated to the above-mentioned PAs measures progress toward the
achievement of the objective of improving the policy framework for public financial management through the
adoption of disaster risk management frameworks by local governments to help them coordinate and manage all
activities pertaining to disaster management, disaster risk reduction, disaster recuperation and disaster
response, as well as monitor and adopt mitigating measures on climate change. (relevance of RI12=S)

RI13 (associated with PA18, PA19) (availability of information on revenue collections) measures the extent of
information on revenue collection that is made publicly available for all three tiers of government through the
establishment of the Revenue Management Information System at the federal and provincial government levels,
and through a template for revenue data collection at the local government level, and the delay in making these
publicly available. Given the fact that this RI supports greater transparency for revenues collected, its relevance
to the achievement of the objective of improving the policy framework for public financial management is rated
Satisfactory. This RI associated to the above-mentioned PAs measures progress toward the achievement of the
objective through a clear and credible results chain as it raises transparency on revenue collections for all three
tiers of government. (relevance of RI13=S)

Table 2: Results Indicators

                                                                                       Actual
                                           Baseline      Target                        change in RI RI
                 Associated RI                                         Actual value as
RIs                                        (including    (including                    relative to achievement
                 PA(s)      Relevance                                  of target date
                                           date)         date)                         targeted     rating
                                                                                       change

Pillar 1: Establish a framework to move towards fiscal federalism


RI1: Share of the
education
budget devolved
to the provincial                                                      FY20 Budget:
and local                                                              60.1 percent
governments       PA1, PA2,                                            (provincial     Over 100
                                           0 percent     60 percent
(measured as      P3, PA4,                                             governments:    percent of
                            S              (30-Jun-      (30-Jun-                                    High
the amount of     PA5, PA6,                                            2.6 percent;    targeted
                                           2016)         2020)
conditional       PA7                                                  local           change
grants to PLGs                                                         governments:
as a share of                                                          57.5 percent)
federal budget
and conditional
grants to PLGs)

RI2: Consolidat PA4, PA5 S                 Not           Consolidated FY20:            100 percent Modest
ed expenditure                             applicable    expenditure consolidated      of targeted


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



produced on an                            (30-Jun-     produced        public             achieved,
annual basis,                             2016)        one fiscal      expenditure for    but not
one fiscal year                                        year prior to   all three tiers    submitted to
prior to the                                           the budget      produced, but      Parliament
budget                                                                 not submitted      with annual
                                                                       to Parliament      budgets
                                                                       with annual
                                                                       budget
                                                                       FY20: LGs and
                                                                       PGs own
RI3: Own                                                               revenue
revenue sources                                                        sources was
                                                                                          Over 100
of provincial and                         2 percent    10 percent      4.8 percent of
                  PA1, PA2,                                                               percent of
local                       S             (30-Jun-     (30-Jun-        total revenue.                    High
                  PA3                                                                     targeted
governments                               2016)        2020)           This reflects an
                                                                                          change
increases by at                                                        increase of
least 10 percent                                                       94.8 percent
                                                                       relative to
                                                                       FY18.
RI4: Share of
federal transfers
spent by local
governments
(federal transfers
include
                                                                        FY20: Local       Over 100
equalization,      PA1, PA2,              0 percent    40 percent
                                                                       governments        percent of
conditional        PA4, PA5, MU           (30-Jun-     (30-Jun-                                          High
                                                                       spent 81.2         targeted
complementary, PA6, PA7                   2016)        2020)
                                                                       percent            change
special and
other grants
from federal
government to
local
governments)
                                                                       (i) Equalization
                                                       Equalization
RI5: Equalizatio                                                       grants in FY20:
                                                       and
n and conditional                                                      to LGs NPR
                                          Not          conditional
grants in FY20                                                         89,947 million 100 percent
                                          applicable   grants in
budget made as PA4, PA5 S                                              (5.9% of total of targeted High
                                          (30-Jun-     FY20 made
per the                                                                budget); to PGs change
                                          2016)        as per the
equalization                                                           NPR 55,299
                                                       formula (30-
formula                                                                million (2.9% of
                                                       Jun-2020)
                                                                       total budget)
RI6: Number of PA8, PA9 MS                0 (30-Jun-   7 (30-Jun-                       100 percent High
provinces that                            2016)        2020)                            of targeted
have adopted                                                                            change
gender


                                                                                                         Page 14 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



responsive
budgeting (PGs
prepared the
annual
Redbook/Budget
with gender
budget codes)




Pillar 2: Improve the policy framework for public financial management

                                                                     FY19: Public
RI7:
                                                                     expenditure
Consolidated                                           FY2019
                                          Not                        data published
public                                                 expenditure                    100 percent
                   PA10,                  available                  on website
expenditure data            MS                         data on                        of targeted High
                   PA11                   (30-Jun-                   within 6 months
publicly available                                     FCGO’s                         change
                                          2016)                      of end of FY for
within 6 months                                        website
                                                                     each tier of
of end-FY
                                                                     government.
                                                                     The provinces
                                                                     of Bagmati and
                                                                     Gandaki
                                                                     prepared
                                                                     MTEFs in
RI8: Number of
                                                                     FY19, and the 100 percent
provinces       PA12,                     0 (30-Jun-   7 (30-Jun-
                            MU                                       provinces of     of targeted Substantial
adopting the    PA13                      2016)        2020)
                                                                     P1, Lumbini,     change
MTEF guidelines
                                                                     Karnali and
                                                                     Sudurpashchim
                                                                     prepared
                                                                     MTEFs in
                                                                     FY20.
RI9: Deviation   PA15       MU            Not          20 percent or FY20:            Change has Negligible
between                                   available    less          Consolidated not been
consolidated                              (30-Jun-     deviation     revised budget measured
revised budget                            2016)        (30-Jun-      estimate not
estimates and                                          2020)         available and
actual                                                               hence the
                                                                     deviation

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



consolidated                                                              cannot be
spending                                                                  computed.




RI10: Proportion PA1, PA2,                                                FY20:
                                                                                             Over 100
of federal capital PA4, PA5,              75 percent 65 percent           Last quarter
                                                                                             percent of
expenditure        PA10,     S            (30-Jun-   (30-Jun-             federal capital                 High
                                                                                             targeted
undertaken in      PA11,                  2016)      2020)                expenditure:
                                                                                             change
the last quarter PA14                                                     45.4%

                                                         Audit
                                          Audit                           FY20: Audit
                                                         irregularities
                                          irregularities                  irregularities for
                                                         of 6 percent
                                          of 7 percent                    three-tier
RI11: Audit                                              or less                             Over 100
                                          for federal                     government is
irregularities                                           across all 3-                       percent of
                PA15        S             government                      3.5% (federal:                  High
reported by the                                          tiers of                            targeted
                                          agencies                        2.9%;
OAG report                                               government                          change
                                          (OAG 2016                       provincial:
                                                         (OAG 2020
                                          report). (30-                   2.7%; local:
                                                         report) (30-
                                          Jun-2016)                       5%)
                                                         Jun-2020)


                                                                      About 400
                                                                      municipalities
RI12: Adoption                                          At least one (at least one
                                          No                                          Over 100
of DRM                                                  municipality municipality per
               PA16,                      framework                                   percent of
framework by                S                           in each       province) are                       High
               PA17                       in place (30-                               targeted
local                                                   province (30- reported to
                                          Jun-2016)                                   change
governments                                             Jun-2020)     have adopted
                                                                      DRM
                                                                      frameworks

RI13: Timely      PA18,     S             Data on 90      Data on 100 FY20: federal          Over 100     Substantial
availability of   PA19                    percent of      percent of     revenue data        percent of
information on                            tax             revenue        are publicly        targeted
revenue                                   collection      collection for available at the    change
collection                                available       federal        aggregate level
(Availability                             with a lag of   government with a lag of
means publicly                            two months      available      one day.
available).                               (30-Jun-        real-time, 60 Provincial and
                                          2016)           percent of     local revenue
                                                          revenue        data are
                                                          collection for publicly
                                                          provincial     available at the
                                                          governments aggregate level
                                                          available      with a lag of six
                                                          real-time and months.

                                                                                                          Page 16 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



                                                                   40 percent of
                                                                   local
                                                                   government
                                                                   revenue
                                                                   collection
                                                                   available by
                                                                   mid-Jan
                                                                   following the
                                                                   concerned
                                                                   fiscal year.
                                                                   (30-Jun-
                                                                   2020)




  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Establish a framework to move towards fiscal federalism

               Rationale
               Outcomes. The program met five of the six outcome targets for the objective of establishing a framework to
               move towards fiscal federalism, with the remaining target being partially achieved.

                     RI1 on the share of the education budget devolved to provincial and local governments (measured as
                      the amount of conditional grants to provincial and local government as a share of the federal budget)
                      rose from 0 percent in the baseline to 60.1 percent (2.6 percent for provincial government and 57.5
                      percent for local governments), meeting the target of 60 percent which was established for this
                      indicator. (rating of RI1=High)
                     RI2 on producing consolidated public expenditures for all three tiers of government in FY20 was
                      achieved. These were, however, not submitted to Parliament along with the annual budget. As such,


                                                                                                              Page 17 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



         this target is judged to have been partially achieved. Moreover, this ICRR did not find this to be a
         sufficiently relevant RI. (rating of RI2=Modest)
        RI3 on raising provincial and local governments’ own-source revenue from 2 percent of consolidated
         revenues in FY16 was achieved, with sub-national government’s own source revenue comprising 4.8
         percent of consolidated revenues in FY20. This largely surpassed the target of a minimum 10 percent
         increase. (rating of RI3=High)
        RI4 on local governments meeting a target of at least 40 percent in spending relative to federal
         transfers (which includes, equalization, conditional, complementary, special and other grants) was
         met, with local governments spending 81.2 percent of federal transfers in FY20. (rating of RI4=High)
        RI5 on the amount received by provincial and local governments in equalization and conditional grants
         being determined based on a formula was achieved. Equalization transfers constituted 3.6 percent of
         the total budget of provincial governments and 5.9 percent of the total budget of local governments.
         Conditional grants comprised 2.9 percent of the total budget of provincial governments 8.1 percent of
         the total budget of local governments. (rating of RI5=High)
        RI6 on all seven provinces in Nepal adopting gender-responsive budgeting, which entailed preparing
         the annual Redbook/Budget with gender budget code, was achieved. (rating of RI6=High)



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the policy framework for public financial management

Rationale
Outcomes. The program met four of the seven outcome targets for the objective of improving the policy
framework for public financial management.

      RI7 on having public expenditure data published on the FOGA website within six months of the end of
       FY19 was achieved. This allowed the consolidated public spending figures for all three tiers of
       government to be compiled based on these data. (rating for RI7=High)
      RI8 on six of the seven provinces adopting medium-term expenditure frameworks was partially
       achieved, with the provinces of Bagmati and Gandaki adopting it in FY19, and the provinces of P1,
       Lumbini, Karnali and Sudurpashchim adopting it in FY20. (rating for RI8= Substantial)
      RI9 on the deviation between consolidated revised budget estimates for FY20 and the actual
       consolidated spending could not be computed as data on the former were not available. The lack of
       data for this RI leads to a negligible rating on efficacy (rating for RI9=Negligible)
      RI10 on reducing the proportion of capital expenditure undertaken by the federal government from 75
       percent under the baseline to 65 percent or less was achieved, with capital expenditure undertaken by
       the federal government comprising 45.4 percent of total capital expenditure in the last quarter of FY20.
       (rating for RI10=Substantial)


                                                                                                Page 18 of 24
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)




                        RI11 on audit irregularities decreasing from 7 percent for federal government agencies (AOG 2016) to
                         6 percent or less was achieved, with the actual achievement standing at 3.5 percent in FY20 (federal
                         government: 2.9 percent; provincial governments: 2.7 percent; local governments: 5 percent). (rating
                         for RI11=Substantial
                        RI12 on at least one municipality per province adopting the disaster risk management framework by
                         establishing a Coordinating Committee and a Disaster Fund with funding allocated to it was achieved,
                         with roughly 400 municipalities having adopted such a framework. (rating for RI12=Substantial)
                        RI13 on 100 percent of revenue collected by the federal government to made available in real-time, 60
                         percent of revenue collected by provincial governments to be made available in real-time, and 40
                         percent of revenue collected by local governments to be made available by mid-January in the
                         subsequent fiscal year was partially achieved. (rating for RI13=Substantial)



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The achievement of the objectives under Pillar 1 is rated as Satisfactory. The achievement of the objectives
under Pillar 2 is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. As a result, the overall achievement of the objectives is rated
as Satisfactory.

The ICR document also provides the outcome of the program with regard to the devolution of actual revenue
and expenditure to sub-national governments, which are featured in Table 3 below. The data featured in the
table indicate that the devolution of revenue and expenditure to sub-national governments consistently
expanded over FY18-FY20.

Table 3: Devolution of Actual Revenue and Expenditure

                        Total       % of                              Total
                                           % of Total      % of Total
                        Expenditure Total                             Revenue    % of Total % of Total % of Total Rev
                                           Exp by          Exp by
                        (NPR,       Exp by                            (NPR       Rev by PGs Rev by LGs by SNGs
                                           LGs             SNGs
                        millions)   PGs                               million)
 FY18                   956,047     0.3    23.7            24         740,958    0              1.9          1.9
 FY19                   1,039,645    9.2     29.5          38.7      872,287     1.4            3.5          4.9
 FY20                   1,073,452    12.2    29.8          42        833916      1.5            3.3          4.8




                                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



Note: Total expenditure= General government expenditure which excludes intergovernmental transfers; Total
revenue= General government revenue which includes only own-source revenues



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions is rated as satisfactory. The prior actions were linked to the achievement of the
program objectives in a convincing and credible manner, which supported the causal chain between the
implementation of the prior actions and the actual outcomes achieved. The relevance of results indicators
is also rated as satisfactory, with the majority of RIs being clearly defined outcomes linked to the prior actions,
and baseline and target data which could easily be monitored and measured over time. The efficacy of the first
objective on establishing a framework to move towards fiscal federalism is rated as satisfactory. The efficacy of
the second objective to improve the policy framework for public financial management is rated as satisfactory.
As such, the outcome of this DPO series is rated as satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks identified in the ICR consist of:

    1. Sub-national governments remain inadequately staffed and existing staff are not sufficiently to meet job
       requirements. The ICR reports that the 2019 Federal Capacity Needs Assessment indicated that 50
       percent of the staffing needs of the provincial and local governments were not met at the time. There has
       been no recruitment of staff at the provincial and local government levels since the completion of that
       assessment despite an increasing share of public spending having been devolved to sub-national
       governments. The Federal Civil Service Bill, which establishes a mandate for recruiting staff for each of
       the three tiers of government, has yet to be enacted. This has resulted in the inability for the recently
       formed Provincial Civil Service Commission from recruiting regular staff. Meanwhile, local governments
       can only recruit staff through short-term contracts. This outcome limits the fiscal devolution process and
       weakens public financial management. The sustainability of the existing reforms may be challenged by
       the provincial and local governments’ low share of own-source revenue.
    2. If provincial and local governments are confronted with challenges in generating own-source revenues,
       this may compromise the development outcomes pursued by the project in light of the fact that sub-




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



       national governments have an information advantage and can deliver public services that are more
       closely aligned to local preferences compared to the federal government.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The design of the programmatic DPO series was informed by a significant body of analytical work that allowed
the Bank to design a well sequenced reform program in the medium-term. The most notable analytical work
underpinning project design included a PFM gap analysis (2015), a note on intergovernmental fiscal transfers
(2017), a note on local level expenditures (2017), a note on fiscal responsibility and budget management, a note
on revenue rights, and a note on the institutional setup for fiscal transfers. The PFMIS, which was relied upon at
the federal government level, had to be implemented and become operational at the sub-national levels, with
new or parallel rules and procedures for formulating, executing and reporting on budgets, for maintaining
appropriate accounts of transactions and for implementing controls and audits, including relevant
legislation. This was essential to ensure that sub-national governments’ spending could be financed adequately,
executed efficiently, and subjected to proper scrutiny and accountability.

While the task team relied on significant analytical work in project design, a major shortcoming of the project
consisted in the fact that the program did not include a PA on the passage of the Federal Civil Service bill in
order to ensure that sub-national governments are adequately staffed to carry out their responsibilities. This
likely resulted in weaker development outcomes during the implementation of the program and beyond
compared to a scenario in which the bill was passed by government. This may also threaten the sustainability of
policy reforms if the bill is not passed by government. This risk was not properly considered in project design,
when considerable attention should have been accorded to it.

The risk assessment of the program was adequate as presented in the program document for both series. The
program documents identified the risks to the operation, consisting of political and governance, institutional
capacity, fiduciary and stakeholder risks, as Substantial. The program documents indicated, however, that these
risks are expected to be largely mitigated by factors such as a stable government, a strong government
ownership, and donor support. Donor support was intended to reduce institutional capacity risk through the
MDFT PFM trust fund and Federalism Working Grouping (co-chaired by the World Bank) that is supporting
capacity building of elected governments and their institutions. This was further support by the reforms featured
under these series, the Integrated Public Financial Management Reform Project. Fiduciary risks were mitigated
by these series which include reform to revamp the rules that govern budget implementation by working closely
with the National Planning Commission, the Financial Comptroller General Office, the Public Procurement
Monitoring Office and the Office of the Auditory General. This was also supported by institutional capacity
strengthening activities through the MDTF focused on rules governing budget implementation.



Rating



                                                                                                   Page 21 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



Satisfactory


b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR reports that the World Bank engaged closely with the Ministry of Finance who coordinated activities
with the provincial and the local governments to monitor and evaluate the achievement of targets established for
results indicators under the results framework over the entire implementation period. To this end, the task team
reported having participated in regular supervision missions, although the ICR does not provide evidence of this.
World Bank technical assistance through the Integrated PFM Reform Project (supported by the Multi-Donor
Trust Fund) provided public servants at all three levels of government. The team made adjustments to the PAs
relative to their triggers under FPFM-DPC1 to reflect unanticipated circumstances or capacity challenges at the
sub-national levels. PA5 was changed t to require at least 25 percent of the LGs to have delegated spending
authority to their chief administrative officers, instead of all LGs as was initially framed in Trigger 2, and came as
a result of the fact that additional staff and the training that was needed for such delegation to be executed
effectively was yet to be conducted. PA9 was modified to the issuance of gender-based guidelines to provincial
governments given that measures to response-and-support system for gender-based violence was established.
PA11 was changed to two-thirds of local governments adopting all the relevant budget management legislations
compared to all local governments adopting them as established under Trigger 5 in FPFM-DPC1. This change
was made due to the challenge with the capacity constraints in preparing various local level budget
management legislations. Finally, PA13 requested that the National Planning Commission issues guidelines to
provincial and local governments for preparing MTEFs, which was different from Trigger 6 which mandated the
actual preparation of three-year MTEFs’ by sub-national governments. This reflected the low technical capacity
and the understaffing seen in local governments. While the adaption did not undermine the achievement of the
objectives, the adaptation could have been anticipated at th outset by the task team.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The overall performance of the World Bank is rated as satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts


                                                                                                       Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



a. Social and Poverty

The ICR identifies a number of social and poverty benefits generated through the allocation of public spending
to sub-national governments through, most notably:

    1. A better alignment in the provision of social services to the local preferences of the population, especially
       for those individuals living in rural areas, which can improve access to public services and
       disproportionately benefit vulnerable households.
    2. An increased capacity for local governments to address issues which are better addressed at the local
       level. For example, local governments provided quarantine and isolation facilities during the COVID-19
       pandemic, and provincial and local governments significantly contributed to the federal government’s
       plan to vaccinate 72 percent of the eligible population by mid-April 2022. The ICR document does not
       provide any evidence in this regard, however.
    3. A greater efficiency in public spending, which may lead to savings that can be allocated towards an
       expansion in the provision or an improvement in the quality of public services public service
       delivery. The ICR document does not provide any evidence in this regard, however.



b. Environmental

There is a concern highlighted in the ICR that local governments may have been prone to use natural resources
in an unsustainable manner in order to support own-source revenue over the short-term. There is no specific
information to support this claim, however.




c. Gender

PA4 under FPFM-DPC1 established a gender-based violence unit, with a dedicated 24-hour helpline services
and referral services such as, shelter, legal aid and psychosocial support. This unit provided 15,003 integrated
services to 25,012 clients by June 2021. Furthermore, the adoption of gender-responsive budgeting through
PA5 under FPFM-DC2 ensures that policies and investments are designed such that they support a reduction in
socio-economic inequalities across the male and female populations.




d. Other

None identified.




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nepal Fiscal Reforms DPC (P160792)



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated as high. The ICR is candid in presenting the risks to the development outcomes.
While the ICR discusses positive impacts on social, poverty, gender and institutional outcomes (along
with potential negative impacts), much of the impact assessments is done on an ex-ante basis rather than on an
ex post basis. The ICR could have presented, for example, data on the improved efficiency of public spending
through fiscal devolution, or the impact of gender-based budgeting on policy measures or public investments.
The lessons which can be extracted from this DPO series are well articulated.


a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR Review agrees with the lessons identified in the ICR based on identifying reforms grounded on sound
analytical work, solid technical assistance, and adopting a sound monitoring and evaluation system. A major
shortcoming of this operation was the lack of support for the passage of the Federal Civil Service bill, which is
yet to be passed, thereby limiting the capacity of sub-national governments to deliver the public services which
are required from them. This could have been incentivized through the introduction of a PA or an RI pertaining to
the passage of the Federal Civil Service bill.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 24
