     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022888

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149965                                   UG-NUSAF3

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56450                                31-Dec-2020                                        131,847,178.97

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2015                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           130,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            130,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                        131,847,178.97                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To provide effective income support to and build the resilience of poor and vulnerable
            households in Northern Uganda.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Labor Intensive Public Works and Disaster Risk Financing (Approval: US$ 61.0 million; Actual: US$ 59.0
   million): This component aimed to provide beneficiaries from poor and vulnerable households with seasonal
   financial transfers in return for their participation in labor-intensive public works, including building physical
   assets of value to local communities such as rural roads, tree nurseries, soil and water conservation
   measures, and marketplaces. Activities included: wages; equipment and semi-skilled labor for public works
   projects; capacity building for local community leaders; and unconditional transfers for households that do
   not have able-bodied members who can participate in the public works projects. There was also a pilot
   activity to temporarily scale up the labor-intensive public works projects following climatic disasters, in order
   to prevent drops in household consumption and to protect livelihoods. Activities included wages and the
   development of key mechanisms to trigger and operationalize the post-disaster response.

   2. Livelihood Investment Support (Approval: US$ 43.5 million; Actual: US$ 45.5 million): This component
   aimed to provide livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households to help them improve livelihoods and
   further increase incomes. Activities included: comprehensive skills training to beneficiaries, livelihood
   grants, and mentoring. Grants of up to US$ 5,000 were provided to groups comprised of 10-15
   households. There was also a pilot activity to develop community institutions to support household
   livelihood investments in the longer term, including revolving village funds.

   3. Strengthening Transparency, Accountability and Anti-Corruption (Approval: US$ 5.0 million; Actual: US$
   5.0 million): This component aimed to support the Inspectorate of Government (IG) to expand its capacity at
   the local level to monitor and reduce misuse of funds. Activities included: sensitizing communities to prevent
   misuse of project funds, enhancing engagement of citizens and stakeholders, and monitoring of project
   activities at the community level, led by Community Monitoring Groups.

   4. Safety Net Mechanisms and Project Management (Approval: US$ 20.5 million; Actual: US$ 20.5 million):
   This component aimed to develop the national social safety net program as envisioned in the draft Uganda
   Social Protection Policy, with particular emphasis on developing instruments to improve coordination across
   the government and development partners.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The appraised project cost was US$ 130.0 million. The actual project cost was US$ 131.8 million.

   Financing


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



         The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 130.0 million, which disbursed in its entirety.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         April 2018: The project was restructured to modify the results framework and to add a safeguard
          policy (OP 4.10) triggered due to the presence of a minority community in one of the project districts.
         December 2020: The project closing date was extended from December 2020 to June 2021, due to
          COVID-related delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The country of Uganda has been experiencing consistent economic growth and a significant reduction in
poverty in the last two decades. However, a significant proportion of the population remains highly
vulnerable to falling into poverty, particularly due to climatic and economic shocks. Socioeconomic
indicators vary greatly by region, with the northern regions, which have been afflicted by conflict and
violence, continuing to have high poverty headcounts and poor human development outcomes. In Northern
Uganda, 80% of households rely on low productivity subsistence agriculture and are highly vulnerable to
climatic events such as droughts, land degradation, and food insecurity; for example, in the Karamoja/
North-Eastern region, 74.2% of the population was classified as poor (2012/13). As noted in the PAD (page
2), economic growth alone thus far has been unable to bring prosperity to all, and therefore specific pro-
poor interventions are needed to protect the poor and vulnerable.

The government's recent National Development Plans 2 (2010-15) and 3 (2020-25) and the Peace and
Recovery Development Plans all focus on increasing social protection for high-poverty regions, including by
improving livelihoods. The prior Northern Uganda Social Action Fund projects 1 and 2, while more focused
on post-reconstruction needs, included developing community infrastructure and providing livelihood
support to increase incomes, including through a cash-for-work mechanism. The current third phase of the
Social Action Fund was designed based on lessons learned from these previous phases, including having a
longer-term goal to build resilience of households and improve quality of public works to better serve as
safety nets. The project objectives are also consistent with the government's draft Social Protection Policy,
which calls for the development of a sustainable system of social protection to protect the poor and
vulnerable from negative effects of shocks.

The Bank's most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2016-21) explicitly addresses the needs of
the poor and vulnerable. One of the three Strategic Focus Areas is "Raising incomes in Rural Areas,"
including by expanding the use of safety nets, and one of the CPF objectives is "to enhance resilience of
the poor and vulnerable." For the latter, outcome indicators include percentage of households sharing at
least two basic assets.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide effective income support to poor and vulnerable households in Northern Uganda

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was clear. Labor-intensive public works projects were to be developed
                             in local villages, providing temporary income opportunities for poor and vulnerable households. Livelihood
                             grants and village revolving funds were also established as additional support to clusters of households to
                             improve income opportunities. These activities were likely to lead to the intended outcome to provide income
                             support to poor and vulnerable households by increasing the value of their household assets and
                             investments. Targeting was a key element, as the project design implemented a three-layer targeting
                             mechanism to ensure that support reached the poor and vulnerable; the first two layers relied on geographic
                             targeting while the third relied on community-based targeting. The community-based targeting mechanism
                             was used to select the poorest and most vulnerable households within those communities, with the
                             community itself collectively selecting those households that were deemed most vulnerable according to clear
                             criteria related to poverty and vulnerability.

                             The labor intensive public works intervention was intended to reach the poorest households in the village,
                             while the livelihood grants/village revolving funds were intended to reach the less poor households. The
                             project covered 67 districts (out of 135 districts and 11 cities nationwide).



                             Outputs

                                        Public works projects in poor villages in 67 districts, which were intentionally labor-intensive and
                                         aimed to develop a physical asset of value to the local communities. According to the project team, at
                                         least 70% of the budget for the public works component was spent on wages for participants, and
                                         documentation at the community level was required to verify participation of and payment to
                                         community members. Also, the provision of technical inputs to the public works planning and
                                         implementation (such as semi-skilled labor) and annual reviews with assistance from the project's
                                         technical support team helped to ensure sufficient quality of the public works.
                                        Financial transfers to 1,915,050 labor-intensive public works participants (target: 2,245,500) for 54
                                         days of work at UGX 5500 per day (US$ 1.40). The ICR (page 13) noted that this was a significant
                                         amount of additional income given that 55.4% of participants lived on or less than US$ 1.90 per
                                         day. The transfers came with a mandatory savings requirement of 30% minimum of income


                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



         generated. Also, 2,423 households from the marginalized Ik population participated in the public works
         projects (target: 1,121).
        Capacity building for participating communities, including "mindset training" to foster positive attitudes
         towards work, savings, and productivity; business skills development; and community leadership
         training.
        Financial transfers to 223,565 beneficiaries (target: 207,500) from households with those unable to
         work, such as the elderly, disabled, chronically ill, pregnant or lactating mothers, orphans, and female-
         headed households. Also, 194 households from the marginalized Ik population received these
         unconditional transfers (target: 112).
        Support for 9,449 livelihood subprojects (target: 7,700) in agriculture, aquaculture, livestock, tree
         nurseries, horticulture, and value addition, reaching 99,597 households. The subprojects provided
         skills training, livelihood grants (up to $5000), and mentoring support for existing and new market-
         driven enterprises. The grants came with a mandatory savings requirement of 30% minimum of
         profits. The skills training included construction techniques, cage fishing, cattle fattening, contour
         ploughing, tree planting, soil management, small-scale irrigation to produce crops 2-3 times a year,
         new crop production (e.g., coffee, matoke, tea), and use of new tools.
        410 village revolving funds (serving 1,466 self-help groups comprised of 33,432 households) to
         support household livelihood investments tapping into already existing community savings groups and
         mobilizing other poor households to form savings groups of their own. Activities also included
         utilization of community business agents who provided ongoing mentoring support and technical
         assistance. (Note: The revolving funds were established in villages that were not already receiving
         livelihood subproject grants).

In addition,

      Implementation of a targeting mechanism to ensure that poor and vulnerable households were
       reached. Almost 100% of the project's desk officers and community facilitators had positive
       feedback on the community-based targeting mechanism used to select individuals for
       participation. According to the ICR (page 17), the utilization of this innovative and transparent
       mechanism for the selection of beneficiaries helped empower beneficiaries and officials from local
       levels of government.
      Implementation of social accountability mechanisms. 90.3% of participating villages were utilizing
       community score cards (target: 85%); 60.3% of participating villages had functioning community
       monitoring groups (target: 70%); and 75.6% of grievances registered about the project were resolved
       in a timely manner (target: 70%), and of these grievances, 21.5% represented non-project activities.
      Development of a management information system to maintain a registry of safety net beneficiaries.



Outcomes

The project benefitted 3,031,690 individuals from poor and vulnerable households, of which 58% were female
(target: 2,995,500; 40% female).

      25,564,410 person-days of employment were created, nearly achieving the target of 26,946,000.
      The average household monthly income increased by 223%.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)




      The percentage of households with savings increased from 54.6% to 70% (no target provided). The
       amount of savings varied, although the share of households in the lowest saving group (less than
       UGX 50,000) decreased from 46% to 22% while the share in the highest saving group (above UGX
       200,000) increased from 13% to 30%. As reported in the ICR (page 14), the end-line evaluation
       showed that these savings enabled beneficiaries to obtain additional credit for productive activities
       (such as expansion of an enterprise or purchase of an asset) or consumption smoothing of household
       expenditure (school fees, burials, etc.).
      The value of household assets increased by 30% between 2015 and June 2021, surpassing the target
       of 20%. This included a 45.6% increase in household ownership of livestock, and a 16% increase in
       household ownership of equipment such as ox ploughs. The percentage of households owning six
       or fewer selected assets decreased from 53% to 22%; the percentage of those owning seven to ten
       selected assets increased from 46% to 71%; and those with more than ten assets increased from 2%
       to 9%.



Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased income generated, increased
savings, and increased value of household assets.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To build the resilience of poor and vulnerable households in Northern Uganda

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. The labor-intensive public works projects created community assets (such as
wells, irrigation systems, market stalls) that could be used for income/livelihood support, particularly in times
of economic or climatic hardships (such as droughts). The pilot activity to develop a support mechanism for
disaster relief mitigation was to provide protection to households and avoid disruptions in consumption. These
activities were likely to contribute to the intended outcome to build resilience of poor and vulnerable
households in Northern Uganda, particularly by increasing land productivity and income, increasing water
supply during drought events, and providing access to safety nets during shocks. Resilience is defined in the
PAD as the capacities of households and communities to adapt to a new strategy in the face of shocks and
crises. As noted in the ICR (page 13), the outputs for this objective overlapped with those for the first
objective, and the intended outcomes of both objectives also overlapped.



Outputs

As reported above:



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)




         Financial transfers to 1,915,050 labor-Intensive public works participants (target: 2,245,500) for 54
          days of work on public works projects at UGX 5500 per day (US$ 1.40). The transfers came with a
          mandatory savings requirement of 30% minimum of income generated.
         Support for 9,449 livelihood subprojects (target: 7,700) in agriculture, aquaculture, livestock, tree
          nurseries, horticulture, and value addition, reaching 99,597 households. The grants came with a
          mandatory savings requirement of 30% minimum of profits.
         410 village revolving funds (serving 1,466 self-help groups comprised of 33,432 households) to
          support household livelihood investments.

In addition,

         Piloting of disaster relief fund (DRF) activities, by providing labor-intensive public works transfers to
          90,405 vulnerable households (target: 84,000) experiencing a shock such as lack of rainfall impacting
          their crops, thereby providing a temporary source of income and protecting consumption/ assets.
          According to the project team, the implementation cycle for approved activities was based on an
          analysis of the seasonal calendar, to ensure that participants had the opportunity to work during the
          lean season when there would no other farming operations; also, financial transfers to participants
          were made on a bi-weekly basis to ensure timeliness of the support.
         Development of system to collect and analyze data for triggers for the DRF program.



Outcomes

As reported above:

         The percentage of households with savings increased from 54.6% to 70% (no target provided).
         The value of household assets increased by 30% between 2015 and June 2021, surpassing the target
          of 20%.

Also,

         3,459 community assets were built through labor-intensive public works projects (target: 3,170), which
          increased incomes, land productivity (soil and water conservation, irrigation) and water supply, and
          access to safety nets. The average distance in kilometers to markets for general goods decreased by
          14% and for livestock decreased by 11%.
         The percentage of households engaged in business enterprises increased by 29%, an indication
          that livelihoods have diversified away from subsistence agriculture.
         The percentage of households having one meal a day decreased from 23% to 10%, while the
          percentage of those having two meals a day increased from 53% to 61%, and those having three
          meals increased from 8% to 23%.
         The Progress-out-of-Poverty Index decreased from 62% to 40%, measuring poverty levels by looking
          at selected household factors such as household size, access to education, and literacy levels, as well
          as ownership of common household assets like mobile phones, radio, and shoes, and the nature of
          the dwelling.



                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)




                            Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased savings, increased household
                            assets, increased community assets, and increased household resilience and consumption.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to evidence of improved incomes and increased resilience, based
                            on effective targeting to reach poor and vulnerable households.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal (PAD, Annex 6), the estimated economic rate of return was 21.4% with a net present value of $41.6
   million. This was further broken down by food crops (19.4%), cash crops (28.0%), agribusiness (24.0%), and
   non-agricultural (14.0%). The estimate was calculated from the following benefits: increased and diversified
   household incomes from a broad range of livelihood sources; improved community assets and market
   integration; sustainable business institutions owned by the rural poor; and increased opportunities for self-
   employment and skills transfer. Most of these benefits were expected to be generated from the labor-intensive
   public works and livelihoods investment support components (approximately 75% of total project costs).
   Although the actual public works projects could not be identified at project appraisal, due to their demand-driven
   nature, random stakeholder consultations and experience from the prior two phases of the Social Action Fund
   informed the estimates. Other likely benefits related to social, institutional, capacity building, disaster risk
   management, and human resource development were not included in the analysis.

   At completion (ICR, Annex 4), the economic analysis was updated and resulted in an economic rate of return of
   25.1%. The benefits were calculated based on economic returns from productive investments from labor-
   intensive public works projects, DRF sub-projects, the livelihood support grants, and the village revolving
   funds. Other likely benefits arising from improved community assets (such as roads) were not included due to
   difficulty in quantifying benefits.

   The implementation schedule progressed largely as planned, with a six-month project extension caused by
   COVID delays rather than by any internal disruptions. There were no significant implementation delays, fiduciary
   issues, or cost overruns. Although there was a lengthy delay in finalizing the 2018 restructuring, there were no

                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



significant impacts on implementation as the restructuring related mainly to revisions to the safeguard policies.
The loan disbursed fully largely within the original project period.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      75.00
 Appraisal                                                 21.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      58.00
 ICR Estimate                                              25.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country development strategy, and
Bank strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to evidence of improved incomes and increased resilience,
based on effective targeting to reach poor and vulnerable households. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to a
reasonable economic rate of return on core activities and minimal implementation inefficiencies. The ratings
indicate that there were only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results,
producing an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcomes lies mainly in the sustainability of the economic activities that were
financed under the livelihood support component. The sustainability of livelihood enhancement activities,
such as small businesses and market enterprises, is unclear, given market demand uncertainties, narrow
profit margins, lack of ongoing technical support and mentorship, and a lack of enforcement of group
functioning practices. Also, there is some risk of sustainability of community assets. Although communities
were expected to take responsibility for the maintenance of community assets built through the labor-
intensive public works support, it is not clear whether this is actually taking place. A key follow-up Bank
project -- Generating Livelihoods and Opportunities for Women (GLOW – P176747) Project -- was under
preparation at the time of ICR writing, which also focuses on provision of training and women’s access to


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



finance and investment in social and economic infrastructure, but a gap in financial support from the Bank is
likely.

However, institutional development gains are likely to be sustained. The project supported the development
of community-level institutions, such as self-help groups and village livelihood committees. The ICR noted
that non-government organizations are actively targeting community groups established under this project as
part of their own delivery structures. In addition, the project developed mechanisms and protocols that will
continued to be used, including national guidelines for the implementation of labor-intensive public works,
proof of concept of the DRF and triggering rules and procedures for its replication and scale-up, proof of
concept of the village revolving fund and its potential for replicability and scalability, strengthening of the IG
at the local level for governance and transparency, and mechanisms to support a national social safety net
program.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was a continuation -- the third phase -- of a series of operations to improve livelihoods and
  incomes for vulnerable populations in the northern regions; however, there were additional elements of
  disaster risk mitigation, replicability, and sustainability addressed through introducing significant
  innovations. Similarly, the project used national and local government entities that had gained experience
  from the prior phases, while also aiming to build capacity at the community level to increase ownership
  and sustainability of project interventions. According to the ICR (page 19), local governments, districts in
  particular, played a central role in the development of community institutions and project implementation
  as a whole, and in ensuring accuracy and quality of the monitoring data produced at lower levels of
  government. The community-based approach helped communities mobilize and actively participate in
  collective decision making regarding the selection of beneficiaries, the prioritization of community needs,
  and the selection and implementation of labor-intensive public works sub-projects.

  The theory of change and the results framework were clear, but the latter was mostly comprised of key
  project indicators that were output-oriented (number of beneficiaries), with only one key
  indicator measuring the actual intended outcome to increase household assets. Several elements of the
  project objectives could have been captured as key indicators, such as increased income, savings,
  access to community assets, and consumption, but were instead reported through evaluations.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was regular and proactive, with ongoing technical support provided to the implementing
 agencies through constant communication, several technical supervision missions, and a comprehensive
 Mid-Term Review (MTR). Significant capacity building support was provided by the Bank team at the

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



 district government level. This was facilitated by minimal task team leadership changes and local presence
 of a Bank team member. As noted in the ICR (page 27), "the good and harmonious working relationship
 between the Bank and government teams played an important role in the success of the project." The MTR
 in particular was used to assess progress on the two pilot activities, which were both subsequently
 expanded for increased impact. Implementation progress was well documented in supervision documents.

 Safeguards and fiduciary issues were effectively managed, including noting the identification of a minority
 community in one of the project areas and implementing necessary safeguard measures. M&E
 implementation was well-executed, with clear use of M&E data to inform decision making.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change and the results framework were clear and relevant. Although the key project
 indicators were linked to the project objectives, they mainly focused on outputs. While these
 indicators facilitated project implementation progress monitoring, they were less robust in
 assessing achievement of objectives. Other outcome-oriented indicators, such as increased
 savings, increased access to community assets, and increased consumption, could have been included. A
 project management information system was included in the project design, in part to facilitate project
 monitoring but also to inform subsequent steps to develop a national social protection system. Evaluative
 activities (such as impact assessments of the core interventions) were planned to provide additional data
 and information about the project's impact.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project management information system was effectively implemented and used. A community-based
  M&E system, relying on reporting templates, was implemented and produced regular reports. The ICR
  (page 24) noted that continuous training of district officials and community facilitators, as well as quality
  assurance mechanisms, were used to help ensure quality and consistency of data. Evaluations were
  carried out as planned by Makerere University at baseline, midpoint, and endline, with a total of 3,689
  beneficiaries randomly selected.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (pages 24-25), the M&E system was a key tool in supporting implementation.
  Based on M&E progress reports, the implementing agencies were able to identify implementation gaps

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



  and prepare quarterly technical support plans to provide critical support to districts. Management
  information system data on beneficiaries was also utilized to inform the Single Beneficiary Registry.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project, with limited environmental and social
   impacts expected from the public works projects. Safeguards triggered included: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).
   Site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans were developed and implemented, with two
   subprojects undergoing full Environment and Social Impact Assessments. According to the ICR (page 25),
   all subprojects were screened for environmental and social risks and adhered to safeguard requirements,
   using an integrated watershed management implementation model.

   During the May 2016 supervision mission, the safeguard policy OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was
   triggered due to the identification of the Ik people, a minority community found in Kaabong District. Although
   there were delays in the formal approval of the project restructuring (required due to the addition of the
   safeguard and amendment of the Credit Agreement) due to a lengthy in-country review process by the
   government, preparation and implementation of the Vulnerable and Marginalized Peoples Action
   Plan immediately took place. No problems were reported in safeguards compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: According to the ICR (pages 25-26), the operation’s financial management
   arrangements were rated satisfactory for most of the implementation period. including staffing in
   compliance with agreed implementation plans. Interim unaudited financial reports and external audit
   reports were submitted in a timely and acceptable manner. There were no qualifications to audits.



   Procurement: At the central and local levels, procurement processes largely involved goods and
   services, and were conducted in accordance with the Bank's procurement guidelines. There were two
   complaints noted relating to motor vehicle procurements, which required administrative reviews and were
   resolved. At the community level, sub-project procurement was handled by Community Project
   Management Committees. Recurrent challenges at the community level were continually
   addressed throughout the operation's lifetime, including low literacy levels of committee members that
   increased susceptibility to manipulation in decision making; inadequate record keeping of procurement
   processes; and political interference due to the direct linkage of the implementing communities with the



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)



   political leadership of the areas. There were no cases of misprocurement reported. Regular procurement
   reviews were largely satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 29-30), adapted by IEG:

      The identification of a clear trigger mechanism for disaster-relief financial disbursements,
       agreed upon in advance, can ensure rapid response and flow of funds to beneficiaries once
       a shock occurs. In the case of this project, the overall strategy was in place, with readily
       available financing and disbursement mechanisms, in addition to the identification of
       independent data sources such as satellite-based observations of ground vegetation and
       food security indices that allowed for rapid and transparent targeting of needy participants.
      Community-level revolving funds can be an effective intervention to ensure sustainability of
       livelihoods once project support ends. In the case of this project, the village revolving funds
       provided continued access to finance and sustained development of community institutions.
      Operations and maintenance of community assets are more likely to be sustained by taking
       into account the constraints of local communities. In the case of this project, despite strong
       ownership by communities, robust operation and maintenance plans with intensive follow-up
       by the project team were needed, including understanding the constraints in leadership,
       financial management, workload, and other factors faced by those local communities to
       follow through on maintenance plans.


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-NUSAF3 (P149965)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR was high, notable for its candor, conciseness, outcome orientation, and quality of
evidence. The theory of change was clearly laid out, and the analysis of the results chain was thorough. The
analysis of results went beyond the PDO indicators (which were mostly output-oriented) and drew upon
additional evidence from other sources to substantiate increases in household savings, assets, consumption,
resilience, etc. The quality of this additional evidence was highly satisfactory. Lessons were well drawn from
project experience, including learning from incremental changes during this third phase of the series of social
protection operations.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
