     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022874

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145544                                    Early Childhood Education Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic           Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53700,IDA-H9100                        31-Jul-2019                                         23,694,583.53

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Apr-2014                                30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               28,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                26,153,894.96                                            0.00

 Actual                                            23,694,583.53                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The stated objective of the project was “to increase the coverage and improve the quality of early childhood
   education (ECE) services for three to five year-olds in Target Districts” (Financing Agreement of May 14,
   2014, p. 4).

   Three outcome indicators were reformulated during the first project restructuring in 2017. The reformulation
   essentially consisted of a switch from absolute numbers to percentages, providing more context and validity to
   the evidence by illustrating the relative change in improved coverage and quality of ECE services. Therefore,

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



   this ICR Review did not apply a split rating, as the revisions reflected better measures of project achievement,
   unrelated to project ambition, and they were consistent with the theory of change.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   I. Increasing Coverage of Early Childhood Education (ECE) in Target Districts (Appraisal: US$6.0
   million; Revised US$13.8 million: Actual: US$11.8 million)

   1.1: Community-Based Contracting for the construction of pre-primary classrooms through the provision of
   construction grants and training to participating villages to construct pre-primary classrooms with age-
   appropriate water and sanitation facilities with adherence to accessibility standards for physically disabled
   children.

   1.2: Community Child Development Groups for 3- and 4-year-olds. Under this sub-component, the project
   would pilot Community Child Development Groups (CCDGs) for 3- and 4-year-olds in 48 locations where
   there were schools with pre-primary classrooms. The CCDG concept would be piloted to provide a separate
   learning environment for 3- and 4-year-old children to determine if this would have a positive impact on the
   cognitive development of 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children.

   II. Improving Quality of Early Childhood Education Services (Appraisal: US$13.3 million; Revised:
   US$11.6 million; Actual: US$8.2 million)

   2.1: Supporting a package of services to deliver: (i) community awareness campaign sessions to engage
   parents in parental education; (ii) childhood disability screening; and (iii) school meals.

   2.2: Teacher and Education Officer Training, including pre-service training, development of a multi-age
   training module, and in-service training on multi-age teaching techniques for teachers and school
   administrators.

   III. Project Management, Capacity Development, and Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal US$8.7
   million; Revised US$2.6 million; Actual: US$3.5 million)

   3.1: This sub-component would finance incremental costs associated with project management, including
   logistics, physical space, and transportation.

   3.2: Support to monitoring and evaluation (M&E).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



   Cost and financing: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$28 million (consisting of both an
   IDA Grant and an IDA Credit, each amounting to SDR 9.1 million or US$14 million equivalent). No direct
   financial contributions were planned or provided by the Borrower. The actual cost was US$23.7 million. An
   amount of about US$1.8 million was cancelled (Task Team clarifications on March 17, 2022).

   Dates: The project was approved on April 2, 2014 and became effective on July 31, 2014. A Mid-Term
   Review was carried out on January 16, 2017. The original closing date was planned for July 31, 2019, and,
   with two project extensions aggregating at two years (see below), the project closed on June 30, 2021.

   Project restructurings: The project underwent three restructurings, as follows:

         The first restructuring on May 18, 2017 increased the number of pre-primary classrooms from 250 to
          550 classrooms, and CCDG shelters from 48 to 73 shelters, while concurrently scaling down
          activities of a pilot nature: the pilot for community awareness was reduced from 520 to 270
          communities, for Multi-Age Teaching (MAT) from 500 to 62 communities, and for disability screening
          from 340 to 300 children. It introduced a new pilot for “Toy Libraries” in 270 communities targeted for
          community awareness. The restructuring also introduced changes to the results framework to rectify
          initial M&E design issues (including unmeasured quality aspects), and to better formulate outcome
          indicators as explained above in Section 2a, and to reallocate funds between disbursement
          categories.
         The second restructuring on May 15, 2018 extended the project closing date to December 31, 2020
          because of delays in pilot activities related to CCDGs, MAT of preschool children, and the early
          childhood development community awareness campaign.
         The third restructuring on November 26, 2020 extended the closing date to June 30, 2021 to
          complete activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, coverage of ECE was limited. In 2013, the proportion of 3- to 5-year-olds enrolled in ECE
programs was 33 percent, and that of 5-year-olds (in “pre-primary classrooms” attached to a primary
school) was 52 percent. ECE coverage varied across geographic, socio-economic, and ethnic dimensions.
Coverage was larger for the better-off segment of the population in urban centers and for the Lao-Tai ethnic
group. Differences in coverage of ECE services translated into disparities in child development outcomes.
The government intended to expand access to ECE, and the Education Sector Development Plan 2011-
2015 aimed at creating affordable and expanded access to ECE for all children, especially in poorer and
educationally disadvantaged areas.

Importantly, districts targeted by the project were and remained relevant to higher-level government goals
for poverty reduction and ethnic development. ECE objectives were expected to contribute to reducing
disparities in educational attainment of children across income levels, ethno-linguistic groups, and gender.
The objectives remain relevant to the country’s long-term goal of increasing the human capital index,
which stood at 0.45 around appraisal, lower than the regional average of 0.59 in East Asia and Pacific



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



               Region. They are also aligned with the World Bank Education Sector Strategy 2020 “Learning for All,"
               particularly for investing early.

               At project closing, the development objectives remained fully aligned with the Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF for FY2017-FY2021) in Focus Area 2: Investing in People, and with Objective 2.2:
               Improving quality of primary and pre-primary education and keeping girls in school. The project contributed
               to CPF indicator 11 (percentage increase in pre-school children ages 3–5-years attending early childhood
               development/ECE/preschool programs). In addition, investing in ECE is consistent with the World Bank’s
               twin goals of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity, since ECE would be expected to contribute
               in the long run to reducing poverty in target areas by improving educational attainment that usually leads to
               higher future earnings.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the coverage of early childhood education services for three- to five-year-old children in target
                             districts

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             It was reasonably expected that the provision of grants to communities for the construction of pre-primary
                             classrooms, provision of grants to Village Education Development Committees, provision of training to Village
                             Education Development Committees (VEDCs) and caregivers, and development and production of CCDG
                             materials and toolkits would result in additional pre-primary classrooms constructed, grants utilized, VEDCs
                             and caregivers trained, and CCDG materials and toolkits produced and available. These outputs would
                             plausibly contribute to increased coverage, measured by children's enrollment rates.

                             The theory of change was interlinked with quality improvement activities and capacity development that are
                             discussed under Objective 2, below.

                             Target districts: Project interventions were concentrated in 14 priority districts in five provinces that were on
                             the government priority list for poverty reduction. The country had a total of 47 priority districts, with heavy
                             concentration of ethnic and disadvantaged populations. Priority districts were defined in the 2003 National
                             Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy of the government of Lao PDR, based on a set of household,
                             village, and district level indicators. These districts, where one third of the national population resided, were



                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



considered priority districts for poverty reduction out of a total of 143 districts in the country (ICR, pp. 17-18).
The total population in Lao PDR was around 6.5 million people during project preparation.



Outputs and intermediate results

Main outputs included grants for the construction of pre-primary classrooms and water and sanitation
facilities. The project constructed 550 fully furnished pre-primary classrooms with water and sanitation
facilities in 480 schools in target villages. The project also constructed 73 shelters, as planned.



Outcomes

The percentage of children aged 3-5 enrolled in ECE programs in CCDG and MAT target villages increased
from a baseline of 12 percent in 2016 to 63.2 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 50 percent. The share
of girls aged 3-5 in the total number of children of the same age enrolled in these programs increased from a
baseline of 50 percent in 2016 to 63.5 percent in 2021, exceeding the same target of 50 percent.

The percentage of children aged 5 enrolled in ECE programs in all target villages increased from a baseline
of 11 percent in 2016 to 65.7 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 48 percent. The share of girls aged 5 in
the total number of 5-year-olds enrolled in ECE programs increased from a baseline of 50 percent in 2016 to
68.8 percent in 2021, exceeding the same target of 50 percent.

Direct project beneficiaries reached 53,811 people, slightly exceeding the target of 51,700 people.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of early childhood education services for three- to five-year-old children in target districts



Rationale
Theory of change

The theory of change was interlinked with that of Objective 1 and held that activities for improving the quality
of ECE services, notably pre-service and in-service trainings for pre-school teachers and administrators,
community awareness campaigns, parenting education, training on childhood disability screening, and
provision of nutritious meals would lead to pre-primary teachers and caregivers being trained, VEDCs and
Village Health Volunteers trained for community awareness activities, children receiving medical screening,


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



and school gardens established, all of which would plausibly contribute to improving the quality of ECE
services.

Research conducted in both developed and developing countries concluded that ECE programs that combine
education, parenting education, and nutrition interventions have shown the largest positive impacts,
particularly for children from low-income families (ICR, p. 7). The project incorporated all three interventions in
its design.

The theory of change was complemented by capacity development activities in management and M&E, and
that would result in the production of classroom observation reports, ECE Education Quality Standards being
designed and endorsed, and grants being audited. Critical assumptions held that the Ministry of Education
and Sports (MOES) was committed to implement project activities, and that there was adequate governance
and coordination among government departments.



Outputs and intermediate results

The project:

      trained 810 VEDC members and 270 Village Health Volunteers on community awareness, supported
         by training modules and toolkits to increase knowledge and understanding of parents and community
         members about the importance of ECE and its availability, parenting skills in early stimulation,
         nutrition, health, hygiene, and childhood disability awareness; and 17,305 community members
         attended awareness sessions;
        introduced childhood disability screening through medical technical assistants, and 254 children
         participated in disability screening, received care, or were referred for treatment;
        provided school lunches under the existing scheme of the National School Meals Program,
         providing 21,886 meals to preprimary and primary students;
        trained 200 ethnic girls as pre-primary schoolteachers through both short- and long-term scholarships
         (intensive 30-week pre-primary training program for girls who have completed upper secondary school
         or 12 years of education, and three-year scholarship program for girls who have completed lower
         secondary school or 9 years of education);
        provided in-service training to 62 pre-primary MAT teachers;
        recruited 146 caregivers;
        established Toy Libraries in 270 villages;
        furnished 100 classrooms with educational toys and books; and
        provided 73 villages with outdoor playground equipment, teaching materials, and child story books.



Outcomes

The percentage of CCDG and MAT teachers receiving performance feedback at least once annually from
ECE officers, based on classroom observations, increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 82 percent in
2018, short of the target of 100 percent.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



                            The percentage of children aged 3-5 in target awareness villages who were stimulated at home increased
                            from a baseline of 55 percent in 2016 to 74.8 percent in 2021, essentially meeting the target of 75 percent.

                            The percentage of children aged 3-5 in CCDG and MAT target villages with an overall child development
                            score above 0.6 increased from a baseline of 37 percent in 2016 to 45.8 percent in 2021, short of the target of
                            47 percent.

                            Additional findings derived from the Impact Evaluation. Three randomized control trials were
                            implemented under the project to estimate the impacts of CCDGs and MAT, compare the impact between the
                            two interventions, and estimate the impact of community awareness interventions (ICR, p. 18).

                            Data showed that ECE attendance, parent-child interactions at home (reading books, telling stories, drawing),
                            and child development outcomes (literacy, numeracy, and executive functions) increased significantly in both
                            CCDGs and MAT communities at both midline (end 2017) and endline (early 2020) compared to the baseline
                            scenario in early 2016. Endline scores for CCDGs and MAT interventions were largely similar, according to
                            the ICR.

                            But the impact evaluation showed no evidence of community awareness campaign impact on children’s early
                            learning environments. The ICR (p. 19) noted that the lack of impact could have been caused by the fact that
                            only a small percentage of VEDCs delivered the full suite of 12 awareness sessions in their villages as
                            originally intended.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to increase coverage of early childhood education services for three- to five-year-old children in
                            target districts was fully achieved; and the objective to improve the quality of those services was almost fully
                            achieved. The aggregation of achievements under both objectives is consistent with a substantial rating for
                            overall efficacy.

                            The outcomes achieved were largely attributable to the project, and the ICR noted that, apart from MOES
                            staff salaries, the project was exclusively dependent on IDA’s support and its related activities (see section 7).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



 5. Efficiency
The ICR (p. 13) highlighted the global acknowledgement that ECE interventions are among the most cost-
effective interventions in social sectors. In settings marked by high inequalities and high rates of poverty and
malnutrition, returns to early childhood interventions have been estimated to range from 6:1 to 18:1, resulting
from increased future productivity and earnings alone. In addition, parental education on early child stimulation
and the introduction of CCDGs for 3- and 4-year-olds are known to be a contributing factor to the improvement
of both cognitive and non-cognitive skills of children (e.g., communication skills, social skills, and emotional
development). The provision of school meals is also known to contribute to reduced dropout rates and increased
school attendance.

The cost-benefit analysis that was carried out at appraisal suggested that expected benefits would outweigh
costs (PAD, p. 14). The analysis used educational attainment as the most easily measured impact of the project,
assuming a range of potential outcomes from optimistic (90 percent uptake with two additional years of
schooling) to less optimistic (50 percent uptake with one additional year of schooling). Estimates on the returns
to education were translated to increases in future income, and then compared to the stream of costs of project
interventions. Using a discount rate of 5 percent per year, the analysis suggested that, under the optimistic
scenario, the project would result in US$7 in benefits for each dollar invested. Under a pessimistic scenario, the
analysis suggested that the project would bring about US$2 for each dollar invested.

The ICR carried out a rigorous cost-benefit analysis with sensitivity testing and appropriate assumptions. The
analysis assumed that beneficiary children would go on to complete nine years of formal schooling; that
students’ participation in pre-primary education would result in higher learning outcomes, which would in turn
increase the students’ expected future wage earnings streams; that benefits accruing to children 3-5 years
old from CCDG and MAT programs would amount to only half of the benefits accruing to 5-year-old pre-primary
program beneficiaries. Using a discount rate of 5 percent, the net present value of the project was estimated at
US$75.5 million under the baseline scenario, with a corresponding internal rate of return (IRR) estimated at 8.7
percent (ICR, p. 25). Under a pessimistic scenario, assuming that improvements in learning outcomes were only
half that of the baseline scenario, the net present value was estimated at US$15.4 million with a corresponding
IRR of 6.1 percent. These estimates suggest substantial economic returns from the project (ICR, p. 25).

At the same time, some adverse aspects of implementation reduced efficiency. The implementation of activities
related to CCDGs, MAT, and ECE community awareness was delayed due to their novel nature (ICR, p. 29).
There were lengthy processes in developing modules and materials for the awareness campaign, and in
finalizing modules and administrative guidelines between MOES and the Ministry of Health. The time taken for
all local stakeholders to gain understanding of project innovations contributed to the delays. Activities picked up
around the third year, although staff turnover took place at different levels of MOES departments and
contributed to variable implementation slow-downs, notably when project focal persons were transferred (ICR,
p. 29). ECE community awareness modules remained partially implemented, but there was adequate progress
in other project activities, including classroom construction. Subsequently, the project faced school closures due
to COVID-19 lockdowns. The implementation period was extended by two years, as noted in Section 2e.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              8.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high, as objectives were responsive to country needs for early childhood
education and remained fully consistent with the World Bank Education Sector Strategy 2020 and with the
Country Partnership Framework (FY2017-FY2021) at project closing. Efficacy is rated substantial, as
development objectives were almost fully achieved. Efficiency is rated substantial, based on the expectation of
substantial returns, but with implementation shortcomings that moderately reduced project efficiency. The
overall outcome is rated satisfactory, indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the operation’s achievement
of its objectives, in its efficiency, and in its relevance.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR reported several risks related to maintaining development outcomes, notably in terms of financial
sustainability. Except for staff salaries, the total expenditure of the operation was financed by IDA, and the
ICR (p. 36) estimated that there was a high risk that financial constraints may be encountered to support the
maintenance of 550 pre-primary classrooms, the continuity of VEDCs and CCDGs, including allowances for
awareness facilitators, caregivers’ remuneration, replenishment of toys and materials, operation and
monitoring costs, pre-service and in-service training, and school meals. Technical sustainability may also be
affected due to teacher transfers and attrition of caregivers. The ICR noted that collective efforts and sense
of ownership would likely be diminished once the project ends if project interventions were viewed as a
"Bank project" (ICR, p. 37).

Nevertheless, a follow-on operation (Learning and Equity Acceleration Project or LEAP, P173407), approved
in March 2021, expanded the ECE program and developed a plan for financial sustainability (ICR, p. 31).
The risk to development outcome is likely to be mitigated by prevailing national policies related to poverty
reduction, education development, and ethnic development promoting inclusion. Factors that would further

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



facilitate risk mitigation include political stability in the country and institutional strengthening generated by
the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation benefited from lessons learned in ECE in the country and globally, including for
  overcoming demand-side constraints through awareness about ECE benefits, attention to disability, and
  provision of school meals, and for enhancing clarity in the lines of responsibility in ECE service delivery
  (PAD, pp. 10-11).

  MOES was the project executing agency, supported by a Project Coordination Unit. MOES was
  responsible for project implementation according to agreed administrative arrangements, financial
  management and procurement practices, and applicable safeguard policies (PAD, p. 11). MOES was to
  be guided by a Project Steering Committee and a Project Advisory Council, supported by a Working
  Group. MOES would implement project activities as part of the day-to-day work of its line departments,
  including with counterpart officials at the provincial and district levels.

  Implementation arrangements were adequately prepared, including for financial management,
  procurement, and safeguards. The ICR reported that preparation included intensive public consultations,
  meetings, workshops, and focus groups. The Bank Team developed an Implementation Support Plan
  that provided details on supervision, technical oversight, fiduciary oversight, external audits, and
  procurement training.

  Risks and risk management measures were adequately identified overall, except for risks associated with
  the introduction of new concepts such as CCDGs and MAT. The ICR (p. 37) reported that the introduction
  of these new concepts required time to be understood by stakeholders. Related delays necessitated
  project extensions, and the ICR noted that implementation of new concepts requires realistic timetables
  at the initial project design stage.

  The ICR (p. 34) stated that, at appraisal, the project identified necessary building blocks for ECE, but did
  not include a sufficient set of interventions to address unmet demand for ECE access. Importantly, the
  initial M&E design lacked coherence and clarity between outputs and outcomes related to the quality
  improvement objective (ICR, p. 34, and Section 9). It was not clear how the quality of ECE services would
  be improved, and outcome indicators did not capture the stated objective (quality standards designed vs.
  quality improvement of ECE services). The above shortcomings were subsequently rectified during
  implementation (see Section 2e, first restructuring).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                         Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)




b. Quality of supervision
 Bank supervision and implementation support missions were carried out on a regular biannual basis.
 According to the ICR, the quality of reporting was adequate. The Aide Memoires carried key findings,
 implementation gaps, and challenges, and key discussions with government counterparts with
 recommendations for follow-up actions. Supervision of fiduciary aspects and environmental and social
 safeguards was carried out once a year jointly with other technical specialists.

 Throughout the seven-year implementation period, the project had six Task Team Leaders. According to
 the ICR (p. 29), there was no indication of negative impacts resulting from the frequent turnover. Task
 Team members were based in the Vientiane Country Office.

 The Bank Team was reportedly effective in helping the project overcome initial delays, where the
 understanding of new project concepts took time to take hold. The first restructuring introduced corrective
 measures to address design weaknesses discussed above in Section 8a. The Team facilitated subsequent
 restructurings that allowed additional time to complete project activities.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is considered satisfactory with a minor lapse in data verification.
 According to the ICR (p. 35), the Bank Team used data provided by the Project Coordination Unit as a
 reference for the Results Framework, and that there was a need for more attention to data verification and
 triangulation of MOES data with the findings of the third-party firm.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated. They were well reflected by coverage indicators, but not by quality
 improvement indicators. As previously noted in Section 8a and the ICR (p. 34), clarity and alignment were
 lacking between outputs and outcomes concerning quality improvement of ECE services. The outcome
 defined by the PAD as "ECE quality standards designed and endorsed" did not reflect quality improvement
 of ECE services. The ICR also noted that training on Community Awareness Campaigns did not reflect the
 quality of campaigns. Another design issue was that the original set of intermediate results indicators
 missed some key outputs (e.g., community awareness, school meals) and necessitated subsequent
 revisions in the results framework. Baselines were available.

 The design included monitoring services by a third party and an impact evaluation that aimed at comparing
 the outcomes of CCDGs, MAT, and ECE community awareness interventions.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 31), the Department of Pre-Primary and Primary Education collected,
  consolidated, and analyzed data and information from various centers and line departments, as planned.
  Indicators included in the Results Framework were tracked, updated, and shared with the Bank.
  Reporting templates were developed for quarterly and annual reporting, and captured the required
  information for each component. The baseline, mid-line, and end-line surveys for the impact evaluation
  were completed. There were disruptions in data collection for the endline survey due to school closures
  resulting from COVID-19 in 2020, but sufficient data was collected by that time to allow data
  analysis (ICR, p. 31). The project revised outcome and intermediate results indicators in 2017 to rectify
  M&E design shortcomings.

  Data verification weakness was discussed in Section 8b. Also, the ICR (p. 38) noted that, in Lao PDR,
  several departments managed different types of education data: the Department of Planning was
  responsible for the Education Management Information System; the Department of Pre-Primary and
  Primary Education for project progress reports; the Department of Teacher Training Education for trained
  teachers; and the Department of Inspection for reviewing the Education Sector Development Plan.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was extensive. M&E findings were used for project monitoring and for the corrective
  restructuring in 2017. The disability screening pilot was scaled down. When the 2016 baseline data of
  the impact evaluation showed very low levels of parent-children’s interactions, the project added “Toy
  libraries” to its activities.

  At the sectoral level, M&E findings were included in the Annual Performance Monitoring Report of the
  Education Sector Development Plan, establishing the project's importance within the overall education
  sector (ICR, p. 30). Findings of the impact evaluation were used to include CCDGs and MAT as key
  strategies for meeting ECE objectives in the Education and Sports Sector Development Plan 2021-25.

  M&E findings were also used to inform the design of the Learning and Equity Acceleration Project
  (LEAP, P173407) that was approved in March 2021, as noted in Section 7. In particular, as the impact
  evaluation showed that CCDGs were beneficial for 4-year-olds and those in socioeconomic status
  quintiles 2 and 3, the LEAP project expanded the program. Also, taking into account evidence of
  improved outcomes associated with MAT, the LEAP project intended to continue supporting that
  intervention. Findings of the impact evaluation were shared in global fora, thus contributing to further
  understanding of ECE aspects at wider levels (ICR, p. 31).




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The ICR (p. 32) reported that, throughout the life of the project, performance was rated satisfactory.

   The project was classified under Category B for Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) in view of
   classroom construction in existing school compounds. The PAD (pp. 16-17) noted that an Environmental
   Screening Checklist was included in the Environmental Code of Practice that provided guidelines on how to
   determine the most appropriate site considering the health, safety, and security of school children and
   structural integrity and environmental soundness of school buildings and premises. The Code of Practice
   was integrated in the Community Based Contracting Operational Manual to ensure that the environmental
   safeguards were included in planning, construction, and operation of the new facilities. The Environmental
   Code of Practice and the Contracting Operational Manual included an Environmental and Social
   Management Plan focusing on mitigation measures and monitoring.

   The project also triggered OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, and conducted a Social Assessment to identify
   potential barriers related to ECE implementation, including training, language instruction, and recruitment of
   ethnic teachers/caregivers for ethnic minority students. Based on the assessment and consultations with
   representatives of ethnic minority groups, the project emphasized ethnic caregivers training, annual
   refresher training, and feedback mechanisms. The project trained 200 ethnic girls as pre-primary
   schoolteachers in project areas through both short- and long-term scholarships (see Section 4, Objective 2,
   Outputs).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Although financial management risk was assessed to be substantial at appraisal (PAD, p. 15) given that
   project activities included extensive community-level support and participation, financial management
   performance, including procurement, was satisfactory, and benefited from adequate procedures,
   arrangements, internal control, and fiduciary standards. The Bank’s financial and procurement teams also
   conducted periodic reviews to gauge performance and compliance. All interim financial reports and annual
   project audit reports were received in a timely manner with unqualified opinion (ICR, p. 33).

   The ICR (p. 27) noted that Lao PDR has a strong nexus between public service providers and key
   stakeholders in the community. According to the ICR, most public schools in Lao PDR shared key
   information with their local communities, and 82 percent of public schools made their financial audit reports
   publicly available.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported (ICR, p. 28).


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)




d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory       Satisfactory
                                                                                This ICR Review rated Quality-
                                                                                at-Entry as moderately
                                                                                satisfactory because of
                                                                                shortcomings in the initial project
                                                                                design, theory of change and
                                                                                M&E design, with lack of
                                                                                coherence between outputs and
                                                                                outcomes pertaining to the
                                                                                quality improvement objective,
                                                                                and with an insufficient set of
Bank Performance                   Satisfactory       Moderately Satisfactory   interventions to address unmet
                                                                                access needs. These
                                                                                shortcomings were satisfactorily
                                                                                rectified during implementation.
                                                                                Both ICR and this ICR Review
                                                                                rated the Quality of Supervision
                                                                                as satisfactory. The aggregation
                                                                                of both sub-ratings is consistent
                                                                                with a moderately satisfactory
                                                                                rating for overall Bank
                                                                                Performance.
Quality of M&E                     Substantial        Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 37-38) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons,
partially re-stated by IEG:

The introduction of new concepts in development projects requires time to be understood by
stakeholders. Under the project, the concept of Community Child Development Groups and Multi-
Age Teaching took time to be adequately appreciated by key stakeholders in both the public sector



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)



and the community. Related delays necessitated a total implementation period of seven years and
indicated the need for more realistic timetables to implement unfamiliar concepts.

Scholarships constitute important incentives to teacher-trainees from hard-to-reach areas to
become pre-primary schoolteachers and to be deployed in remote schools. The project trained
200 ethnic girls as pre-primary schoolteachers through both short- and long-term scholarships.

Early childhood education has multi-sectoral dimensions. Coordination and collaboration
among sectors, stakeholders, and communities facilitated progress made in early childhood
education in the country. Teams of the Department of Education and Sports collaborated with their
peers in other sectors, notably the Ministry of Health, the Department of Finance, and the
community. The project also benefited from internal collaboration among departments of the Ministry
of Education and Sports: District Education and Sports Bureau, Department of Inspection,
Department of Planning, Department of Pre-Primary and Primary Education, and Department of
Teacher Training Education.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was results-oriented and aligned with development objectives. It adequately illustrated the theory of
change and aptly identified initial design issues. The ICR's analysis was thorough and supported by adequate
evidence. The ICR appropriately linked the narrative with the efficacy rating. Its thorough discussion of M&E
aspects was noteworthy. Specific lessons were directly derived from project experience. The ICR was internally
consistent overall and followed guidelines, but lacked reporting on actual costs by components, and had
occasional lapses in clarity and an outstretched narrative that exceeded the recommended length.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)




                                                                           Page 16 of 16
