        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022897

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P151318                                       Higher Education Support Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                          Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56060,IDA-D0430                           31-Dec-2020                                        31,429,045.60

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 07-May-2015                                   30-Jun-2021

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                 33,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                                  33,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                              31,431,332.40                                           0.00




 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt         Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                             Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the May 30, 2015 Financing Agreement between the Government and IDA (Schedule 1, p. 5), the
   project’s development objective (PDO) was “…to improve the relevance of selected higher education
   programs and the stewardship of the higher education system in the Recipient’s territory.” The Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) of April16, 2015 presented the same statement (PAD, pp. viii, 8, and 27).

   The PDO did not change throughout the project’s life, nor did key outcome targets or indicators.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Project support was delivered through three components.



   Component 1: Support to Selected Public Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) (original estimate:
   $22.00 million; actual cost: $19.58 million) was to improve the relevance of selected higher education
   programs, while contributing to improving stewardship by supporting governance improvements and quality-
   related interventions in selected existing HEIs demonstrating a strong commitment to reform and offering
   programs in agriculture, livestock, mining and technology.

   Subcomponent 1.1: Support to selected existing public HEIs was to focus on four institutions (with
   particular areas of specialty): (i) the Rural Polytechnic Institute of Katibougou (IPRK) (agriculture, research,
   and outreach); (ii) the University of Segou (UOS) (livestock, agriculture/water management, irrigation); (iii)
   the University of Science and Technology of Bamako (applied sciences); and (iv) the National School of
   Engineering (ENI) (engineering programs, including mining). The project was to support the implementation
   of five-year (2015-2020) Institutional Development Plans (IDPs) and Annual Work Plans (AWPs) for each of
   these HEIs, approved by their respective Boards of Trustees prior to effectiveness. Each AWP, specifying
   annual objectives and indicators, was to serve as the basis for contracts to be cosigned by the HEI rector,
   the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research (MESRS), and the Ministry of Economy and
   Finance (MEF). The AWPs were to include all activities and funds allocated to the institutions (domestic and
   external), with clear roles, responsibilities and mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of annual
   performance. Annual AWP reports and audits were to complement the report of the Quality Assurance (QA)
   unit on HEI performance, used for monitoring of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). Two DLIs, with
   seven disbursement-linked results (DLRs) focused on governance, relevance, and quality, with relevant
   targets set for each HEI, were incorporated into performance-based contracts.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Support to the UOS livestock department: This HEI, Mali’s first public regional
   university, required more in-depth support, given that it was still in the process of development, while other
   selected HEIs were already established. This subcomponent was to support the development of a new
   livestock and animal health department, particularly the construction and equipment of new teaching
   facilities, goods, and technical assistance required to set up a modern, functional facility.

   Subcomponent 1.3: Support to the development of the new Bamako Africa School of Mines: Also in
   support of a new HEI under development, set up to address the skills gap in the country’s mining sector,
   this subcomponent aimed to support the development of a business model for the school, incorporating a
   public-private partnership (PPP) framework to involve interested mining companies. To this end, the

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



subcomponent was to support a feasibility study, covering financing options, architectural plans, curriculum
and program development, and equipment specifications.



Component 2: Higher Education System Support (original estimate: $8 million; actual cost: $8.67
million) was to improve the stewardship of the higher education system by strengthening the government’s
capacity to articulate and implement reforms; play an oversight and regulatory role, including for the private
sector; and manage information. To this end, this component was to support:

      Upgrading of the Directorate General for Higher Education and Scientific Research (DGESRS),
         including: building of new premises, procurement of office furniture and information technology (IT)
         equipment, and staff training.
        Support to the Planning and Prospective Unit (PPU) and the development of the sub-sector plan,
         including: procurement of equipment, furniture, consultants, and training of PPU and HEI staff on the
         production of annual statistics in coordination with the management information system (MIS) and
         annual tracer studies. The PPU was to assist HEIs not participating in Component 1 to develop and
         monitor their respective five-year IDPs, with the support of a Dutch-financed project.
        Support to the Quality Assurance (QA) Unit: consultant services and workshops to promote and
         facilitate QA implementation in HEIs, assist selected academic units to undertake self assessments
         and guide implementation of the bachelor's – master's – doctorate system, and provide equipment
         and furniture.
        Management and Information System (MIS), as an integral part of the West and Central African
         Research and Education Network, complementing existing interventions, including technical
         assistance (TA) to enhance the MIS and upgrade its software based on specifications outlined in a
         2011 preliminary study. This included: (i) the development of a standard MIS for HEIs (accounting,
         budgeting, academic and student management, facilities management); and (ii) the implementation
         of a Higher Education Management Information System (SIGES) at the levels of the MESRS and
         HEIs.
        Virtual library and upgrading libraries: complementing UNESCO’s financing of a virtual library,
         acquisition of eBooks and complementary equipment for HEIs as well as three videoconferencing
         rooms.
        Development of private sector providers, including: studies and related consultancy services to
         support the development and expansion of private HEIs; and TA and equipment upgrading for the
         MESRS unit responsible for private HEIs.



Component 3: Project Management and Technical Assistance (original estimate: $3.00 million;
actual cost: $3.11 million) to provide fiduciary support and studies and analytical work (improvement of
higher education M&E, a new financing system that would incentivize a more competitive higher
education system, exchange programs for HEIs with internationally renowned institutions, and innovation to
promote learning outcomes, academic excellence, and responsiveness to market demands). TA was also
envisaged to support selectively services of HEIs not included under Component 1 to compete for
partnerships with African Centers of Excellence in West and Central Africa.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



   There were no revisions to components during the life of the project.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. The total cost of the project was $31.36 million equivalent, or 95 percent of the original estimate of
   $33.00 million.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed by IDA, through a credit (IDA-
   56060) in the amount of SDR 10 million ($14 million equivalent) and a grant (IDA-D0430) in the amount of
   SDR 13.5 million ($19 million equivalent). No Borrower contribution was planned or provided. A total of 9.22
   million SDRs was disbursed against the SDR 10 million IDA credit (92 percent disbursed), while 100
   percent of the SDR 13.5 million SDR IDA grant was disbursed. Of the total IDA allocation of SDR 23.5
   million (credit and grant combined), a total of SDR 22.72 million was disbursed, translating into a 97 percent
   disbursement rate.

   The Investment Project Financing instrument employed a "mixed modality," with approximately $3.2 million
   of the project's total financial resources allocated to DLIs and the balance of resources allocated to items-
   based disbursements. The "mixed modality" approach sought to demonstrate incentive-based
   improvements at the HEI level.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on May 7, 2015, became effective on September 23, 2015, and
   closed on June 30, 2021. The project was restructured once to extend the original closing date of
   December 31, 2020 by six months to allow for the completion of a small number of activities, already
   programmed but not completed, due to delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the August 18, 2020
   coup d’etat.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. Mali’s National Higher Education Policy
(PNES) 2021-2030 and its Strategic Plan for Higher Education (2021-2026) are clear in articulating chronic
issues and challenges facing the sector. Notwithstanding some improvements in sector performance, the
PNES points to remaining challenges, including shortcomings in the quality of higher education training and
research and the extent to which they are responsive to labor market needs, especially in priority
sectors. The national policy and strategy documents also highlight shortcomings in higher education sector
governance, which undermine sector quality, effectiveness, and efficiency. The project's explicit focus on
priority sectors (agriculture, livestock, mining, engineering, and technology) was highly appropriate given
the very large share (80 percent) of all higher education students in Mali enrolled in the humanities and
social sciences disciplines (ICR p. 6). While quality of tertiary education was not explicit in the PDO
statement, it was well integrated into the stewardship objective (and corresponding results framework and
DLIs/DLRs), including the establishment and strengthening of quality assurance institutions, capacities,


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



               processes, and partnerships with the private sector (the future employers of program graduates) at the
               national level and in each of the target HEIs, as well as their monitoring and ongoing improvement.

               The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. Building on the
               foundation laid by this project, Mali’s new 10-year policy (PNES) seeks to: (i) improve the quality of
               programs to meet labor market needs; (ii) improve the quality of the faculty and teaching staff; (iii) address
               the shortage of teaching staff by increasing their numbers; (iv) increase student enrollment; (v) further
               integrate higher education and scientific research; and (vi) improve governance within the system.
               Implementation of the first five years of this policy, as articulated in the Strategic Plan for Higher Education,
               converges around five axes aiming to: (i) strengthen the quality, effectiveness, and efficiency of
               governance; (ii) optimize equitable and inclusive access to higher education; (iii) improve the quality of
               training and learning environments; (iv) increase graduates’ employability; and (v) deploy the Information
               Technology Services Policy through strengthened links with HEIs.

               The PDO is highly relevant to the Bank’s most recent strategy for Mali. The World Bank’s Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mali was initially conceived to cover the period FY2016-2019 and was
               subsequently extended to include FY2020. In a February 24, 2022 meeting, the Bank’s Mali team (co-task
               team leader and other team members) informed IEG that a short-term Country Engagement Note (CEN) is
               currently under preparation but not yet available. The CEN's short-term horizon is driven by currently high
               political uncertainty in Mali. The team also noted that this CEN is expected to continue the strong focus on
               human capital development to achieve economic reform and resilience. In the meantime, the 2016-2020
               CPF supports three areas of focus, all relevant to the project. The first area of focus (Improve Governance)
               aims to improve the allocation and efficient use of public expenditures, enhance public sector
               accountability, and improve service delivery. The second area of focus (Improve Infrastructure and
               Connectivity for all Malians) includes an emphasis on improving skills required for the development of
               agriculture, livestock, and other priority sectors and subsectors, as well as the integration of young people,
               especially girls, in the labor market. The third area of focus (Build Resilience) includes an objective to build
               human capacity, with an emphasis on strengthening the quality and relevance of education services, both
               basic and higher education. The project was included in the CPF as direct support to the objective of
               human capacity development. The project was also consistent with the World Bank’s twin goals of
               eliminating extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the relevance of selected higher education programs

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



The PAD did not include an explicit theory of change. The ICR (p. 5) provides a good synopsis of the
program's logic in the form of a results chain, reflective of the project design as described in the PAD (p.
10). In support of Objective 1 (improve the relevance of selected higher education programs), the project
financed a number of interventions to help four public HEIs develop new programs, improve existing
programs, license these programs, and attract new students in three priority sectors (agriculture, livestock,
and mining). The relevance and quality of these programs were to be enhanced through the establishment
and implementation of partnerships with employers, including the private sector, through which priorities
would be set, existing programs revamped, and new ones developed so that graduates’ skills would be better
aligned with priority sectors’ needs. Supplemental support (civil works, equipment, TA) provided to two new
universities, still in the process of developing programs, to fill skills gaps in critical sectors included: (i) the
development of a new livestock and animal health department at UOS; and (ii) the development of a business
model for the Bamako Africa School of Mines, incorporating a PPP framework. This support was expected to
culminate in intermediate results: an increased number of national students enrolled in licensed programs at
participating HEIs; an increased share of the HEIs’ budgets allocated to pedagogical inputs; an increase in
the amount of cash generated internally at participating HEIs; and ultimately enhanced relevance, as
measured by employer satisfaction with graduates of priority programs, number of programs developed with
private sector participation, and tracer studies documenting experiences and successes of HEI graduates in
priority sectors.

It was expected that achievement of these outcomes (and intermediate outcomes) would be facilitated by a
set of DLIs and DLRs embedded in performance contracts and implemented within the four participating
HEIs:

DLI #2 (improved relevance of selected programs) and four supporting DLRs:

      DLR #4: number of training programs licensed in line with agreed guidelines
      DLR #5: number of new students enrolled in licensed programs developed with the private sector and
       approved by the Board of Trustees
      DLR #6: number of teachers trained in the licensed courses approved by the Board of Trustees
      DLR #7: percentage increase in financial resources generated internally



Outputs and intermediate results

      A total of 36,392 students were enrolled in licensed programs at participating HEIs, up from a baseline
       of 10,000 and exceeding the target of 18,900.
            o Of these students enrolled in licensed programs, 12,744 were female, up from a baseline of
               2,500 and exceeding the target of 5,000. Outreach, affirmative action, scholarships, and
               financial incentives supported the achievement of this intermediate result (DLR #5).
      A total of 1,403 teachers were trained in the licensed programs, up from a baseline of 120 and
       exceeding the target of 780. This includes teachers receiving in-service or pre-service training, which
       enabled them to teach the revised program content in a satisfactory manner. The tracer study has
       documented administrators’ satisfaction with the quality of these teachers, post-training (DLR #6).
      By the project’s completion, 15 percent of budgets in participating HEIs were allocated to pedagogical
       inputs, up from a baseline of 10 percent, but falling short of the target of 30 percent. This indicator
       refers to non-capital allocations, which improve teaching-learning processes with the exclusion of

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



     salaries, additional hours, and scholarships. Although the target was missed partly due to the
     indicator's definition, and even though the focus was on the project-supported HEIs, the project did
     achieve a substantial system-wide improvement in the quality of teaching and learning through the
     provision of pedagogical resources nationwide. The ICR notes that, in retrospect, the target may have
     been ambitious.
    The amount of cash generated internally at participating HEIs increased by 216 percent over the
     baseline year (2015), exceeding the target of a 160 percent increase. This increase is based on the
     financial resources generated by the university from a combination of fees, donations, and services
     rendered using the specialized equipment provided through the project (DLR #7).
    Six public HEIs prepared proposals for acquiring support from the Africa Centers of Excellence
     (ACE) in West and Central Africa Project and were selected by the project to support development of
     partnerships with ACE institutions, achieving the target of six. These proposals were competitively
     selected by a committee of national and international experts to support public HEIs other than the
     four project-supported HEIs in implementing innovative proposals for human resource development
     and scientific research with ACE institutions. This was the first time Malian HEIs had the opportunity to
     participate in a regional higher education competition. The six participating public HEIs had a total of
     15 research proposals that support research and training for 13 Master’s degree students, 31 Ph.D.
     students, and 15 post doctorates. The programs have been important for maintaining professional
     connections and research collaboration with other regional higher education institutions.
    The project supported the creation of the Department of Livestock and Animal Health at the UOS and
     the development of a new African School of Mines to increase the quality of graduates with skills
     aligned to these priority sectors. Supported included construction, equipment, curriculum
     development, new training programs, and training of faculty to deliver these programs.



Outcomes

    From a baseline of 45, a total of 197 programs in participating HEIs were proposed and developed
     with private sector participation by the project’s end, exceeding the target of 135. These programs
     were licensed and approved by the QA unit within the MESRS. Prior to their approval by MESRS,
     these programs underwent a process internal to the HEIs including recommendation by the
     universities and approval by a council in charge of reviewing programs on offer, made up of faculty
     and private sector representatives, and/or a committee in charge of scientific and pedagogical
     perspectives. The establishment and application of this QA capacity and process for all new and
     improved courses, both within HEIs and at the national level, is indicative of improved quality of
     training and program graduates. The factoring into this process of private sector participation is
     indicative of improved relevance, since the private sector represents the future employers of program
     graduates, and their role was to ensure the matching of training to their labor market needs (DLR
     #4). This being said, the 2019 tracer study (noted below) does point to the opportunity to further
     strengthen HEI-private sector partnerships.
    A number of project findings and outcomes were documented in three tracer studies conducted during
     project implementation: two in 2017, and one in 2019. The 2019 (closest to project-end) study,
     conducted by the National Observatory for Employment and Training, provided data and information
     on 12,508 students from seven (project and non-project) HEIs who were enrolled in Bachelor's degree
     programs during 2015-2018, with follow-up interviews of a random sample of these students. As such,
     it is not well suited to assess the project's impact on students' quality and employability, since this

                                                                                                Page 7 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



    particular cohort of students was enrolled during the first half of the six-year project, when the project's
    activities to improve relevance and stewardship were being launched and implemented. The ICR's
    economic analysis (Annex 4, p. 56) also points out that "...the study was limited to the first cohort of
    beneficiary students that completed their Bachelor's at the end of 2017-18, and it could take longer for
    the impact of quality improvements to take full effect and translate into higher employability
    rates." This being said, survey results were factored into the preparation of the new 10-year higher
    education policy (2021-2030) and Strategic Plan for Higher Education (2021-2026) and point to both
    accomplishments and remaining challenges, including the following:
         o Employers’ satisfaction with graduates in priority sectors (agriculture, livestock, mining)
             achieved a level of 87 percent, exceeding the target of 40 percent (employer satisfaction
             surveys). Neither the PAD nor the ICR indicates any baseline value for this indicator, but the
             ICR (paras. 4-5) does document a considerable gap at this project’s outset between the needs
             of employers in priority sectors and the number and quality of HEI graduates. It would be
             reasonable to assume that the project’s target of 40 percent is likely indicative of the low level
             of employers’ satisfaction with the workforce they hired from HEIs at the time of project design.
             It is also plausible to assume that employers’ increased involvement in designing and
             improving new and improved programs was also a factor, and that (as is noted in the ICR’s
             economic analysis (Annex 4)), employers’ satisfaction is likely to increase further as newer
             cohorts of graduates, fully benefiting from project interventions, enter the workforce post-
             project.
         o Administrators in the project HEIs were satisfied with the quality of the professionally licensed
             teaching staff.
         o University staff interviewed would like to see a greater focus (up to 60 percent of hours)
             devoted to practical skills.
         o The large majority of graduates benefiting from internships at the time of training were enrolled
             in project-supported universities, and internship opportunities were largely based on personal
             relationships.
         o The insertion rates of project-supported and non-project-supported HEI graduates was roughly
             the same, at 6 out of 10 graduates, However, the share of project graduates working in their
             primary sector is higher among project graduates than non-project graduates, as are earnings
             The ICR does not quantify these differences.
         o Six out of 10 jobs held by project graduates are formal jobs.
         o Employability of both project and non-project graduates was problematic, with 30 percent of
             graduates persistently unemployed, 28 percent in paid employment, four percent on a paid
             internship, 15 percent self-employed, and 23 percent continuing training. Again, this study
             documents outcomes for students graduating in the early years of the project (2015-2018),
             prior to the achievement of project outcomes. Impacts are expected to be more robust for
             graduates of project HEIs, who graduated at the project’s end, or post-project.
         o A total of 37,795 students benefited from the project in the four selected HEIs and other HEIs
             benefiting from the project, slightly exceeding the target of 35,000. The ICR (p. 14 and
             Annex 1) documents a target of 18,900, but this ICRR uses the target of 35,000 stated in the
             PAD. There were no formal revisions of targets. Females made up 35 percent of these student
             beneficiaries, achieving the target of 35 percent. However, the tracer study found that male
             graduates had advantages over their female counterparts in terms of access to sustainable
             employment, average time to find employment, and wages. This finding applies to both project
             and non-project cohorts, and the ICR did not provide specific data on these differentials from
             the tracer studies.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Support Project (P151318)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the stewardship of the higher education system

Rationale
Investments in the licensing of programs, in the generation and use of various sources of information (tracer
studies, employer satisfaction surveys, a higher education information system including a virtual library and
online courses, and studies), in forging partnerships with the private sector, and in quality assurance were,
together, expected to culminate in enhanced sector management capacity. Specifically, these investments
were expected to result in: an increased number of public HEIs equipped with a management information
system (MIS) with operational resource management capacity, the establishment of a semi-autonomous QA
Unit; an increased number of users accessing the digital library system; and the annual publication of
statistical reports with relevant data from HEIs, both public and private. These, in turn, were expected to lead
to improved stewardship of the higher education system in Mali, as measured by: the number of public HEIs
with a functional Board of Trustees (or University Council) with substantial representation of the private sector
and other priority sector employers, and the number of institutional development plans approved at public
HEIs.

It was expected that achievement of these outcomes (and intermediate outcomes) would be facilitated by a
set of three DLRs implemented within the four participating HEIs, which provided focus and incentives for
achieving: DLI #1 (improved institutional governance) and three supporting DLRs:

      DLR #1 Functional Board of Trustees (or University Council) of HEIs in place at four HEIs
      DLR #2: Adoption and implementation of management tools and procedures of HEIs
      DLR #3: Approval of HEIs IDPs and yearly operational budget with indicators



Outputs and intermediate results

      Each year the annual report on achievements against DLIs was produced on time (before end-March),
       achieving the target. This report, supervised by MESRS (DGESRS) and the QA unit, assessed
       progress made by each participating HEI on each DLI and DLR. The achievement of all the DLIs and
       the full disbursement of funds against these DLIs are considerable achievements for the MESRS,
       especially since this was the first higher education project to implement results-based financing.
      A total of nine public HEIs have an MIS with operational resource management, up from a baseline of
       0 and achieving the target of 9.
            o Thanks to the project’s support, SIGES is now able to provide at the level of each of the nine
                universities accurate statistics, online registration, human resource management, and financial
                information, all critical inputs for the higher education statistical report.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



          o The project supported the Mali Research and Educational Network, which allowed for the
            interconnectivity of Malian HEIs with other African HEIs.
          o The project helped establish videoconferencing centers in seven sites, facilitating virtual
              meetings with other institutions related to teaching and research. This strengthened
              connectivity facilitated the launch of online courses at basic, secondary, and tertiary levels
              when schools closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
            o With project support, an online learning platform (Moodle) was established, and teachers and
              researchers were trained on the preparation and delivery of courses. Overall, 625 videos were
              prepared, 126 higher education teachers were trained in online course preparation and
              delivery, and 123 online courses were developed by teachers and researchers. The Moodle
              platform is envisaged by MESRS to be used for the creation of a future virtual university in
              Mali.
    MIS statistical reports are published annually, providing relevant data on HEIs, both public and private,
     achieving the target. Support for the SIGES system has allowed for the collection of standardized
     data that can be used to compare data and publish the statistical yearbook.
    A total of 84,341 users (students and faculty members) have accessed the digital library system, up
     from a baseline of 0 and far exceeding the target of 10,000. The virtual library is fully established,
     and access was given to all students and teachers of HEIs registered in the MIS. With project support,
     a contract with CAIRN.INFO (a French language web portal containing scholarly materials in the
     humanities and social sciences) provided more than 10,000 online resources to all professors and
     students in public HEIs identified through SIGES.
    Quality assurance was substantially strengthened under the project.
            o A quality assurance agency (the Malian Agency for Quality Assurance of Higher Education and
              Scientific Research, AMAQ-SUP), responsible for program regulation, accreditation, and
              evaluation, was established in June 2018, accorded semi-autonomous status, and became
              operational, achieving the target.
            o Internal quality assurance units (CIAQs) were also developed within the HEIs. To date, the four
              selected public HEIs, the vast majority of other public HEIs, and most private HEIs have a
              CIAQ. After establishing their CIAQs, HEIs conducted self assessments to improve their
              programs based on education standards. QA support included: study tours, development of
              evaluation standards, development of administrative and financial operating procedures for the
              AMAQ-SUP, and awareness raising on the importance of quality assurance.
    Capacity of the National Directorate of Higher Education and Scientific Research has been
     enhanced. It is now able to carry out studies, collect and analyze data provided by SIGES, support
     planning with the HEIs, provide statistical reports, monitor performance-based conditions of the HEIs,
     and provide support and training related to QA. Moreover, MESRS has given this National Directorate
     overall responsibility for developing a common vision for HEIs as well as the broader sub-sector
     program to improve the quality and relevance of higher education. Its evolution from a National
     Directorate to a General Directorate provides it with an increased stature and leadership role to
     facilitate assumption of its expanded responsibilities.
    The project was successful in introducing DLIs, achieving its goal of developing the four project HEIs
     into new models of institutional and pedagogical governance. The four HEIs have embedded the
     project-supported governance and operational models into their institutions and now serve as
     governance models for MESRS and other HEIs in Mali. In addition, the MEF, based on project
     experience, has entered into performance-based contracts with other HEIs, for which the DGESRS is
     responsible. While not part of the original project design, the government has drafted a new regulatory


                                                                                               Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



                                    framework conferring autonomy to HEIs based on the project model universities, which was reported
                                    to be undergoing a review and consultation process at the time of ICR preparation (ICR, p. 18).



                            Outcomes

                                  Nine public HEI IDPs (five-year strategic plans specifying priorities, planning, budget, indicators, and
                                   implementation formation) were approved by the HEIs’ Boards of Trustees and found satisfactory to
                                   the Bank, up from a baseline of 0 and achieving the target of nine. Together, these nine institutions
                                   cover the full range of disciplines offered at the bachelor's, master's and doctorate levels, and account
                                   for 97 percent of students enrolled in public HEIs.
                                  Nine public HEIs had a functional Board of Trustees, up from a baseline of 0 and achieving the
                                   target of nine. Functional boards are defined as having at least 30 percent of non-civil
                                   servants/private sector representatives from sectors relevant to programs developed at the HEI, and
                                   meeting at least twice annually to approve the HEI budget and relevant documents, thus ensuring HEI
                                   autonomy. These Boards deliberate on key elements of HEI management, such as strategic plans,
                                   budget, appointment of key staff, QA, and institutional rules, regulations, and procedures, in
                                   conjunction with the AMAQ-SUP.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            All of the PDO indicators were met or exceeded and the DLIs were all met. The project substantially
                            improved the quality and relevance of the higher education system in Mali. Employers’ satisfaction with
                            project-supported graduates they hired is high. Over 150 new programs were developed in partnership with
                            the private sector and licensed. The quality of professionally licensed teaching staff has risen. More project
                            graduates are working in their primary sector (compared to non-project graduates); and the number of project
                            beneficiaries slightly exceeded targets.

                            The project also made substantial contributions to improvements in sector stewardship. Performance-based
                            contracting has been incorporated into the new governance structures of project-supported HEIs and this
                            model will be extended to other HEIs. Investments in the MIS, the higher education information system
                            (SIGES), and IT/digital capacity have strengthened the generation and use of information for sector tracking
                            and management and the expansion of access to digital information, resources, and learning. Well-
                            functioning quality assurance structures have been established both within MESRS and within HEIs,
                            substantially boosting the capacity for quality assurance. The establishment of five-year institutional
                            development plans and budgets and functional Boards of Trustees in each of nine HEIs has substantially
                            strengthened HEI’s strategic management and oversight capacity.


                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



Attribution

The Mali team shared their perspectives on the project’s attribution/contribution to outcomes during a 2-24-
2022 meeting. While many development partners support basic education, very few support the higher
education sector. The outcomes reported by the ICR can be largely attributed to the project, although two
projects also contributed. The Netherlands Development Cooperation has contributed to project outcomes
through the Netherlands Post-Secondary Education Capacity Building Project (NICHE), which focused on the
professionalization of higher education programs. The Bank and the Netherlands worked closely together,
including occasional joint supervisions, to ensure continued coordination and full complementarity of
efforts. In addition, the Canadian International Development Agency, through the implementation of the
Project for Agricultural Training for Food Security in Mali (Formation agricole pour la sécurité alimentaire au
Mali, FASAM) has also contributed to outcomes. Katibougou and Segou HEIs (both supported under the
Bank’s project) benefitted from lessons learned and collaboration with this project for the design and
implementation of their study programs on agriculture and farm breeding. The institutional strengthening and
sector reform outcomes are strongly attributed to the Bank’s project and dialogue. Project objectives (aimed
at improving sector governance and stewardship) and its approach (performance-based contracting,
increasing responsibilities and autonomy of HE institutions) were critical in providing proof of concept and in
supporting reforms in project-supported HEIs, which are widely acknowledged and appreciated by national
actors and stakeholders and now being extended to the entire sector.

Counterfactual.

During the 2-24-2022 meeting with IEG, the Mali team also shared their perspectives on the counterfactual of
no project.

      The DGESRS used to be a National Directorate. Now it is a General Directorate, with more
         responsibility, an increased steering role for the higher education sector. It undertakes data collection,
         analysis, and reporting, with a view to informing evidence-based decision-making. Project activities to
         strengthen its capacity have equipped it to play its role effectively. Without project support sector
         stewardship would not be as strong.
        The Management Information System established with project support has facilitated and rendered
         much more efficient the management of information and the easier access of students to information
         and scholarships. Among its key features is the institutionalization of a unique identifier for the
         student population (some 120,000 students), facilitating their online registration, and linking them to
         scholarship opportunities. Sector efficiency would have been much weaker in the absence of the
         project.
        Quality assurance and regulation of the higher education sector would have been limited, less
         independent and weaker, had the project not supported the establishment of a semi-autonomous
         quality assurance function at the national level (AMAQ-SUP) and had there been no establishment of
         quality unites in project HEIs.
        In the absence of performance-based contracting, introduced under the project, financing,
         management and oversight of higher education programs and institutions would have been less
         focused on results and reform and more on inputs.
        In the absence of the project’s significant contribution to the strengthened digitalization capacity of the
         education sector, Mali would not have been equipped and able to take the quick action it did to extend




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



          access to education (including basic, secondary and higher education) during the time of school
          closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. (See also Section 10.c on unintended impacts.)



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
An end-of-project cost benefit analysis (CBA) showed that the project is likely to have generated substantial
benefits and reasonably high rates of return. Both the internal rate of return (IRR) and net present value (NPV)
estimates show that the project was economically viable at the end of the project implementation period based
on actual project beneficiaries. These estimates were calculated for sub-components 1.1 (support to existing
public HEIs) and 1.2 (support to the UOS livestock department) because the benefits for these interventions
were quantifiable. Calculations culminated in an estimated benefits/cost ratio of 1.84, a NPV of benefits of
US$228.9 million, and a strong IRR of 12.5 percent. To obtain a lower-bound of the benefits/cost ratio, the
economic analysis factored in the costs of the remaining components, which are not easily quantifiable, and
assumed no associated benefits. Even with such an assumption the benefit/cost ratio was found to be 1.77. The
results of the economic analysis strongly support the assertion that the project offered good value for money for
the beneficiaries (ICR, Table 4.2, p. 58).

Sensitivity analyses, which varied the project’s impact on employment outcomes for graduates, reaffirmed the
project’s efficiency. The economic analysis, described above, was based on the assumption that the
employment rate of graduates would correspond to the employer satisfaction rate, as measured through the
2019 tracer study. Two sensitivity analyses were undertaken, varying the impact of the project on employment
outcomes for graduates. The first (low case scenario) assumed no difference in the long-term employment rate
of student beneficiaries compared to the overall employment rate for graduates of tertiary education in Mali, and
still culminated in a benefit/cost ratio of at least 1.1. The second (high case scenario) assumed a 10-percentage-
point gain above Mali’s overall employment rate for tertiary graduates, culminating in a benefit/cost ratio of at
least 2.1.

The non-quantifiable benefits are also likely to have been significant. The costs of component 2, which aimed to
build institutional capacity and strengthen sector stewardship, represented a much smaller share of project
financing than those of component 1. The project developed a proof-of-concept framework to improve the
governance of the higher education sector in Mali. If there were accompanying reforms to extend this model
sector-wide, all higher-level institutions would benefit from a mechanism to improve program quality; justify,
mobilize, and prioritize investments in infrastructure and equipment; and achieve greater efficacy, efficiency, and
accountability through a results-based approach fostering improved management and accountabilities.

Implementation was efficient overall. The project achieved its objectives, with only a six-month extension of the
original implementation timeframe. This is noteworthy, considering that the extension was made to compensate
for delays caused by two major events that occurred during the project’s final year: the onset of the COVID-19
epidemic and the August 2020 coup d’etat. Together, the IDA Credit and Grant were 97 percent disbursed (see
also Section 2e). The project’s implementation arrangements, its interventions aimed at strengthening
institutions and capacity for sector stewardship, its results-based financing approach, and the granting of

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



increased autonomy to HEIs all contributed to its smooth and timely implementation. Some delays in the
implementation of QA activities/regulations at the central level, reported in 2017, negatively impacted the ability
of the ENI and the IPRK to attain their DLI targets, but these issues were subsequently resolved.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high, as the objectives were highly responsive to: (i) current country
conditions (shortcomings in the quality and relevance of higher education training and research and in
governance capacity, notwithstanding recent improvements on these fronts); and (ii) current development
priorities of the country (continued improvements in the quality of programs and their relevance to market
needs, enhanced employability of graduates, and strengthened sector governance). Additionally, the PDO were
substantially relevant to the World Bank’s most recent CPF (FY2016-2019, extended to 2020), with the
preparation of a new CEN under way. Under its “Build Resilience” focus, the CPF includes a Human Capital
Development objective that specifies the need to improve the quality and relevance of education services,
encompassing all levels of schooling and training.

Efficacy of both objectives is rated substantial. Objective 1 (improve the relevance of selected higher education
programs) was substantially achieved with a mix of targets fully achieved (tracer surveys conducted, highlighting
both successes and areas for improvement) and exceeded (employers’ satisfaction with graduates and the
number of licensed programs developed with the private sector). Objective 2 (improve the stewardship of the
higher education system) was substantially achieved, with HEIs' structures, capacities, and autonomy
strengthened.

Efficiency is rated substantial, with the end-of-project CBA (1.8), IRR (12.5%), and NPV ($288.9 million)
showing that the project was economically viable. Implementation was smooth overall and use of project
resources efficient.

Taken together, these ratings indicate that there were only minor shortcomings with the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, producing an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Support Project (P151318)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Project activities have been institutionalized by MESRS and the four project-supported HEIs, which now
serve as models for improved governance and program relevance. Institutional strengthening at the central
and institutional levels was effective in mitigating original capacity risks and culminated in improvements in
data systems and in the use of data to develop employment policies. QA capacity and processes have been
developed and institutionalized, contributing to improved program quality and relevance. This capacity
strengthening and institutionalization of new processes enhances the likelihood of project interventions being
sustained.

Nevertheless, three overarching risks to development outcomes were identified in the ICR (p. 28). First,
relatively poor education outcomes, combined with relatively high unemployment and poverty, have made
Mali’s large youth population susceptible to ongoing political tensions. Mali will need to encourage and
nurture more productive employment throughout the economy, including for self-employed and informal
workers in agriculture, livestock, and mining sectors. Second, project-financed equipment and construction
will require government provision of regular maintenance and renewal to ensure continued impact of
investments. Third, performance-based contracts signed between selected HEIs and MESRS to achieve
DLIs and DLRs prior to disbursement of funds boosted quality and institutional autonomy and strengthened
governance. Mali’s adoption of a draft regulatory framework that seeks to extend this model sector-wide,
including conferring of institutional autonomy to HEIs, is critical for ensuring the sustainability and scale-up of
this reform. In addition, going forward, the AMAQ-SUP team will need to increase its capacity to respond to
increased demand for accreditation of HEI programs and institutions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design was closely aligned with Mali’s National Policy and Strategy for Higher Education
  Development (2003-2013) and with the Bank’s Interim Strategy Note for Mali, which was focused on
  long-term economic growth and human capital development and in effect at the time of preparation. The
  design and its underlying theory of change were straightforward and focused, with a clear PDO, key
  indicators, and DLIs, which were appropriate for tracking progress towards achieving intermediate and
  final outcomes. The design reflected peer reviewers' recommendations and lessons from other relevant
  projects, with a particular focus on performance-based contracts. The use of results-based financing was
  a new, innovative approach for Mali, but at the same time appropriate to the project’s aim to improve HEI
  governance and the quality and relevance of HEI programs. The risk assessment identified the salient


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



  risks and included appropriate design features to mitigate them. The Bank’s preparation team included
  the relevant technical expertise and knowledge of reform and institutional strengthening to underpin a
  sound, well-informed design. Preparation was appropriately consultative, including faculty, staff, and
  students (and their parents) of HEIs, as well as MESRS and MEF staff. The Bank’s preparation team
  undertook due diligence in its preparation of fiduciary aspects, conducting assessments of financial
  management and procurement capacities, building implementation arrangements, and ensuring
  adequate capacity based on strengths and constraints identified.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were conducted on a semi-annual basis, properly staffed with higher education
 specialists and fiduciary and safeguards staff and consultants. Especially given the innovative nature of the
 project, with its results-based approach and the PDO goal of improving sector stewardship, the project
 team was actively engaged in supporting the government in its implementation efforts. Supervision teams
 provided consistent focus and support to financial management, procurement, and safeguards progress,
 and worked with DGESRS, the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), and other implementation agencies to
 build their capacities on these fronts. The missions were systematic in documenting progress and
 challenges in aides-memoire and internal reporting. Aides-memoire provided a clear record for the
 government on performance, challenges, and next steps, which provided clarity of guidance and a vehicle
 for learning and dialogue as reforms were implemented. By nature of the project’s results-based design
 and strong M&E, supervision and aides-memoire maintained a strong results focus. Challenges were
 addressed effectively without compromising the project’s design integrity. Supervision reporting also kept
 World Bank management informed of progress and was an important input to the ICR process. The Bank
 was effective in responding to the government’s request for a six-month extension due to the COVID-19
 pandemic and a coup d’etat during the project’s final year, which allowed for the completion of the project,
 as designed, and the institutionalization of new governance and quality assurance structures.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change, as presented in Figure 1 (ICR, p. 5) was logically sound, with clear links between
 inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and the PDO. The PDO were clearly articulated at the outset and
 did not change. The six PDO-level indicators and eleven intermediate outcome indicators were clearly

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



 defined and provided good measures of progress and outcomes. The design envisaged routine monitoring
 and reporting by the PIU and DGESRS, supported by the development of a computerized MIS that would
 integrate university subsystems into the national higher education system. The aim was to capture needed
 data for reporting on the project indicators, statistical yearbooks, and progress against HEIs’ development
 plans. The project’s results-based approach included DLIs and DLRs for the four project-supported HEIs,
 which were coherently linked to the HEIs' development plans and to the performance-based contracts. The
 DLIs and DLRs paid specific attention to new program introductions, teacher training, IT updates, and the
 monitoring and implementation of HEI development plans. As such, the M&E design was supportive of the
 government’s overall HEI reform agenda and the establishment of a QA process for institutions and HEI
 programs. Another strong feature of M&E design was its support of critical studies and evaluation,
 designed to provide complementary information, data, and insight on higher education financing,
 employment and quality of program graduates, and employers’ satisfaction with these graduates.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was rated satisfactory in the Bank’s internal reporting throughout project implementation. Reporting
  of data on the project indicators was systematically carried out during the entire life of the project. The
  DGESRS, PIU, and HEIs analyzed and reported on achievements against indicators on a regular
  (semiannual) basis. HEIs also issued progress reports on DLI achievement, linked to the performance-
  based contracting. Performance contracts were monitored by the DGESRS and PIU to ensure targets
  were being met. The AMAQ-SUP (fully institutionalized with project support) undertook M&E of a higher
  education QA mechanism, and continues to fulfill this function post-project. QA units were established
  within each project-supported institution and institutional self-assessments conducted. The project helped
  establish a robust MIS for the higher education sector. The DGESRS also conducted studies, with the
  support of technical assistance, including: a report on the challenges and constraints of private higher
  education in Mali; a feasibility study for the African School of Mines – Mali; an environmental and social
  impact study for the New School of Mines; an a study on the curriculum and programs for the New
  School of Mines. The project also conducted tracer studies and an employer satisfaction survey that were
  instrumental in assessing project achievements and impact, as well as a study on financing of higher
  education and feasibility of a student loan system.



c. M&E Utilization
  MESRS centralized all data on a single platform and regularly monitored the workforce by university,
  faculty, and sector. The data has also informed the publication of an annual statistical yearbook. IT
  systems and capacities established within project-supported HEIs facilitated the systematic collection
  and reporting of performance contracting data, helping MESRS and DGESRS in their overall monitoring
  responsibilities and HEIs in tracking their own progress against performance indicators. The
  establishment of QA units within each project-support HEI and their conduct of self evaluations are
  expected to be institutionalized, with the establishment of a strong and functioning AMAQ-SUP. MEF
  has expanded the use of performance-based contracts, whose results will (together with HEI budgets)
  provide the basis for allocating university budgets. The higher education MIS also institutionalized a
  unique identifier linked to a digitized student card, access portal, digital working place, online learning,
  online registration, and integrated management of payments. Studies undertaken with project



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



  support and DGESRS’s strengthened capacity to conduct studies and analyze data enhanced the
  preparation of the new Strategic Plan for Higher Education (2021-2026).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Category B status, since no activities were expected to have a negative impact
   on environmental resources or quality of life. OP/BP 4.01 “Environmental Assessment” was triggered due to
   potential production of solid waste with the refurbishment and construction of facilities (DGESRS and
   UOS). OP/BP 4.12 “Involuntary Resettlement" was also triggered. An Environmental Social Management
   Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework from a previous education project (P123503) were
   updated and disclosed in-country (March 30, 2015) and at the World Bank InfoShop (April 2, 2015).

   Safeguards were consistently monitored, and internal ratings remained in the satisfactory (including
   moderately satisfactory) range. In 2019, the PIU completed the Environmental and Social Impact
   Assessment, which assessed limited impact and scale of key construction activities. Moreover, construction
   sites’ Environmental and Social Management Plans were prepared with a view to mitigate the potential
   risks. In 2019, MESRS established a project-specific grievance redress mechanism (GRM), replacing the
   project’s previous reliance on the GRM in MESRS, which was not project-specific. During the project period,
   the GRM received and satisfactorily processed two complaints related to construction in Segou.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). FM performance received satisfactory ratings except for one moderately
   satisfactory rating in April 2016, due to issues associated with FM staff changes that were quickly
   resolved. A strong FM team and sound FM arrangements underpinned proper financial management,
   including: regular steering committee meetings for oversight; timely and satisfactory submission of interim
   financial reports; submission of required audits to the Bank, all unqualified; and effective implementation of
   recommendations emanating from external audit and Bank supervisions. The audit report for CY 2020
   issued an unqualified opinion and noted the effective implementation of all FM recommendations. This
   evidence indicates compliance with the Bank’s exigencies.

   Procurement. The consistent rating of moderately satisfactory in the Bank’s internal reporting system
   reflected sustained delays in processing, approval, and signing of procurement documents. Bank
   procurement staff provided training and technical support to the PIU to ensure compliance with
   procurement guidelines and improve procurement efficiency. The Bank team also conducted annual
   procurement reviews, which recommended improvements to contract processing. In 2020 the PIU
   migrated to the Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system, including



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



  procurement activities in the STEP platform. Procurement plans were updated and submitted to the Bank
  on a regular basis and always of good quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The project’s key digital achievements, including the establishment of a robust MIS in the higher education
  sub-sector and the establishment of a distance learning platform, rapidly informed the government’s
  decision to introduce the use of alternative education delivery channels during the COVID-19 pandemic
  with a focus on the use of radio for primary and lower secondary education provision, television for upper
  secondary, and distance learning (internet) for higher education. The project team took the lead in
  facilitating learning continuity during the pandemic, producing notable results: 625 instructional videos for
  national education; training of 126 teachers on distance learning; and delivery of 123 online courses. The
  project also facilitated open access by students, teachers, and researchers to digital resources through the
  virtual library, which bodes well for future partnerships with universities at the global level.



d. Other
  Gender. The project fully achieved the target for women’s enrollment in licensed programs (Section 4), but
  the tracer study points to the continued need to focus on closing the gender gap within both HEIs and the
  labor market, especially with regard to women's access to sustainable employment, average time to find
  employment, and wage differentials. The new Strategic Plan for Higher Education (2021-2026) envisages a
  review of the scholarship program with specific focus on prioritizing women’s applications. Moreover,
  MESRS intends to increase the presence of women in fields of technological science, medicine, pharmacy,
  agronomy, and animal medicine.

  Higher Education Governance. The project’s second objective to improve the stewardship of the higher
  education system in Mali was expressly focused on improving higher education governance; and it was
  substantially achieved. Associated outputs and outcomes are documented in Section 4.

  Additionally, the performance-based contracts introduced under the project have now been institutionalized
  and have been an important driver of change among project HEIs, strengthening their ownership and
  autonomy around clearly defined objectives, activities, and results. This project-demonstrated effect has
  caused MEF to institutionalize performance-based contracts and budgets across all HEIs in Mali, with a
  view to enhancing accountabilities sector-wide.

  Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity. The ICR (p. 21) noted that the provision of quality training to a
  growing number of students in priority economic sectors has already resulted in improved employment
  opportunities for graduates as evidenced by the tracer studies. These opportunities have the potential to
  contribute to the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity, with new, increased cohorts of
  graduates benefiting from the full project's effects and facing improved prospects for employment. At the
  same time, the ICR (p. 21) cautions that unemployment and under-employment are still a concern for HEI
  graduates, factors that are cited in studies as facilitating the radicalization and violent extremism of
  individuals, which is a high risk in the Malian context. There is scope for improving the relevance of HEI
  programs, continuing to connect with the private sector to this end, and encouraging more productive
  employment throughout the economy. It is also important to take note of the ICR's observation (p. 2) that


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



   equity in access to secondary and tertiary education remains a challenge, given that the upper income
   quintiles of the population make up the largest share of beneficiaries of these levels of education. This
   points to the need for continued efforts to attract and retain more equitable intake of tertiary-level students
   through scholarships and other incentives and supports.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons, drawn from the ICR and slightly consolidated by IEG, are well-grounded in
the ICR’s storyline and relevant to other countries undertaking higher education reform.

Establishing a solid governance system and strong ownership are critical for ensuring
implementation, institutionalization, and sustainability of reforms. In the case of Mali, the
project helped support the establishment of the Directorate General for Higher Education and
Scientific Research, responsible for overseeing and guiding the development and reform of the
higher education sector and the implementation of performance-based contracts. Instrumental in
achieving this outcome was the commitment of the actors who facilitated reform implementation,
leading to the autonomy of the project-supported higher education institutions. Realization of the
government’s intention to adopt the draft higher education regulatory framework will be important for
institutionalizing autonomy for HEIs.

The establishment of a strong and viable M&E system enables the full documentation and
analysis of program achievements and challenges, which, in turn, enable decision-makers
and implementers to learn and enhance their effectiveness and impact. The project
successfully established a sound M&E system and supported numerous studies and evaluations
that were undertaken during the project’s life and proved to be essential for informing policy
decisions in the higher education sector.

Effective accreditation mechanisms are essential for ensuring quality of higher education
programs and institutions. In the case of Mali, the establishment of two complementary quality
assurance entities has substantially strengthened capacity on this front. The Malian Agency for
Quality Assurance of Higher Education and Scientific Research has evolved into an effective
regulation and accreditation body. In addition, quality assurance units, established in higher



                                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



education institutions, are essential for the preparation of their self-evaluations (which are linked to
performance-based contracts) and quality criteria.

Performance-based contracts can be an important vehicle for strengthening dialogue,
transparency, monitoring, and increased autonomy of higher education institutions. The use
of performance-based contracts at the HEI level has helped HEIs negotiate annual programs and
budgets based on targets and results rather than on inputs. The Ministry of Economy and
Finance has recognized these contracts as best practice and recommends expanding this approach
to improve the oversight and efficiency of other HEIs. Senior management of the HEIs have
supported the reforms enthusiastically and restructured internal processes in keeping with the spirit
of these reforms. They have also been strong proponents of the continued use and expansion of the
reform system-wide.

Government strategic thinking and agility on the use of information technology can lead to a
more expansive use of the technology than originally designed or envisioned. Project
investments in an HEI information system allowed for considerable connectivity with other teaching
and research institutions. These initial investments in information technology enabled the Ministry of
Higher Education and Scientific Research and universities to adapt quickly to COVID-19 pandemic-
related school closures by launching online courses, not only at the HEI level, but also at the primary
and secondary levels, when and where possible. This led to much broader use of the information
systems and technology than originally envisioned and enhances potential for the creation of a
future virtual university.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. Evidence provided in the ICR was drawn from project data collected and analyzed at the
HEI and ministry levels. Project data facilitated the reporting of progress against relevant and well-defined
indicators, and the baselines and targets established for them. They were systematically documented in the
ICR’s Annex 1 (Results Framework and Key Indicators) and appropriately reflected in the Efficacy
discussion. This data was complemented by data and findings from tracer studies, which assessed the quality
and employability of graduates and the satisfaction of their employers, among other aspects. The ICR also
explained and drew on the links between the HEI-level DLIs and DLRs and the intermediate outcome and
outcome indicators. The ICR provided additional information and insights, gleaned from the tracer studies, on a
number of shortcomings and challenges to achieving further improvements in the quality and relevance of
training programs. These findings and insights were presented in general statements and did not systematically
cite data from the studies to back up statements (e.g., comparisons of outcomes between project and non-
project graduates, and comparisons of wage data between project and non-project graduates and between
male and female graduates).

Quality of Analysis. The ICR reflected a solid analysis of the evidence, especially the use and triangulation of
project data, study results, and achievements against DLIs and DLRs. The ICR’s analysis also integrated

                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Support Project (P151318)



qualitative results and findings to make a convincing case for real achievements in sector reform and
stewardship. The ICR did not directly assess attribution/contribution of the project, or the counterfactual of no
project. A February 24, 2022 meeting with the task team provided good input to these analyses.

Quality of Lessons. Lessons presented in the ICR were based on the evidence, analysis, and findings
presented in earlier sections of the document and were well linked to the ICR’s narrative and ratings. They are
relevant to other countries that may be attempting to improve the quality, relevance, and stewardship of the
higher education sector.

Results Orientation of the ICR was strong. The efficacy discussion was oriented around the project’s two
development objectives, and was systematic in providing evidence for each element of the results chain in
terms of how it facilitated PDO achievement.

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. The ICR was internally consistent and adhered to the
guidelines, with a couple of minor caveats.

      The ICR did not provide the IDA Credit and Grant amounts (original and actually disbursed) in SDRs,
       which is necessary to calculate the real disbursement rates. The ICR presented these only in terms of
       US$.
      The majority of the discussion of relevance of objectives focused on relevance at the time of project
       development. The assessment of current relevance did not squarely address relevance to country
       needs, but did address relevance to new government policy and plans. The assessment of relevance to
       the Bank’s current strategy referred to a CPF that seems to be out of date – FY2016-2019, extended to
       2020 -- and did not indicate whether there is a new CPF under preparation, or any other (updated)
       indication of the Bank’s strategy in Mali in the interim. The task team clarified in its February 24,
       2022 meeting with IEG that a short-term Country Engagement Note is under preparation but not yet
       available.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 22
