     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SHWSSP1(P167246)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0022827

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P167246                                  SHWSSP1

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89180                               31-Oct-2020                                       40,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jan-2019                              31-Oct-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       40,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Dileep M. Wagle            Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Program Agreement (signed February 15, 2019) for the DPL did not include any statements on the
   objectives of the Program.
   The Program Document (PD) of the Programmatic Development Policy Loan 1 for this operation, however,
   described the Program Development Objectives (PDO) as follows: “The PDO is to support the GoHP
   (Government of Himachal Pradesh) in its policy and institutional development program for improving water
   supply and sewerage services that are financially sustainable and managed by an accountable institution
   responsive to its customers”.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SHWSSP1(P167246)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The operation, which was originally structured as a series of three DPLs, supported three pillars of the
   Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP)’s Medium-term Program for improving WSS (Water Supply &
   Sewerage) services, which would benefit some 4.08 million people with continuous, pressurized piped water
   supply and 4.01 million people with improved sewage connections, and put the urban WSS of Himachal
   Pradesh on a solid institutional, financial and governance footing. The program supported by this DPL would
   build on the reform efforts already undertaken, reinforcing stakeholder incentives to pursue change.
   The pillars/policy areas supported by this operation were:

     i.   Improving governance, managerial and financial autonomy
     ii . Increasing the efficiency of WSS operations
     iii . Increasing customer orientation and accountability, complemented by a cross-cutting capacity building
     effort.

   Following international best practice of utility reform, these policy actions were considered key to improving
   the performance of water utilities. The policy areas were underpinned by seven prior actions linked to DPL1,
   along with triggers for the second and third tranches of the envisaged programmatic series, aimed at
   deepening the reforms under each of the prior actions.

   Policy Area A: Improving Governance, Managerial and Financial Autonomy

   This pillar included the following sub-areas for reform:
   (a) Shifting from departmental structure to an autonomous WSS company with devolved
   responsibilities: The program supported GoHP’s policies for corporatizing WSS operations, consolidating
   the company into the Shimla Jal Prabandhan Nigam Ltd (SJPNL), as a jointly owned autonomous WSS
   company.
   (b) Delegating full managerial and financial autonomy to the WSS company: During the initial reform step,
   all financial and managerial powers of WSS had been delegated to the SJPNL’s Board of Directors. The
   Board further delegated these to the Managing Director (MD)-cum-CEO, which marked a major break with
   the past, when the authority of WSS managers had been divided between various governmental
   departments.

   (c) Developing and implementing the organization structure, human resource (HR) policy and capital
   investment plan: The Board of Directors of SJPNL was chaired by the Chief Secretary of the GoHP. An MD-
   cum-CEO was appointed, and the Board had developed key company-level policies and systems – a
   corporate governance framework, an HR structure, an internal performance standard and Monitoring &
   Evaluation system, and grievance redressal mechanisms.

   (d) Supporting Medium-term Plan activities aimed at improving financial autonomy: Under the program, a


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SHWSSP1(P167246)



clear regulatory mechanism would be put into place to govern tariff setting and subsidies to improve cost
recovery. GoHP had approved these proposals and the Shimla Municipal Corporation (SMC) had adopted
these policies. By introducing volumetric tariffs alongside well-defined cost-recovery and subsidy policies,
SJPNL aimed to achieve 100 percent recovery of O&M costs for water distribution and sewage collection
and treatment (excluding bulk water costs) by FY2021-22. Full O&M cost recovery was expected to reach
66 percent by the year 2033-34.
Policy Area B: Increasing Efficiency of WSS operations
(i) Shifting focus from traditional infrastructure construction to performance-based financing and a service
delivery orientation: With the support of the DPL, the GoHP intended to improve the service delivery
orientation of the WSS sector for the Greater Shimla Area and ensure continuous (24x7) pressurized water
supply, sewage collection and treatment for all households. The GoHP’s Medium-Term Capital Investment
Plan included both capacity addition and rehabilitation of existing sewage treatment plants (STPs) to reduce
the risk of contaminated water supplies and overwhelmed water infrastructure in the wake of floods. The
operation would also support GoHP in improving service delivery orientation in the Greater Shimla Area
through performance-based service delivery policy.
(ii) Incentivizing energy efficiency improvements in WSS operations: Based on a detailed study,
inefficiencies in energy consumption were estimated to be about 25 percent on account of old equipment for
Shimla city and non-revenue water. SJPNL had identified a package of electrical and hydraulic measures to
improve energy efficiency, including contract demand optimization, energy efficiency pumps, modification of
suction line, and minimization of leakages, among others. SJPNL intended to incentivize energy efficiency
through performance-based policy for WSS services, which would result in energy use per unit of bulk water
from existing sources being reduced by 20 percent by FY2023-24.
Policy Area C: Increasing Customer Orientation and Accountability
(i) Increasing Customer Orientation: Short-term improvements carried out by SJPNL had resulted in greater
water quality compliance and improved bulk water production. SJPNL was also planning to demonstrate
better response to customer complaints, predictable supply schedules and volumetric billing benefiting
customers with low consumption. SJPNL was also to develop customer-friendly connection and billing
practices.
(ii) Increasing Accountability: SJPNL, having developed utility systems and databases to collect information
on WSS service performance, would establish a Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) framework using global
WSS benchmarks and GoI’s Service Level benchmarks to collect performance information disaggregated by
customer groups to highlight service delivery status for poor and vulnerable sections. SJPNL would also
carry out communication, grievance redressal and customer feedback programs to improve citizen
engagement. The utility would implement a grievance redressal mechanism, combined with social outreach,
annual customer satisfaction surveys and citizen report cards.
Although the Program was envisaged as a series of three DPLs, upon completion of DPL-1 the Government
of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) requested the Bank to replace the second and third DPLs in the series with a
Program for Results (PforR) operation of US$160 million centered around the same objectives as the original
programmatic DPL series. Within the framework of the GoHP’s WSS medium-term program (2018-30), the
development objectives of the PforR (approved by the Board in 2021) were to strengthen the financial and
operational performance of the SJPNL utility and improve access to water supply and sewerage services in
Shimla City. The target areas of the PfoR were a natural extension of the DPL series, picking up from DPL-1
to support the continued reforms in governance while targeting performance improvements in operations and


                                                                                              Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SHWSSP1(P167246)



   finance. The demonstrated commitment of the GoHP and SJPNL to pursue the reform objectives under the
   PforR program strongly indicated the likely continuity of the reforms initiated under DPL-1.

c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program Cost: The cost of the program under DPL1 was US$ 40 million. After the onset of the Covid-19
   pandemic in early 2020, the GoI decIded to refrain from future sub-national DPLs. As such, the subsequent
   DPLs in the series were replaced by a Program-for-Results of US$160 million centered around the same
   objectives as the original programmatic DPL series.
   Financing: An IBRD loan of US$40 million was used to finance the program costs for DPL1. The loan was
   provided to the Government of India, with the Urban Development Department of the State of Himachal
   Pradesh as the implementation agency for the Program. The loan was disbursed in a single tranche.
   Borrower Contribution: Neither GoI nor GoHP contributed to the Program financing.
   Dates: The Loan Effectiveness date for DPL1 was April 24, 2019. DPL1 Loan closed on October 31, 2020,
   as scheduled.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  At appraisal, India’s economy had recovered from the disruptions caused by the demonetization of 2016 and
  introduction of a goods and services tax (GST) in 2017, to record 6.5 percent in 2018 (and reach 8.2 percent
  in Q1, 2018-19), making it one of the world's fastest growing economies at the time. The country was also
  making good progress in reducing absolute poverty, the number of people living below the absolute poverty
  line of US$1.90 per day (2011 PPP) having declined to 8 percent in 2018. At the same time, rapid
  urbanization was increasing pressure on the delivery of basic urban services, including water supply and
  sanitation, across the country.
  Urbanization was projected to increase from 31 percent as per the 2011 census to 50 percent over the net 20
  years. While there had been a substantial increase in coverage through WSS facilities, service performance
  was found to have been inadequate. Hardly any Indian city received piped water 24 hours a day, non-
  revenue water – due to leakages and unauthorized connections – was estimated at 40-70 percent of the
  water distributed and the operations and maintenance (O&M) cost was only 30-40 percent on average. While
  81 of the urban population had access to adequate sanitation, very few cities had sewage networks. Urban
  Local Bodies (ULB’s) were responsible for WSS services; however, infrastructure was often developed by
  State Agencies and handed over to the ULB’s, which might not have the financial and technical capabilities to
  manage the assets. This led to poor performance due to lack of clear lines of accountability. The GoI
  recognized that to improve WSS services, sector institutions needed to become customer-focused, efficient
  and accountable.
  Himachal Pradesh exemplified many of the challenges of rapid growth and urbanization that were facing the
  WSS sector. The population of greater Shimla was expected to nearly double to 0.41 million by 2050, in
  addition to which the city received an average of 3.6 million tourists per year, thereby putting considerable
  strain on the historical WSS infrastructure. Water was being supplied only once in two days, for limited hours


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        SHWSSP1(P167246)



  and sewer connections served under 70 percent of the population with partial and shared connections. The
  cost of services was high, since bulk water needed to be pumped 1,400 meters up from the source. On
  account of low accountability and operational efficiency, Non-Revenue Water was estimated at 50 percent
  and O&M recovery only 21 percent, necessitating an annual subsidy of over $12 million.
  In response to these challenges, GoHP prepared a comprehensive, transformational program to improve
  WSS services for the Greater Shimla area, which the DPL would reinforce. In 2018, GoHP and SMC
  incorporated SJPNL as a “ring-fenced”, autonomous WSS company with devolved responsibilities and
  managerial and financial autonomy. The reform program was intended to consolidate these actions, to
  improve operational and financial performance and accountability to customers. Complementary reforms
  targeted under the program would support a shift from traditional infrastructure financing to a service delivery
  orientation.
  The objectives of the DPL were relevant to the development strategy and priorities set out in the World Bank’s
  Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for India for FY18-FY22, and in the Systematic Country Diagnostic
  (SCD, 2018), which underpinned them. A key developmental challenge addressed by the SCD was the need
  to pivot to a more resource-efficient growth path – with a strong focus (pgs. 38-39) on correcting distortions in
  energy and water use, including the need for greater efficiency in water use and policies to promote greater
  demand-side water management. The CPF was organized around four approaches for smarter engagement
  in India, which included Engaging a Federal India and the need for Strengthening Public Sector
  Institutions. The former approach envisaged strategic partnerships with select states and the latter, improving
  institutions through increasing capability and via aligning incentives and strengthened core government
  systems. Specifically, under Objective 1.1 of the CPF the World Bank supported steps to improve efficiency
  of natural resources, particularly water, by inter alia (i) improving the management of water resources through
  reforms and capacity strengthening, and (ii) developing efficient, sustainable, performance-based service
  delivery models for the water sector. It was expected that state-level operations to support water efficiency,
  and other objectives such as climate resilience, would underpin results. Similarly, Objective 1.2 supported
  steps to “improve the livability and sustainability of cities in select states”, especially focusing on the need to
  address deficiencies in basic services, such as water, sanitation, energy and health care.



  Rating
  ---

b. Relevance of Design
   ---



  Rating
  ---


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SHWSSP1(P167246)


PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     ".. to support the GoHP (Government of Himachal Pradesh) in its policy and institutional development
     program for improving water supply and sewerage services that are financially sustainable and managed by
     an accountable institution responsive to its customers”

    Rationale
    The DPL series had one program development objective: to support the GoHP’s transformational program to
    improve WSS services for the greater Shimla Area. This support was intended to be spread across a series
    of three DPLs, which were subsequently cut back to a single DPL, followed – on the basis of the
    Government’s request - by a PforR of US$160 million, centered around the same objectives as the original
    programmatic series.
    Theory of Change (TOC): The TOC was based on creating an independent and accountable WSS provider,
    operating on commercial principles, who would deliver better water supply and sewerage services in a
    financially sustainable and customer-responsive manner (ICR, p.9). Prior Actions under each Policy Area,
    specifying the establishment of the establishment of the WSS provider (SJPNL) with a move to cost-recovery
    tariffs and a clear policy on subsidies, a discernible shift towards performance-based service delivery and
    energy efficiency, and monitoring of WSS service performance, were expected to lead to longer-term
    outcomes in the form of improved governance, management and fiscal autonomy of the WSS provider,
    increased efficiency of WSS operations and increased customer orientation and accountability.
    Although the DPL series was formally terminated after completion of DPL-1, the approach followed by the
    ICR, of assessing results of what could reasonably be expected to be completed by the end of the DPL-1
    period, on a pro-rata basis, is valid. As such, results under Policy Area B were not expected to be realized
    prior to 2024, and could not be pro-rated. Results expected under the second and third DPLs in the series
    were for the most part based on medium to longer-term reforms that would be put into place, that would
    widen the geographical area of impact (to peri-urban and satellite towns) and ensure longer-term
    sustainability. Much of the Government’s WSS medium-term program (MTP) continued to be supported
    under the PforR that replaced DPLs 2 & 3 (ICR, pgs 8-9), thereby ensuring the continuity of reforms and
    actions initiated under DPL-1.
    The achievement of the Program’s objectives is evaluated on the basis of results obtained under the Prior
    Actions to the operation. These objectives were to be achieved through implementation of policy and other
    actions organized under the respective Policy Areas. Efficacy ratings have been determined by: (a)
    assessing the extent to which each RI or group of RIs were achieved and rating it on a four point scale
    (High, Substantial, Modest and Negligible); (b) assigning ratings to the RIs at the policy area level using a six
    point scale (Highly Satisfactory, Satisfactory, Moderately Satisfactory, Moderately Unsatisfactory,
    Unsatisfactory and Highly Unsatisfactory); and (c) using a numerical rating scale to aggregated the policy
    area results to an overall efficacy rating. The first two steps are described in the paragraphs below, taking
    into account the achievement of targets identified in Table 3, and are summarized in Table 4. The derivation
    of the overall rating is shown in Table 5.
    Policy Area A: Improving Governance, Managerial and Financial Autonomy
    The DPL operations contributed to a significant improvement in governance, and managerial and financial
    autonomy in the State’s WSS sector. Targets for the majority of (12) results indicators were fully


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SHWSSP1(P167246)



achieved. The exceptions were RI #12, which could not be verified because the indicator was transferred to
the PforR, and RI #9, which was partially achieved because the automatic tariff increases for 2020 and 2021
were deferred on account of Covid 19 (instead, GoHP decided to charge commercial establishments lower
residential tariffs due to the absence of tourists, and to compensate SJPNL for lost revenue in the amount of
INR 112 crores for 2019-20). As reported by the ICR (p.14), following the creation of SJPNL, the utility
achieved “impressive service and governance improvements in its first two years of operation despite the
impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic”. SJPNL maintained stringent quality standards, ensuring no further
outbreaks of jaundice; reduced transmission losses and increased water supply by 25 percent and sewage
collection by 200 percent. This contributed to strong initial revenue growth, allowing the utility to make
investments in replacing pipes and pumps. It was also able to implement a 100 percent metering policy and
volumetric tariffs. A Corporate Governance and Financial Accountability Assessment of SJPNL conducted
by the Bank in December 2020 confirmed that significant progress was achieved in implementing key
corporate governance actions, including appointment of the Board of Directors (with two independent
members) and of the Managing Director, and the delegation of several financial management and
administrative responsibilities, as well as of use of interim procurement procedures. The Company’s audited
accounts for 2018-19 were approved by the management and published, with no qualifications recorded in
the accounts.
Shimla was on track to improving O&M cost recovery to 66 percent by 2033-34, notwithstanding a slight
slowdown due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The move to volumetric billing and metered consumption had a
positive impact on revenues. However, given Shimla’s geographical characteristics as a high-altitude city
requiring water to be pumped up a considerable height, much remains to be done for the Company to attain
full operational cost recovery, which was not possible (nor targeted to be achieved) within the time-frame of
DPL1 - hence would be addressed under the PforR operation.
On this basis, the efficacy rating for this Policy Area is Satisfactory.
Policy Area B: Increasing Efficiency of WSS operations
Since the time frames for activities falling under Policy Area B extended well beyond DPL1 (many of these
being transferred to the PforR), only partial results were obtainable within the period under
consideration. Among these, SJPNL successfully introduced an approach to performance-based
contracting, by linking up to 40 percent of the contract sum to agreed performance standards. In this way, as
reported by the ICR (p. 16), SJPNL recently entered into a design-build-operate (DBO) contract for bulk
water offtake, treatment and transmission from the Sutlej river, with a construction period of three years and
an O&M period of ten years, with performance parameters included – such as continuous water supply,
reduction of Non-Revenue Water (NRW), and strengthened billing and collection. The contract was included
as a disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) in the PforR program, with payment to the operator being linked to
such parameters as the actual volume of water delivered, water quality, energy efficiency and water
loss. SJPNL also initiated the procurement of an operator to implement a continuous water supply project in
Shimla city and tested performance-based service contracts for water distribution on a 24x7 basis.
Under energy efficiency, SJPNL was able to replace aged pumps and leaking pipes for energy efficiency
improvements and NRW control. A reduction in energy consumption from 7.69 KwH/m3 to 7.24 KwH/m3 by
2021, representing noticeable progress towards a 2024 target of 6.15 KwH/m3.
In light of the fact that most of the activities under this Policy Area extended well beyond the reach of DPL-
1’s time-frame, the efficacy of this Policy Area is not rated.
Policy Area C: Increasing Customer Orientation and Accountability

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SHWSSP1(P167246)



Significant progress was registered by SJPNL towards strengthening customer orientation and
accountability. The Company successfully implemented a Finance Management System with transparent
accounting procedures; implemented a Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) – including provision for
online registration of grievances and monitoring redressal; introduced simplified procedures for new
water/sewerage connections; and an online system for connection applications, billing and payments. It also
launched a Social Outreach Program and IEC Campaign on water conservation and usage, engaging
shareholders and NGOs. A biannual customer satisfaction survey (with public disclosure) was launched, as
well as a variety of tools to reach customers (website, toll-free number, email address, Grievance Redressal
Portal and Walk-In facilities).
Both results indicators under this Policy Area were achieved. Based on the above, the efficacy rating for this
Policy Area is Satisfactory.
Table 4: Relevance and efficacy rating
                            Result indicator                          Relevanc Achievem           Efficacy
                                                                       e rating     ent rating   rating (PA)
                Policy Area A: Improving Governance, Managerial and Financial Autonomy
       RI #1 (DPL1) - Number of urban local bodies (ULBs) as                        Substantial Satisfactory
                        customers of the SJPNL                        Satisfactor
       RI #2 (DPL1) - Percentage of decisions on investment,               y           High
        expenditure and staff recruitment referred to GoHP for
                                 approval
    RI #3 (DPL1) - Annual audited financial statements of SJPNL                        High
                            publicly disclosed
     RI #4 (DPL1) - Adherence to HR Policy for hiring MD-cum-                          High
             CEO with a fixed tenure of at least two years            Satisfactor
         RI #5 (DPL1) - Percentage of SJPNL staff receiving                y           N/A
      performance incentives based on employee performance
                                evaluation
    RI #6 (DPL1) - Females as percentage of total staff in various                     High
                           services of SJPNL
       RI #7(DPL1) - Percentage of corrective actions taken by        Satisfactor      High
    SJPNL based on recommendations of corporate governance                 y
                                  review
   RI #8 (DPL1) - Improved performance of SJPNL as measured                            High
             by the annual performance scorecard rating
      RI #9 (DPL1) - Timely determination of annual tariffs and       Satisfactor Substantial
                                subsidies                                  y
         RI #10 (DPL1) - Volumetric billing of 24x7 customers                          High
                 RI #11 (DPL1) - Collection efficiency                                 High
              RI #12 (DPL1): O&M cost recovery (water)                Satisfactor      N/A
                          Bulk and distribution                            y
                   O&M cost recovery (distribution)
                    O&M cost recovery (sewerage)


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               SHWSSP1(P167246)




                       Policy Area B: Increasing Efficiency of WSS operations
            RI #13 (DPL1) - Percentage of customers of the WSS             Moderatel     Not Rated      Not Rated
           company serviced by private service providers receiving               y
         continuous water supply and connected to sewage systems           Satisfactor
                                                                                 y
        RI #14 (DPL1) - Energy consumption of water production from         Satisfacto    Not Rated
                                existing sources                                ry
              RI # 15 (DPL1) - Reduction in Non-Revenue Water
                 Policy Area C: Increasing Customer Orientation and Accountability                     Satisfactory
       RI # 16 (DPL1) - Annual reports on SJPNL performance,              Satisfactor High
       customer satisfaction, and citizen report cards published and      y
       disclosed
       RI # 17 (DPL1) - Percentage of WSS complaints redressed            Satisfactor High
       within the specified redressal period                              y
    The above table indicates that the efficacy rating is Satisfactory for two of the three policy areas, and Not
    Rated for the remaining policy area, on account of the fact that the activities extended well beyond the scope
    of DPL-1 (and were transferred to the PforR operation).
    On this basis, overall efficacy for DPL-1 is rated Satisfactory.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The relevance of the prior actions is rated Satisfactory based on Satisfactory ratings for RIs under 6 PAs and a
  Moderately Satisfactory for the RI under one PA (percentage of customers of the WSS company serviced by
  private service providers receiving continuous water supply and connected to sewage systems). The PAs under
  all of the Policy Areas had a clear and direct impact on the program objective of improving water supply and
  sewerage services that were financially sustainable and managed an accountable, customer responsive
  institution. Although the DPL series was terminated early, reforms had been front-loaded via the prior actions
  the impact of which was not diluted, since the activities targeted to be completed during period of DPLs 2 & 3
  were transferred to the PforR that replaced them, so that continuity could thereby be maintained.
  The overall efficacy rating is Satisfactory. The rating is based on a Satisfactory rating for two of the three
  policy areas, the third policy area not being rated, since targets for the results indicators under this area were
  not expected to be realized during the period of DPL1 (though it was noted in the ICR that considerable
  progress had been made in implementation of these activities, which were on track to achieve their completion
  targets). As mentioned in the ICR (17), SJPNL and GoHP remain committed to the reform process and have

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            SHWSSP1(P167246)



confirmed their intention to continue World Bank support under the PforR program (approved by the Board in
2021). The DPL was instrumental in supporting establishment of SJPNL as a corporate entity and setting it on
the path to reform through actions related to improved governance, operations and service delivery.
As such, with an overall PA relevance rating of Satisfactory and an overall efficacy rating also of Satisfactory,
the overall outcome rating for DPL-1 is Satisfactory.


a.     Outcome Rating
       Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

There are risks to the development outcomes that have been achieved by prior actions undertaken under the
DPL series. Key among these is the possibility of persistent or increased net revenue shortfalls on account of
delays in tariff/subsidy adjustments due to political economy constraints and the negative impact of the Covid -
19 pandemic on GoHP’s revenues, which would seriously impact the financial sustainability of the WSS
institution (SJPNL). Secondly, efforts to achieve continuous 24x7 supply of water, which are key to achieving a
shift to performance-based service delivery (under PA #5), could conceivably be derailed through exogenous
factors. The same is true of the GoHP’s efforts to improve energy efficiency in WSS operations (in keeping with
PA #6). If this were to happen, it would seriously compromise the progress made under the reforms undertaken
via the relevant prior actions. The fact that these objectives continue to be pursued under the PforR may
mitigate these risks somewhat, but sustained efforts in the form of continued reforms and investments in service
improvement will need to be made to ensure that the progress made so far does not lose momentum.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
       ---

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
      ---


     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     ---

b. Quality of supervision
      ---


     Quality of Supervision Rating
     ---


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         SHWSSP1(P167246)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
    ---


  Government Performance Rating
  ---

b. Implementing Agency Performance
   ---


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  ---

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
   ---


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
   ---


b. M&E Implementation
   ---


c. M&E Utilization
   ---


  M&E Quality Rating
  ---

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects

                                                                            Page 11 of 14
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         SHWSSP1(P167246)



       ---




b. Fiduciary Compliance
 ---


c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
       ---


d. Other
       ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Bank Performance              Satisfactory            Satisfactory                ---
Relevance of Results
                                                      Satisfactory                ---
Indicators
Quality of ICR                                        Modest                      ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:
1. The front-loading of key reforms can have a positive impact on program outcomes: Under the Shimla
WSS Reform Program, the upfront creation of SJPNL was critical to initiating a virtuous circle in which
institutional improvements facilitated improved service and motivated further reforms. SJPNL’s experience
shows that institutional strengthening, the separation of responsibilities and introduction of accountability
mechanisms can lead to performance gains in operations, management and finances – resulting in better
quality product (water) and better service provision. These results served to validate the reforms in the eyes of
both stakeholders and the public, making it possible to protect the momentum of the reforms, even when there


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SHWSSP1(P167246)



was pressure from the GoI to terminate the DPL series early, by encompassing them within a PforR that was
introduced in its place.
2. A successful strategy to improve cost recovery, especially via tariff increases, needs a clear
communication to the public, as well as tangible service improvements, in order to raise willingness to
pay. Non-performing public utilities often struggle with a vicious cycle with regard to cost recovery, whereby
low service performance undermines consumer willingness to pay, and resultant low revenue flows inhibit
service improvements. The example of SJPNL demonstrates that this vicious cycle can be broken, with the
public accepting reasonable increases in tariffs in exchange for real improvements in service that are
communicated clearly. In SJPNL’s case, customer satisfaction rose by a reported 70 percent, as a
consequence not only of better service provided but also on account of efforts made by the company to
promote information via surveys, advertising and social media.

3. The willingness to devolve power is central to the successful creation of an autonomous utility. In
the case of SJPNL, there was support from both the political establishment and the World Bank, as well as
strong public pressure arising out of the earlier jaundice epidemic and water scarcity crisis, which also affected
the profitable tourism industry. The freedom given to SJPNL to recruit a competent workforce played a key role
in meeting targets and providing the basis for achieving a utility turnaround.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR generally reads well, is informative in parts, is concise and broadly consistent with the Bank’s
guidelines. The sector challenges and government program to improve WSS services are well described, so
as to provide a rationale for the DPL program, its objective and policy areas supported. The framework of the
PforR program which replaced DPLs 2 & 3 is also described in matrix form. A more detailed matrix (ICR
pages 10-13) provides a summary of the program design and outcomes showing the prior actions under each
policy area, and their linkage to the results indicators and targets. The indicative triggers for DPLs 2 & 3 are
included for clarification.
That said, the quality of analysis is not based on sufficient and balanced interrogation of the evidence, and
clear linking of evidence to findings through the results chain. The discussion of both relevance and of efficacy
does not look closely enough at the disaggregation of specific prior actions and their linked results indicators,
but takes the form of a more general overview. Hence, a clear understanding of the outcomes for groups of
prior actions for each policy area does not adequately emerge.
The section on Bank performance, especially on Implementation aspects, is overly brief. Some more details
would have helped to justify the rating. The section on Environmental, Forests and Natural Resources
provides negligible information.
On the positive side, the lessons provided are based on the experience gained from implementing the DPL
and appear to be operationally relevant.

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SHWSSP1(P167246)



Based on this, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                                      Page 14 of 14
