     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022835

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P166075                                     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Sierra Leone                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2750                                   28-Feb-2021                                           9,847,615.93

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Feb-2018                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          9,850,829.97                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to rehabilitate selected critical infrastructure and to strengthen
   government capacity for managing disaster risk.

   The PDO was not revised.

   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



   PDO1: to rehabilitate selected critical infrastructure.

   PDO2: to strengthen government capacity for managing disaster risk.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1: Rehabilitation of Public Infrastructure and Slope Stabilization (cost at approval: US$
   7.84 million; actual cost: US$7.7 million). The component financed the restoration and improvement of key
   public infrastructure, as well as the stabilization of the landslide site, specifically:

   Sub-component 1.1. Slope stabilization and remediation measures. This subcomponent involved technical
   studies and works aimed at removing rocks and soil materials that remain at risk of slipping in the next rainy
   season, reprofiling steep slopes, clearing river sediment and enforcing riverbanks, replanting, and
   demolishing damaged unstable buildings.

    Sub-component 1.2. Road, bridge, and drainage infrastructure rehabilitation. This subcomponent
   supported reconstruction and enhancement of bridges, rehabilitation and preventive stabilization of
   roads, and rehabilitation and upgrading of drainage channels.

   Sub-component 1.3. Water infrastructure rehabilitation. This subcomponent involved rehabilitation and
   upgrading of water supply network, strengthening community water points (kiosks and boreholes), and
   rehabilitation of water treatment plants and reservoirs.

   Component 2: Strengthening Institutional Capacity (cost at approval: US$1.8 million; actual cost:
   US2.04 million). The Component financed capacity building activities to strengthen the Government of
   Sierra Leone's (GoSL’s) Disaster Risk Management (DRM) institutions and emergency preparedness and
   response mechanism, specifically:

   Sub-component 2.1. Strengthening DRM and early warning systems. The subcomponent supported an
   update of the government’s DRM framework, emergency preparedness capacity, and the early warning and
   response systems.

   Sub-component 2.2. Strengthening solid waste management (SWM). This component was originally
   designed to finance technical studies for solid waste management and drainage.

   Component 3: Project Management (cost at approval: US$1.9 million; actual cost: US$1.55 million. This
   component financed the administrative aspects of project implementation.

   2. Changes in components during implementation:


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



   The sub-component 2.2 (US$0.6 million) Strengthening Solid Waste Management was modified during
   implementation, without a change in its cost or its ambition. It was originally designed to assess the
   feasibility of improving the poor solid waste disposal capacity in Freetown, which was a major cause of
   frequent urban flooding, from the clogging of drains. The component aimed to finance drainage and SWM
   technical studies, strategy, and assessments for Freetown. During the supervision mission of February 10-
   22, 2019, it was determined that far more significant resources and time were needed to support a more
   comprehensive program in the SWM sector. Thus, this component was revised to focus on small scale
   community drainage rehabilitation and construction to control localized flooding in upper catchment areas of
   communities that were also vulnerable to landslide risks. The sub-component was re-named Community
   Resilience Interventions and re-focused on the design and construction works for community drainage to
   mitigate flood risks. The mission’s Aide-Memoire states that “this revision maintains alignment with the
   overall objectives of the project, financing category, and results framework.” It further clarifies that the
   revised sub-component involves construction of 1.3 km of drains in high flood risk areas, a 15m culvert, and
   a 12m bridge.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$11.29 million, compared to the appraisal estimate of
   US$11.54 million.

   Project Financing: The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit
   (US$10 million at appraisal and US$9.8 million at closure).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The actual Borrower contribution was U$1.49 million, slightly lower than
   the appraisal commitment of US$1.54 million.

   Project Dates: The project was approved on February 22, 2018, and became effective on April 13, 2018.
   The mid-term review was on February 14, 2020. The original closing date was February 28, 2021. The
   project was extended once, on January 22, 2021, for four months, to June 30, 2021 through a level two
   restructuring, approved on January 22, 2021. The extension was required to complete the works under
   Component 1.2. Bridge Rehabilitation Works that had already started but were delayed due to: (i) COVID-
   19 related lockdowns and travel restrictions resulting in delays with procurement process; (ii) flooding of the
   construction sites due to heavy rain; and (iii) a delay in the preparation of safeguards instruments by
   contractors.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: The country is characterized by high vulnerability to natural hazards, but the
government’s disaster preparedness and response capacities remain weak. In the last 40 years,
Sierra Leone has suffered from more than 30 natural disasters, which affected more than 300,000 people
including many of the poor and vulnerable households. On August 14, 2017, Freetown experienced most
severe landslides and flooding resulting in more than 1,141 people dead or missing and over 6,000 people
affected. The Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA), completed in September 2017 provided the following

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



estimates: (i) total economic loss of US$31.65 million and (ii) total recovery needs of US$82.41 million. The
primary needs were in the following two areas: (i) rehabilitating transport, water and sanitation, and
drainage networks; and (ii) stabilizing the slopes of the landslide areas. In addition, it was critical to build
government capacity to respond to future disasters, which would involve the restoration of the country’s
meteorological infrastructure, thereby enabling disaster predictions and warnings.

Relevance to Government Strategies: At the time of approval, the PDO was relevant to the country
conditions and well-aligned with national priorities. The Project responded to the urgent need to
prepare the country for future disasters, prior to the next rainy season when the risk of flooding and
landslides increases. The need for such preparedness was highlighted by the recent disaster of August
2017 when the country suffered a high death toll and serious economic damages. The project is aligned
with the government’s Agenda for Prosperity, which outlines the action plan for 2015-18 in the context of
the country’s Vision for 2035. The Agenda refers to the need of building resilience to natural disasters by
improving weather and climate services through better warning systems and by strengthening government
DRM management.

Relevance to the World Bank Assistance Strategies. The project also aligns with the World Bank
Group's (WBG’s) Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) 2017, which identifies natural disasters, such as
recurrent floods, drought, and landslides, as one of the key country risks. The project also contributes to the
WBG's twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity by choosing the location of
the restoration works on the basis of three key criteria: (i) poorest and most vulnerable population; ii)
sizeable population; and iii) restoration of access to livelihoods.

The PDO remained relevant at closing. One of the core goals of the Sierra Leone’s Medium-Term
National Development Plan 2019–2023 (NDP) is to increase climate and disaster resilience. In alignment
with the NDP, Freetown’s 2019–2022 Transform Freetown Strategy aims at the capital’s climate resilience
through investing in resilient infrastructure. The PDO remained aligned with the WBG’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) FY21–26, which highlights disaster preparedness under each of its three pillars. The
CPF outlines the importance of improving disaster risk governance; addressing DRM capacity and
awareness of the population; and investing in resilient infrastructure.

Previous sector experience. In immediate response to the August 14th 2017, landslide in Freetown, the
World Bank provided supplemental grant financing of US$10 million from an ongoing Development Policy
Operation (DPO) (P165639). This supplemental financing, which was approved at the end of November
2017, provided fiscal space for the Government to respond to the most immediate recovery priorities,
informed by the DaLA and the Landslide Response Framework (LRF).

The landslide and floods of August 14, 2017 impacted service delivery infrastructure including transport,
water and sanitation, health and education services. Urgent remediation measures were needed to stabilize
the slopes of the landslide areas because there are unstable ‘rafts’ of soil and weathered rock which could
slip during future rainstorm events, putting at risk communities downstream. Priority urgent actions were in
the areas of: (i) housing and social protection; (ii) water and sanitation systems; (iii) investing in
the Technical Pillar to inform coordination and design of resilient recovery interventions; (iv) reviewing and
relocating health facilities impacted by the disaster; (v) repairing and rehabilitating roads and bridges; and
(vi) slope stabilization. The project was designed to add value to the priority areas (i), (ii), (iii), (v), and (vi).
The project was also designed to have the potential to leverage further investment in disaster risk
management and solid waste management.



                                                                                                           Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



               The PDOs, which aimed at rehabilitating selected critical infrastructure and strengthening
               government capacity for managing disaster risk, addressed the country needs through slope
               stabilization and rehabilitation of critical infrastructure, as well as on the DRM capacity building. The
               project financed the restoration of the infrastructure damaged by the 2017 landslide and flooding, including
               roads, bridges, drainage, and water supply and sanitation; slope stabilization; and the improvement of
               government capacity in the areas of disaster preparedness and early warning system services. To meet the
               needs to implement the works before the rainy season, which starts in mid-May, the Project was prepared
               using accelerated procedures.

               The relevance of objective is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To rehabilitate selected critical infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for this objective showed a logical causal link between inputs that led to
                             outputs and expected outcomes of this project. The inputs were: (i) slope stabilization and remediation
                             measures; (ii) roads, bridges, and drainage infrastructure rehabilitation; and (iii) water infrastructure
                             rehabilitation. These inputs, if successfully implemented, were expected to result in outputs such as bridges
                             reconstructed, drainage rehabilitated, water piping installed, water treatment plants and reservoirs
                             rehabilitated, and slopes stabilized. This would result in the following outcomes: (i) increased number of
                             people protected by the slope stabilization works and (ii) increased number of beneficiaries with restored or
                             improved access to service delivery infrastructure. The ToC then links these two outcomes to the PDO
                             outcome “to rehabilitate selected critical infrastructure”.

                             While the ToC, which was created for the ICR, clearly indicates inputs and outputs, as well as the underlying
                             assumptions necessary for the ToC to work, but does not do justice to the project in its description of the
                             outcomes. Instead of describing the outcomes, the ToC replicates the PDO and the PDO indicators and does
                             not go beyond that. The outcomes that are missing from the ToC include decreased likelihood of landslides,
                             reduced impact of future climate events due to improved infrastructure resilience, expanded access to piped
                             water, improved mobility, and increased safety due to the demarcation and fencing of the areas that are
                             prone to landslides. Also, the ToC does not reflect the higher-level objective of the project: reduced risk of
                             high human and economic losses from future disasters. However, all these project outcomes are clearly
                             described in other parts of the ICR, therefore this comment relates to the ToC presentation only.



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



Outputs

The outputs related to Objective 1 reflect slope stabilization and rehabilitation of transport/drainage
and water supply infrastructure. Two of the three original targets and all three final targets were
achieved.

A. Slope stabilization to reduce the risk of landslides: The project remediated the key landslide slope at
Mortormeh by reintegrating natural drainage channels, clearing debris, re-planting, and stabilizing the ground.
Approximately 120,000m³ of debris materials including boulders were moved to form a more uniform and
stable landform. Approximately 21 thousand trees were planted to stabilize the soil, creating a park.

B. Rehabilitation of transport and drainage infrastructure:

      Five bridges were reconstructed. The target of 4-6 bridges was reached.
      The length of drainage constructed or rehabilitated was 1.9 km. The target of 1.65 km was exceeded.
       The indicator was introduced at mid-term review (Aide Memoire, February 10-14, 2020, page 18).

C. Rehabilitation of water supply infrastructure and building new piped water connections:

      A water treatment facility and reservoirs were rehabilitated. The results framework (RF) does not
       include an indicator to reflect this outcome.
      The length of water piping installed was 4 km. The original target of 22-55 km was not reached. The
       revised target of 2 km was exceeded. The mid-term review explains that the target for piped network
       was an over-estimate and was set prior to the feasibility and design studies (Aide Memoire, February
       10-14, 2020, page 18). The over-estimate at appraisal was made because the cost of the water
       treatment facility was not included in the estimate of the water infrastructure investment cost, instead
       all budget was assumed to be devoted to water piping.

Outcomes

1. Both PDO targets under Objective 1 were achieved:

A. The project reduced the risk of landslides for 3,116 people in the landslide-risk area by the slope
stabilization works, significantly exceeding the target of 400-600 people. Fifty-two percent of the beneficiaries
were female, compared to the target of 40-50 percent. The under-estimate of the target was due to a rushed
nature of project preparation. A proper assessment involving modeling was conducted after the
implementation started.

B. The project restored or improved access to critical infrastructure (roads, bridges, drainage, and water
supply) for 148,616 people, significantly above the target of 34,000-44,000 people. Forty-nine percent of the
beneficiaries were female, compared to the target of 40-50 percent. The under-estimate of the target was due
to a rushed nature of project preparation. It was corrected after the implementation started.

2. Outcomes not captured in the Results Framework:




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



C. Approximately 61,800 people (or above 5 percent of the Freetown population) are benefiting from
improved water supply as a result of the project's investments in rehabilitation of water pipelines and a water
treatment plant (3 million liters per day).

D. Approximately 1,160 people who did not previously have access to piped water gained it as a result of the
project's investment in new connections.

3. Under Objective 1, the project’s achievements were three-fold, combining slope stabilization and
restored critical (and improved) transport and water supply infrastructure:

      Slope stabilization. The project remediated the main landslide slope by reintegrating natural
       drainage channels, clearing debris, re-planting, and stabilizing the ground. The works mitigated the
       future landslide risk in the project area.
      Transport and drainage infrastructure restoration, with resilient features. The rehabilitation of
       bridges, culverts, and drainage alongside the roads followed the “build back better” approach to
       embed resilient features in the restored/rebuilt infrastructure, enforcing it against future climate events.
       The connectivity restoration was critical for the livelihoods: before the project, there was no road
       access to many of the affected communities, but now, as the beneficiaries state, vehicles are coming
       through for the first time (ICR, page 12).

Improved connectivity. 76,416 people (daily average traffic count) are now benefitting from the restored
infrastructure connectivity, which is expected to lead to enhanced economic activities and improved access to
key facilities such as hospitals and schools.

      According to the beneficiary survey, 82 percent of survey participants believe that business activities
       will be enhanced as a result of better road connectivity.
      Water supply restoration, with resilient features. The water treatment plant supplying the area was
       restored, and water pipes installed, restoring water supply and increasing access to improved water
       compared to the time before the destruction caused by the landslides and flooding. This includes
       access provided to remote and isolated communities.

The project achieved all of it targets under Objective 1, except the original target for one intermediate
indicator, the length of water piping. The original target was 22-55 km; it was revised at mid-term to 2 km, and
the actual output was 4 km. This was a calculation error (please see in the description of the outputs). This
mistake should be viewed in the context of the accelerated project preparation, which was necessary in order
to complete the project before the rain season. This overestimate is considered a minor shortcoming.

Two of the PDO targets were significantly overachieved, specifically: (i) population protected by slope
stabilization works: 3,116 people, which significantly exceeds the target of 400-600 people and (ii) population
with restored or improved access to service delivery infrastructure (roads, bridges, drainage, and water
supply): 148,616 people, which is considerably above the target of 34,000-44,000 people (PDO 2 indicator).
The project team has provided the following clarifications: the under-estimate of the target was due to a
rushed nature of project preparation, and an assessment based on modeling provided realistic estimates after
project implementation started.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen government capacity for managing disaster risk.

Rationale
The ToC for this objective showed links from inputs to outputs to outcomes. The inputs were: (i)
strengthening of the government’s DRM and (ii) promoting community-led storm drainage maintenance
activities. These inputs were expected to lead to outputs such as: (i) government officials trained in DRM; (ii)
community members engaged in community disaster risk awareness and preparedness activities; (iii)
community-led storm drainage constructed; and (iv) community DRM trainings conducted. This would result in
the following outcome: enhanced disaster preparedness and contingency plan.

The ToC in the ICR has the following shortcomings as related to Objective 2: it provides only a partial
description of the inputs and outputs; the link from the outputs to the “outcome” is not logical; and the result
listed as the outcome is, in fact, an output. Also, important project achievements are missing from the ToC
under Objective 2, specifically: DRM institution building (creation of a specialized DRM agency with a
capability to manage disaster prevention and response; creation of a functional early warning system through
the upgrade of the equipment and facilities; and skills development) and creation of community-based
sustainable drainage operations and maintenance. However, these results are discussed in other parts of the
ICR, therefore, this comment relates to the presentation of the results chain in the TOC.

Under objective 2, the following outputs/intermediate outcomes were achieved:

      DRM institution building and policy support. The project used the strong inter-governmental
       momentum generated around the recovery effort to achieve DRM institutional strengthening
       necessary for timely response to future emergencies. A National Disaster Management Agency
       (NDMA) was established in November 2020, and a related update of the national DRM Policy
       conducted. A detailed disaster preparedness and contingency plan was developed and aligned with
       the national health emergency response plan and shock responsive social safety nets. Its
       implementation will follow the Standard Operating Procedure Guidance, developed under the project.
       Skills development accompanied institution building: 183 government officials received the DRM
       training in the areas of disaster preparedness and management, exceeding the target of 15-20
       officials. These policy and institutional changes were critical for the achievement of Objective 2: the
       project creating a capability to effectively manage disaster prevention and response in the country.
       Before the project, DRM management was a responsibility of a small unit in the Office of National
       Security, which had insufficient power and resources for the task. Having a stand-alone Disaster
       Management Agency is considered an international standard by the United Nations Office for Disaster
       Risk Reduction (UNDRR).
      Emergency preparedness and response (EP&R) capacity building. The project increased the
       capacity of the government to manage disaster risk by financing the EP&R equipment and training to
       key response agencies: the National Water Resources Management Agency (NWRMA), the Sierra
       Leone Meteorological Agency (SLMet), and the National Fire Force (NFF). Specifically, the project
       provided equipment for water level monitoring to enable hydrological data provision to the NWRMA;


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



                                    supported the installation and rehabilitation of the weather stations needed for hydromet data
                                    monitoring by the SLMet; and procured the communication equipment, protective kits, and search and
                                    rescue equipment for the NFF. Eighty NFF officials participated in a four-week early emergency
                                    response training workshop. EP&R capacity is critical for the government ability to make decisions in
                                    case of disasters.
                                   Non-governmental stakeholders' capacity development for sustainable drainage operations
                                    and maintenance. The project invested in the creation of the volunteer-based self-help groups in
                                    vulnerable communities, leading to sustainable self-help operations and maintenance of the project-
                                    constructed drainage. First, the project supported 1.3 km of community-led drainage construction in
                                    11 vulnerable communities, designed with full community participation to identify the priorities.
                                    Second, under the project, in May 2020, 455 community members participated in emergency
                                    drainage activities which resulted in clearing 4.9 km of gutters and drains, covering 19 wards, 52 flash
                                    flood points, 21 waterways, 11 bridges, and 31 culverts. Third, the project supported three-day DRM
                                    capacity building workshops in 17 vulnerable communities on detecting disaster risks and providing
                                    timely alerts, as well as the DRM awareness campaigns in the media including radio, TV, social media
                                    platforms, street advertising, community townhall meetings, and community outreach programs.
                                    Overall, more than 5,800 individuals were engaged in community DRM awareness and preparedness
                                    activities under the project, exceeded the target of 3,400-4,400 individuals. As a result of these soft
                                    and hard interventions, flooding was reduced as compared with the previous rain seasons (the latter
                                    was reported by 92 percent of the beneficiary survey participants). After the project completion, the
                                    flash flood points were repeatedly cleared of silt buildup by community volunteers. This showed that
                                    the project was able to create community ownership, leading to a self-help operation and maintenance
                                    of the project-constructed drainage.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For Objective 1, the efficacy is Substantial. The project achieved the key outcomes of reducing the risk and
                            severity of landslides and flooding in the future, restoring and increasing access to basic infrastructure (roads,
                            bridges, drainage, and water supply), and increasing infrastructure resilience to disasters; the results
                            framework (RF), as well as additional evidence in the ICR, provide sufficient proof. There was a minor
                            shortcoming: the original target for one of the intermediate indicators – the length of water piping – had to be
                            reduced from 22-55 km to 2 km, which is a major target decrease. The project team provided the following
                            explanation: the estimate at appraisal was based on the assumption that water supply restoration would focus
                            on piping and would not involve the rehabilitation of the water treatment facility.

                            For Objective 2, the efficacy is Substantial. The project achieved all outcome and output targets under this
                            objective. The activities lead to improved institutional and community capacity to respond to future climate
                            change-related disasters in an efficient and timely fashion. Specifically, the project supported creation of a
                            specialized DRM agency, financed a disaster preparedness plan, and promoted sustainability of the drainage

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



  infrastructure built under Objective 1 by involving communities in its maintenance. Coupled with investment in
  infrastructure and soil stabilization, institutional and community capacity building constituted an effective
  package supporting outcomes sustainability.

  The overall efficacy is substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure for Component 1 (investments in slope
stabilization and transport and water supply infrastructure) and not for Component 2 (capacity building).

1. Economic analysis at appraisal. The net present value (NPV) of project interventions was estimated at
appraisal at US$27.1 million.

The methodology used for cost-benefit analysis. The analysis was conducted at the subcomponent
level. The time period for the analysis was 10 years for sub-component 1.1 (slope stabilization) and 15 years for
sub-components 1.2 and 1.3 (infrastructure rehabilitation). A discount rate of 6 percent was applied. The
following benefits were estimated: (i) avoided loss of lives; (ii) avoided damage to infrastructure; (iii) increased
connectivity; (iv) increased access to potable water; and (v) improved conditions for agriculture. The estimates
for costs and benefits were based on market and shadow prices.

2. Economic analysis at closure shows a positive NPV equaling to US$12.5 million and an economic rate of
return (ERR) at 19.8 percent, in excess of the annual discount rate of six percent. The results are robust when
sensitivity analysis is applied. Specifically, when the benefits estimate is reduced by 10 percent or benefits are
assumed to lag for two years, the NPV is still positive and the ERR is 17.8 percent and 18.4 percent
respectively.

The methodology used for cost-benefit analysis. The time period for the calculations was 20 years. The
applied discount rate was six percent, which reflects the annual opportunity cost of social investments. The
benefits begin accruing in the second year of project implementation. A standard factor of 0.8 was applied to
convert financial costs to economic costs (net of taxes and using the shadow price for labor). It was estimated
that flooding and landslides of the magnitude similar to the 2017 disaster (to which this project responded) are
likely to occur every 15 years, while less damaging adverse climate events occur every 5 years and even less
destructive events happen every year.

The benefits were monetized as follows:

a. Avoided destruction of infrastructure from extreme climate events is monetized at US$5,327,622 (events
occurring once in 15 years). This total consists of the following avoided losses: to residences at US$4,489,413;
to roads at US$25,709; and to bridges at US$812,500 (ICR, page 44-45, paragraph 3). The monetization was
based on the inputs described below and a conservative 50 percent effectiveness factor. The source of the


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



average damage costs is the Damage and Loss Assessment report, which provides the estimates of the losses
incurred by the 2017 disaster (World Bank Group. 2017. Sierra Leone Rapid Damage and Loss Assessment of
August 14th, 2017. Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28836 License: CC
BY 3.0 IGO.), as well as the project results. The source of the price of carbon is: USAID’s AFOLU Carbon
Calculator. http://afolucarbon.org/.

b. Climate mitigation. The benefit of reduced CO2 emissions is US$219,030 over 20 years. They occur from
the planting of 21,000 trees across 17 hectares of land in Freetown, which was part of the slope stabilization
activity. These trees are estimated to absorb 24 tons of CO2 annually and 552 tons of CO2 in 20 years. The
price is assumed to be US$40 per ton of CO2 up to 2029 and US$50 per ton of CO2 afterwards.

c. Economic benefits. The economic benefits are estimated at US$844,730 per year. They include time
savings from improved urban mobility and increased access to piped water, as well as income from productive
forestry (as a result of the tree planting). Specifically: (i) 76,416 individuals will save the average of five days per
year from improved urban mobility; (ii) 64,200 individuals will save the average of half an hour per day from the
acquired access to piped water; and (iii) productive forestry will yield 160 kg of wood annually priced at US$2
per kg.

In addition to the monetized benefits, there are several anticipated benefits that were not monetized,
including: (i) reduced deaths and injuries due to a decreased impact of floods and landslides; (ii) greater labor
force participation (due to reduced impact of disasters and improved connectivity); (iii) better school attendance;
and (iv) health benefits from expanded access to improved water sources.

3. Efficiency analysis (unit cost comparison) at closure. The comparison was made with two similar projects
implemented in Freetown by the GoSL: the Rehabilitation of Freetown Street Phase 2 (Project A) and the
Rehabilitation of the Waterloo Township Roads (Project B). The comparison showed that the project’s unit costs
for two types of culverts were almost identical with Project A (one percent and five percent higher, respectively)
and higher than in Project B (60 percent and 34 percent, respectively). The ICR states that this outcome should
be viewed in the context of price inflation in the five-year period from the start of implementation of Projects A
and B and of the reviewed Project.

The economic analysis for Component 1 (physical investments constituting 68 percent of total project
costs both at approval and at closure), conducted at project closure, showed a positive NPV and an IRR
in excess of the annual discount rate of six percent. Specifically, The NPV is US$12.5 million and the ERR
is 19.8 percent. This analysis was technically sound and thorough. The data inputs were country- and project-
specific, making the calculations reliable and the attribution clear, and sourced mainly from: the assessment of
damages occurred as a result of the most recent landslides and flooding of 2017 and project results.
Conservative assumptions were used in the estimation of project benefits. In addition to economic analysis, a
unit costs comparison with two similar projects was conducted (for culverts only). The economic analysis for
Component 1 was also conducted at appraisal and showed that the project was economically viable.

Administrative efficiency. Operationally, the project was able to implement its activities within the original
funding envelope and without any significant adjustment of its design. While project inefficiency was limited to
the closing extension of just four months (needed to complete bridge rehabilitation delayed due to the COVID-19
lockdowns, flooding of the construction sites, and the longer than expected preparation of safeguards
instruments). Prior to MTR, project IP rating dropped to “Moderately Unsatisfactory”. The ICR notes slow
implementation and insufficient funding of some activities, as well as. However, the project team intervened,



                                                                                                          Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



including in “making critical decisions around the budget allocations and adjustment of the scope of Component
2.2” (ICR, page 25), and the subsequent IP ratings stayed at “Moderately Satisfactory”.

The project efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     68.00
 ICR Estimate                                              19.80
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on the high relevance of objectives, substantial efficacy, and substantial efficiency, the overall outcome
rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk. The project-constructed drainage system requires continuous maintenance, which includes
cleaning of the canals from solid waste. However, the risk that government financing for these activities will
not be continuously available is high. To mitigate this risk, the project invested in training community
members in drainage operations and maintenance and creating community ownership in relation to the
sustainable functioning of the project-constructed drainage. However, financial risk is still high. The ICR
states: “Although the project helped the GoSL make significant progress towards strengthening DRM
institutional capacity, planning and implementation capacity in the country is still constrained due to lack of
financial and human resources, so a long-term engagement is needed for transformational institutional and
capacity improvements” (ICR, page 26). Climate resilience is one of the key areas of the CPF FY21-26, and
DRM management is supported by the Resilient Urban Sierra Leone Project (P168608), a subsequent
operation to the reviewed project.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



Institutional Risk. The project invested in strengthening the DRM and early warning systems’ management
capacity of the government. However, there is a substantial risk that this capacity may not be retained. To
mitigate this risk, the project provided DRM management training to 183 government officials.

Exposure to natural disasters. The country is highly vulnerable to natural disasters, and considering their
increasing severity, the resiliency of the infrastructure built by the project might become insufficient in the
future.

Environmental risk. The Freetown Peninsula is characterized by significant deforestation, with 60 percent
of forests lost in the past four decades, mostly as a result of uncontrolled urban development. Between 2011
and 2018, the forests that border Freetown experienced a tree cover loss of 12 percent per year.
Deforestation can undermine slope stabilization and flood risk reduction efforts made by the project, as
forests act as protectors against natural hazards. To reverse deforestation, the government should be
supported in developing its urban planning capacity, and this is being addressed through the ongoing
Resilient Urban Sierra Leone Project (P168608), which supports urban greening campaign and urban
planning capacity building. The project-reforested wooded areas will be maintained by the NPAA, who will
ensure monitoring and regulation enforcement. Therefore, this risk is modest.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared in a period of 3.5 months as an emergency recovery loan with the use of
  streamlined procedures. As standard practice for emergency operations, the Bank defined specific
  activities, technical aspects and verified M&E arrangements at the implementation stage. Environmental
  and social risk management aspects were adequately addressed at entry.

  The Project was aligned with the government’s strategy for strengthening climate resilience and with the
  WBG’s CPF FY21-26, which mainstreams climate resilience. Lessons learned from previous emergency
  operations in the Africa Region including in Malawi, Nigeria, and Burundi, as well as globally (specifically,
  in Cambodia and Honduras), were taken into account at design stage. The project incorporated lessons
  on importance of multi-sectoral programmatic approach to ensure consistency with broader government
  recovery priorities.

  While the project is small in comparison to the scale of the needs, it was designed to have a leveraging
  impact and was coordinated at design with relevant interventions by the Government, development
  partners, and other World Bank projects. Several central government and municipal agencies and many
  development partners were consulted during project design stage.

  Key risks the project would face were adequately assessed, including the government ownership risk
  related to upcoming elections, sustainable financing of infrastructure maintenance risk, institutional
  capacity risk, and risks related to project management and implementation capacity. Largely adequate
  mitigation measures were identified. However, some proposed risk mitigation measures were insufficient.
  In mitigating the government ownership and financing risks, the Bank team relied on effective
  communication and coordination with different stakeholders and implementing partners by establishing a
  strong project coordination unit (PCU). Given the capacity constraints of the PCU, the Bank team could

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



  have proposed more support to the PCU from the beginning of project implementation. In addition, the
  risk related to the limited prior experience of the project fiduciary management unit (PFMU) should have
  been mitigated from start through close guidance.

  There were shortcomings in the M&E design (see Section 9). Two of the PDO indicator targets were
  significantly overestimated at appraisal, and one intermediate indicator target was substantially
  underestimated. The project team clarified that these errors were due to the fast-track project preparation
  which left no option but to set the targets before a proper assessment was conducted.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Ten full missions were undertaking during the 3.3 years of the project implementation, and the issues
 identified were reflected in the Implementation and Status Reports' (ISRs') performance ratings, and proper
 interventions were undertaken when needed. The project’s implementation performance (IP) rating, as
 reported in the ISRs, changed from Satisfactory during the first year of implementation to Moderately
 Satisfactory and then to Moderately Unsatisfactory prior to the MTR. Based on the MTR, which highlighted
 a few issues related to slow implementation and insufficient funding of some activities, the Bank team
 assisted the GoSL in making critical decisions around the budget allocations and adjustment of the scope
 of Component 2.2. Considering the capacity constraints of the PFMU and PCU, the Bank team ensured
 their close supervision. As a result of the interventions, the subsequent IP ratings were Moderately
 Satisfactory until project closure. With regard to M&E, the Bank team could have adjusted the targets and
 better capture the outcomes from multiple interventions.

 Since the implementation challenges were adequately addressed by the project team, the quality of
 supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's RF was adequately linked to the project ToC, as described in the ICR, as well as to the PDO
 and to the logic of project interventions in the PAD. All indicators were quantitative and time-bound, and all
 of them had baselines and targets. Sex-disaggregated indicators were applied adequately. The indicators
 sufficiently reflected project inputs and outputs. However, project outcomes were not fully reflected in the

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



 RF, and the links from outputs to outcomes were not always logical. Under Objective 1, only the number of
 beneficiaries from land stabilization and infrastructure rehabilitation were present in the RF as outcomes,
 while other key project outcomes were not captured. Importantly, infrastructure resilience, which elsewhere
 in the ICR is presented as a critical aspect of project interventions leading to reduced impact of future
 climate events (the “build back better” principle), is not present in the RF. Under Objective 2, the RF
 contains no outcome indicators, which would reflect institution building, specifically: creation of a
 specialized DRM agency, upgrade of the equipment and facilities for early warning systems, and creation
 of community-based sustainable drainage operations and maintenance. Even the PDO indicator under
 Objective 2 – “Disaster preparedness and contingency plan developed” – measures an output, and other
 outputs, not surprisingly, are not logically linked to it.

 Due to the emergency nature of the project, one of the original intermediate indicator targets was set before
 the feasibility studies and was not realistic. It was later significantly reduced. Specifically, the indicator the
 length of water piping had the original target of 22-55 km and the revised target of 2 km. At the same time,
 two of the three PDO targets were substantially overachieved, pointing to the miscalculations at appraisal:
 (i) 3,116 people were protected by slope stabilization works, while the target was 400-600 people and (ii)
 148,616 people benefited from restored or improved access to service delivery infrastructure (roads,
 bridges, drainage, and water supply), while the target was 34-44 thousand people. Again, this should be
 viewed in the context of the expedited project preparation



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports that the PCU played a lead role in monitoring and reporting on the delivery and
  achievements of their respective components of the project. One indicator for infrastructure rehabilitations
  defined at inception of the project was adjusted during implementation: at Mid-term review (February 10-
  14, 2020), the intermediate indicator Length of roads rehabilitated was replaced with the intermediate
  indicator Length of drainage works implemented. The original indicator measured “kilometers of roads
  (including functioning drainage structures) reconstructed/rehabilitated with transport services restored”
  (Project PAD, page 28), therefore the change can be considered a clarification. Another change was
  in the target for the intermediate indicator Length of water piping from the original target of 22-55 km to 2
  km (revised at MTR). These changes improved the results framework and the likelihood of the project to
  achieve expected results.

  As most final indicator values related to the project beneficiaries exceeded targets significantly, the PCU
  and Bank team could have adjusted these targets more frequently and used the M&E as a dynamic and
  adaptive tool so that project stakeholders were fully aware of intended project impact and targets. The
  ICR states that the PCU’s M&E capacity was weak in the first half of the implementation period, and their
  M&E reports were often not submitted in a timely manner. Similarly, the Bank team did not update the
  results framework data in the ISR for the first half of the implementation period. As the project
  progressed, capacity issues were addressed through the Bank team’s more frequent support, and M&E
  data was adequately collected and systematically analyzed towards the project closing. The overall M&E
  performance rating of the project in the ISR remained “Moderately Satisfactory” throughout the project.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



  The ICR reports that M&E was utilized to track project implementation progress, inform reallocation of
  funds, and demonstrate project impact. At the MTR, M&E data was used to inform reallocation of funds,
  for instance, among components 1 and 2 to ensure a more efficient use of the project’s resources.
  Based on the M&E framework, PCU conducted comprehensive beneficiary surveys to collect more
  qualitative data and stories to further articulate the impacts of the project, which informed the Bank and
  borrower’s ICRs. In addition, the collected information was used to develop a short video and
  communication materials to raise community awareness about the importance of integrating DRM into
  development planning.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category “B” at appraisal. There was no change in
   environmental category during restructuring. The following safeguards policies were triggered: (i)
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Forests (OP/BP 4.36); (iv)
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and (v) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental safeguards: Minor environmental, health, and safety concerns regarding the dust, noises,
   and unsecured stockpiles at construction sites were received through the Grievance Redress Mechanism
   (GRM) (7 complaints). They were addressed in less than 48 days by the contractors, PCU, and the Local
   Mediation Committee. Based on field observations and monitoring, additional concerns related to COVID-19
   prevention measures were identified as contractors and hired workers did not practice social distancing and
   lacked appropriate personal protective equipment, especially face coverings. These were addressed in a
   timely manner. Some major construction works were executed at the peak of the rainy season, thereby
   increasing water pollution risk. However, the project’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
   provided adequate risk mitigation measures. Under sub-component 1.3, the scope of rehabilitation of the
   Babadorie Water Infrastructure was scaled down due to uncertainties around structural integrity.
   Subsequently, an ESMP was prepared and implemented in line with an Environmental and Social Impact
   Assessment (ESIA) for the remaining activities under this sub-component. Compliance with environmental
   safeguards was rated “Moderately Satisfactory” by the ISR at project closing.

   The ICR does not report on the implementation of Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36).

   Social Safeguards: A detailed assessments of the landslide site (C1.1) identified a high-risk area or “red
   zone” with more than 100 houses exposed to falling rocks and landslides. The GoSL decided to demolish
   the buildings and compensate and evacuate the residents. While this action was not part of this project, it
   was informed by the project-financed risk assessment. Also, the “red zone” was adjacent to the project site.
   Following internal consultations, the WBG decided that OP 4.12 should apply to C1.1. The GoSL conducted
   a social audit of the resettlement process and submitted a Retroactive Resettlement Action Plan (RRAP).
   The social audit indicated that some homeowners were not compensated (tenants and caretakers), while
   some were either undercompensated or overcompensated. The property valuation was conducted to
   amicably resolve all grievances related to compensations. Overall, the RRAP implementation was carried

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



  out in close collaboration with the implementing institutions and community stakeholders and completed in
  an appropriate manner.

  An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) was prepared for components 1.2 and 1.3. The PCU was
  able to finalize compensations for sub-component 1.2 (55 Project-Affected Persons (PAPs)), sub-
  component 1.3 (35 PAPs), and sub-component 2.2 (12 PAPs). The GRM was effectively utilized throughout
  the RRAP/ARAP implementation, and there were no major complaints that required anticorruption or police
  intervention. Compliance with social safeguards was rated “Moderately Satisfactory” by the ISR at project
  closing.

  Protocols for Human Remains and Assets: As a result of the devastating 2017 landslides, the bodies of
  the victims remained under the mudslides. Some of these human remains were unearthed during slope
  stabilization. The project put in place protocols related to burials of the remains. The protocols were
  designed in consultations with the communities, including local traditional and religious leaders. A total of 13
  human remains were retrieved and transported to the morgue. When assets were found, meetings were
  held with the local committee, and the assets were handed over to the police.

  Gender based violence (GBV): The project was prepared prior to the World Bank GBV requirement for
  civil works. Notwithstanding, a project-wide GBV and violence against children (VAC) action plan were
  developed as a working document with obligation for all contractors, sub-contractors, and community
  laborers implementing the project to adopt it as part of the contractors’ ESMP. All contractors and related
  parties were also committed to comply in accordance with the country’s Sexual Offences Acts of 2012 and
  2019 in addition to international best practices to prevent and respond to all anticipated GBV risks. The
  project hired four social workers who were trained and tasked with providing daily outreach services and
  monitoring the project sites. No incidents or complaints related to GBV/VAC were reported.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (paragraph 69) that FM arrangements, including FM staff,
  planning and budgeting, and internal control procedures, were adequately maintained, and the overall FM
  performance rating of the project remained “Satisfactory” throughout the project. The PFMU ensured that
  the project complied with the Bank’s financial reporting requirements and quarterly interim financial reports
  (IFRs), and annual audit reports were submitted within the stipulated timelines. No material fiduciary risks
  were identified. Overall, PFMU had adequate financial management systems, including accounting,
  budgeting, staffing, internal controls, audit, and financial reporting. The cumulative exchange loss due to
  SDR/USD exchange rate fluctuation was US$0.125 million (1.25% of US$10 million IDA allocation) at
  project closing.

  Procurement: While no major compliance issues were found, weak procurement and contract
  management capacity remained the project bottleneck. The preparation of the Project Procurement
  Strategy for Development (PPSD) was significantly delayed due to limited technical capacity, causing
  significant delays in the recruitment of firms for the preparation of safeguard instruments and the
  infrastructure rehabilitation activities. These delays lead to the project performance rating downgrade to
  “Moderately Unsatisfactory” in the June 2019 ISR. The Bank team hired procurement consultants to
  reinforce procurement capacity and also provided training on procurement. A clear operation manual with
  specified turn-around times for procurement processes was developed. As a result, the procurement

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



   capacity issues were addressed. Overall, the PCU had awarded 44 contracts. A Procurement Post Review
   published on October 12, 2021 indicates that five contracts remain non-compliant, requiring normalization
   through provision of additional information.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were mostly derived from the ICR with some modifications by IEG (ICR,
paragraphs 77-84):

1. When robust analytical assessments are conducted at project start and inform project
design, it promotes both transparency in the allocation of funds and prioritization of
activities among multisectoral stakeholders in a complex multi-sector and multi-partner
recovery context. The Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) Report and Multi-City Hazard
Review and Risk Assessment informed project scope and design and enabled concrete multi-
stakeholder interventions in the country overall. The DaLA report provides critical information, which
supported complementarity and coordination of DRM interventions by different stakeholders. Multi-
City Hazard Review and Risk Assessment (September 2018) provided knowledge important for
building resilient infrastructure.

2. Emergency post-disaster operations, especially in the context of low implementation
capacity, significantly benefit from keeping project design and implementation arrangements
simple and flexible, as well as mobilizing trust fund resources to complement the client’s
capacity. This project had a simple design, enabling smooth implementation in a short time period,
as well as coordination with other stakeholders involved in disaster response. Design flexibility
provided the opportunity to reorient one sub-component from SWM studies to community-led
drainage rehabilitation, which increased operation sustainability.


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



3. The Bank’s safeguards instruments used in emergency operations need to be very clear,
and their applicability should not be undergoing review and discussion during project
implementation, delaying urgent action on the ground. The project had such experience in
relation to preventive resettlement policy when the risk of landslides was identified and the
Government made a decision to demolish the existing housing and relocate the population. Despite
the need to act urgently, the Bank took a few weeks to determine the applicability of OP 4.12 for
C1.1. The unclarity arose because the preventive resettlement was informed by the project-financed
risk assessments but was not related to project activities. While the relocation in the project-related
case was at the end successfully conducted, such delays increase the risk of additional loss of
human lives in case of another landslide. In summary, the Bank was irresponsive and delayed
important government action. To mitigate that in the future, having RAP emergency procedures
could help to provide more responsive support in urgent situations. Also, the Bank’s measures for
preventive resettlement, informed or triggered by the Bank-executed or project-financed risk
assessments, need to be further elaborated and standardized given its growing portfolios in DRM.

4. M&E mechanisms for emergency operations would benefit from being more adaptive and
flexible because results indicators and their targets are often set without preparatory studies
due to the rushed project preparation. The project would significantly benefit if a WBG guidance
document for emergency operations with standard costs required for key infrastructure interventions
were available. The WBG should consider creating such document. It would also help if emergency
projects were allowed to adjust the RF frequently to reflect the ongoing validation of original
targets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is of a good quality and delivers relevant and valid information, substantial evidence, and a thorough
analysis. The ratings are fully supported by the narrative. There are two minor shortcomings. First, in its
presentation of project outcomes and long-term outcomes, the ToC replicates the PDO and the PDO indicators
and does not go beyond that to specify a wider set of outcomes or higher-level outcomes. Properly
presented project outcomes would include decreased likelihood of landslides, reduced impact of future climate
events due to improved infrastructure resilience, expanded access to piped water, improved mobility, and DRM
institution building. Long-term outcomes should reflect the main value added of the project: reduced risk of high
human and economic losses from future disasters. Second, there is no substantive explanation for a significant
overachievement of two out of three PDO indicator targets or for a substantial underachievement of the original
target for a critical intermediate results indicator. These unclarities, however, do not affect the validity of the
ICR's analysis or its ratings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Freetown Emergency Recovery Project (P166075)



Substantial




                                                                             Page 20 of 20
