     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022877

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P117341                                 CN-HaJia Railway

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83470                              31-Dec-2020                                        281,650,869.56

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2014                             31-Dec-2020

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                        281,650,869.56                                               0.00

 Actual                                    281,650,869.56                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Peter Nigel Freeman         Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement dated May 12, 2014 (schedule 1,
   page 5) and in the Project Appraisal Document (page 21):

   " To improve accessibility and mobility by responding to existing and anticipated transport demand
   along the Harbin - Jiamusi corridor through the provision of additional railway capacity and reduction
   of transport time for passengers and freight ".


                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



   The PDO is unpacked as stated below for this review.

   1. To improve accessibility by responding to existing and anticipated transport demand along the Harbin -
   Jiamusi corridor through the provision of additional railway capacity and reduction of transport time for
   passengers and freight.

   2. To improve mobility by responding to existing and anticipated transport demand along the Harbin - Jiamusi
   corridor through the provision of additional railway capacity and reduction of transport time for passengers
   and freight.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There was one component (PAD, page 15).

   1. Railway Line. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$5,566 million. The actual cost was US$5,429
   million.

   This component financed construction of the new HaJia railway line - a 343 - kilometer (km) long, double-
   track, electrified, mixed-use (passenger and freight) line - between the cities of Harbin and Jiamusi.
   Activities included, constructing twelve new stations, upgrading the existing Jiamusi station, related
   technical services, installing goods, maintenance facilities and equipment, rolling stock and land acquisition
   and resettlement costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal (inclusive of contingencies) was US$5,566.0 million. The
   actual cost was US$5,429.0 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$300.0 million. Of this, US$281.6
   million was disbursed. Of the IBRD loan, US$7.5 million was cancelled (reasons discussed in sections five
   and ten).

   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$5,266.0 million. Their actual
   contribution was US$5,147.3 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 28, 2014, became effective on August 15, 2014 and closed as
   scheduled on December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Despite China's economic growth over three decades before appraisal, there
were glaring disparities in the country. While coastal regions expanded, northeastern provinces like the
Heilongjiang province lagged behind. The province was ranked 17th out of 31 provinces in terms of Gross
Regional Product (GRP) per capita, and the GRP of Jiamusi city a remote city in the province, was about
75% of the provincial average. At the national level, the country faced environmental challenges.

Sector context. The project corridor, the new Hajia mixed-use (passenger and freight) high-speed
rail aimed to connect Heilongjiang's capital city Harbin with Jiamusi. Although an existing line connected
the two cities, this line was originally intended for moving coal, and not passenger travel with little attention
given to passenger service standards. The passenger transit time was over seven hours between the two
cities (ICR, page 6). While a highway connected the cities, traffic along this road was subject to
disruptions due to heavy snow and fog for up to seventy days a year. Creating additional rail capacity
for responding to the existing and anticipated freight and passenger traffic was important for the province.

Government strategy. The PDOs is relevant to the Government strategy. China's 11th Tenth Five-Year
Plan (FYP) for 2006 - 2010 highlighted the need for promoting the rail mode, due to its lower cost, higher
energy efficiency, and lower carbon emissions as compared to the road and air modes. China's 12th FYP
for 2010 - 2015 highlighted the need for supporting the integration of lagging regions. China's Transport
National Planning Outline for 2021 - 2025, reinforced the goal of expanding the rail network to
75,000 Kilometers (km) of high-speed lines and 130, 000 km of conventional lines by 2035.

Bank strategy. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2013-2016 at appraisal had two strategic
themes: supporting greener growth and promoting inclusive development. The PDO was well-aligned with
the CPF, given the rail mode's lower negative externalities, and the area around Jiamusi and the northern
Heilongjiang province lagged behind the country in terms of economic development. The PDO continued to
be well-aligned with two areas of the Bank's current CPF for 2021-2025. The engagement area two of the
CPF articulated the need for " promoting greener development and low carbon transport cities " by
providing a faster, more economical and greener mode for passenger travel between cities". The
engagement area three of the CPF underscored the need for " sharing the benefits of growth" through
shortening economic distances between cities and the provincial capital. The PDO was also aligned with
the Bank's corporate priority of financing low carbon and climate-resilient development.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has financed seventeen railway projects in China. This project was
the sixth and the most recent Bank-financed high - speed railway project. The outputs of the project
activities would aid in realizing the outcomes of improving accessibility and mobility by creating additional
rail capacity. Although the PDO formulation was relatively output-oriented, the theory of change presents
relevant and clear expected outcomes at higher levels. That said, the PDO did not clearly define
"accessibility" and "mobility". The project design, which focused on the construction of the railway line, was
similar to the previous Bank financed high-speed railway projects in China and did not present significant
new challenges. Consequently, the overall project reliance is assessed as substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve accessibility by responding to existing and anticipated transport demand along the Harbin -
                Jiamusi corridor through the provision of additional railway capacity and reduction of transport time for
                passengers and freight.

                Rationale
                Theory of change. Constructing a 343 km-long double track, electrified, mixed-use high-speed railway
                line, new stations, upgrading the existing Jiamusi station, installing maintenance facilities and
                equipment and rolling stock, will create additional capacity for meeting the existing and anticipated passenger
                and freight movement between Harbin and Jiamusi. and thereby improve accessibility. As the PAD does not
                define accessibility, this review defines accessibility as the ease of reaching destinations in line with the main
                literature*.The intended outcomes were expected to contribute to the long-term development outcomes
                of aiding in economic integration, diversifying the Heilongiang province and reducing greenhouse gas
                emissions. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical, and the outcomes were
                monitorable.

                * Reference. " How to get there? A critical assessment of accessibility objectives and indicators in
                metropolitan transportation Plans" https://drive.google.com/filed/d/1p24v-aik-
                ifwDKTYC5mn4Ld67ijYH4u/view.

                Outputs (ICR, page 33)

                      The 343 km double-track, mixed use Hajia railway line linking Harbin and Jiamusi was operational
                       from September 30, 2018. The high-speed railway line was modern, air conditioned and provided
                       excellent service.
                      For several intermediate stations, which were located away from the county urban areas, roads were
                       upgraded to improve access and station squares were developed to provide transfers and parking
                       facilities. Each station had a designated area with children's play station, feeding room, and separate
                       toilets for women passengers with childcare and feeding needs. These areas were clearly marked,
                       accessible and well-lit. Each station was built to facilitate safe and efficient passenger flow with open
                       waiting areas, visible information desks and security stations. The stations on the high-speed railway
                       line are like modern airports with accessibility features, such as elevators and ramps.

                The ICR (paragraph 25) noted that travel in China was disrupted due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and hence
                Hajia' Railways 2020 operational statistics was unavailable. Hence, the outcomes discussed below are based
                on the 2019 data, which covered a full year of operation of the Hajia line.

                Outcomes


                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



The new Hajia rail line was expected to improve accessibility between Harbin and Jiamusi
through: (i) increasing ridership (the number of passengers using the high-speed line); (ii) better service level
of the new line (the number of daily train pairs between the two cities); and (iii) the volume of
freight transported (throughput) on the conventional existing line.

      In 2019, the annual passenger volume (ridership) was 9.6 million. This represented a six percent
       increase relative to the target of 9 million. Passenger attitude surveys conducted at appraisal indicated
       that passengers were willing to pay a surcharge for the better quality services on the high-speed rail
       as compared to the existing line.
      In 2019, there were on average thirty daily train pairs providing express passenger services between
       Harbin and Jiamusi. This exceeded the target of an average of twenty- five daily train pairs.
      The annual freight volume on the existing lines in 209 between Harbin and Jiamusi was thirty-
       one million tons, well below the target of forty- two million tons, and below the baseline of thirty-five
       million tons. The ICR (paragraph 29) notes that the lower-than-expected freight volume was due to
       the decline in coal freight following the national policies instituted to control coal production for
       environmental considerations. The ICR (paragraph 30) also notes that the anticipated increase of farm
       and consumer goods transported through the lines did not materialize, due to the overall slumping of
       the northeast economy. As a result, there was not enough freight demand for the additional capacity
       created in the existing line (due to the diversion of passenger traffic to the high-speed line).
      Although freight volume on the existing line did not increase due to external factors, the freed-up
       capacity was absorbed by the increase in passenger traffic on the existing line. According to the
       China's High Speed Railway Development review published in 2019, contrary to expectations, High
       Speed Rail services did not result in overall reduction in passenger traffic through the conventional
       line. Rather, they created growth in passenger rail traffic, which the previous capacity was unable to
       meet.

Efficacy of this objective is assessed as substantial. Although the indicators of ridership and service level do
not directly measure accessibility, they measured the increased number of passengers travelling between the
towns and villages due to the additional rail capacity created under the project. The volume of freight
transported did not increase to the expected level was due to a recessionary trend in the local
economy. While coal traffic did not increase, the freed-up capacity on the conventional line was absorbed by
the increase in passenger demand, indicating the economic value of the additional passenger capacity
created under the project. It was decided to switch the coal traffic to the conventional line since time savings
were less critical for coal conveyance.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve mobility by responding to existing and anticipated transport demand along the Harbin - Jiamusi
corridor through the provision of additional railway capacity and reduction of transport time for passengers
and freight.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)




                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change. The outputs discussed above were likely to reduce the travel time for the movement
                            of passengers and freight between the cities and thereby improve urban mobility between the two
                            cities. Urban mobility is defined in this review, as the ability and ease to move people and freight in line with
                            literature*. The causal links between project outputs and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes
                            were monitorable. The activities would aid in the long-term development outcome of supporting integration of
                            northeast Heilongjiang province. The intended outcome is based on the assumption that China railway
                            operates sufficient passenger trains and ensures the operation's reliability.

                            * Reference. Measuring transportation traffic, mobility and accessibility, March 1, 2011, Todd Litman, Victoria
                            Transport Policy Institute.

                            Outputs

                            The outputs described above are also relevant to this objective.

                            Outcomes.

                            The outputs of the activities were expected to improve urban mobility, by shortening distance between the
                            cities, saving travel time for passengers on the high-speed railway line and reduce travel time for moving
                            freight on the existing line.

                                  In 2019, the fastest travel time on the high-speed railway line for passengers between Harbin and
                                   Jiamusi was 118 minutes as targeted. This was significantly shorter that the travel time on the existing
                                   line (around six hours). This travel time savings is attributable to the reduced rail distance between
                                   Harbin and Jiamusi, which was shortened by 164 km (from the existing 507 km to 343 Km), and the
                                   new lines faster travelling speed.
                                  In 2019, the fastest travel time for freight movement between Harbin and Jiamusi was 600 minutes,
                                   well below the target of 390 minutes. This is because freight cargoes are now carried on the
                                   original line, which has enough capacity for moving the freight, whereas the high-speed line is needed
                                   for the unexpected growth in passenger traffic. Freight traffic is less sensitive to time savings than
                                   passenger traffic.

                            Overall efficacy is assessed as substantial, given that the outcomes were realized for the most part.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale



                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



  On balance, overall efficacy is assessed as substantial. Although freight-related indicators did not meet the
  target, other targets were achieved or exceeded.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for activities relating to construction of the Hajia rail
line. This activity accounted for 100% of the appraisal estimate and actual cost. The economic benefits at
appraisal were assumed to come from: (i) a reduction in travel time for passenger traffic diverted to the new line;
(ii) the potential increase in freight traffic as the new passenger line would free capacity on the existing line; (iii)
a reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases (GHCs); and (iv) wider economic and social benefits due to
the improved accessibility of Jiamusi and surrounding towns. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate
was RMB 33 billion (about US$962 million). The ex-ante Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 19%
(ICR, page 40).

The ex-post analysis excluded the potential benefits from wider economic benefits (as the new rail had just
opened and it was too early to identify the wider economic benefits) and freight volume. The potential benefits
were hence assumed to come from travel time for passenger traffic on the new line and the benefits from
reducing greenhouse emissions. The NPV when the project closed at 12% discount rate was - RMB 7.5 billion
(about US$1.1 million). The ex-post EIRR was 9.4%, well below the ex-ant EIRR. The ICR (paragraph 37) notes
that if the two components of potential benefits were excluded from the ex-ante analysis, the ex-ante EIRR
would have been 9.9%, slightly above the ex-post EIRR. The data on ridership on the new line were, it should
be noted, based on the 2019 traffic, as the operational statistics for 2020 were not available.

Despite delays during implementation, the Hajia Railway Line was operational four months ahead of schedule.
The actual costs were within the appraisal estimate and the project closed as planned and on schedule.

Operational and implementation efficiency. Operations commenced four months ahead of schedule, despite
significant challenges associated with construction often in extremely cold conditions. However, there were
resettlement issues throughout implementation. An independent resettlement monitor was not selected until
more than a year after construction commenced, due to the lack of competition during the domestic tendering
process. This forced the Hajia Railway Company (HRC) to restart the tender three times to find a suitable
company in line with domestic tender requirements. Moreover, the competitively selected consultant lacked the
necessary resources and capability for a large railway project (ICR, paragraph 64). The ICR (paragraph 63)
notes that the quality of resettlement monitoring and reporting during implementation was poor. For example,
the independent resettlement monitor did not collect data at the village level, and did not conduct an analysis of
resettlement activities as required, despite many trainings and repeated written remainders by the Bank.
Although resettlement issues were resolved for the most part with the HRC hiring a third- party monitoring
expert, at project closing one resettlement complaint still remained open.




                                                                                                          Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



 About 94% of the Bank loan was disbursed (US$282 million out of US$300 million). US$7.50 million of the Bank
loan was cancelled due to a case of misprocurement (discussed in section 10b).

In sum, efficiency is modest because of the operational shortcomings during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                19.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             9.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall outcome is assessed as moderately satisfactory, given the substantial ratings for relevance of the PDO
and efficacy, and modest rating for efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Macroeconomic risk. There is moderate risk to development outcome regarding the macroeconomic
situation. A worsening macroeconomic condition could negatively affect ridership on high-speed railways.

Financial sustainability risk. The PAD (paragraph 40) notes that detailed passenger attitude surveys
conducted at appraisal, indicated that consumers were willing to pay a surcharge for high-speed rail as
compared to the conventional rail. This finding was consistent with empirical finding of a surge in traffic on
high-speed rail which now represents about 30% of rail trips in China. Although the freight demand on the
existing line did not increase to the level expected, the freed up capacity was absorbed by passenger traffic,
indicating the economic value of the additional capacity created under the project.

That said, the ICR (paragraph 85) notes that in the medium term from 2021 - 2023, the Hajia line would
operate at lower than planned service levels and experience lower demand from passengers, due to the

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



disruptions to travel caused by the COVID -19 pandemic. However, based on the line's performance in
2019, and similar train systems that have been operated high levels of reliability and safety in China since
2008, it is expected that service levels and passenger volume on the Hajia line will return to the planned
levels when travel returns to normal post once the COVID-19 pandemic is over.

Social risk. There is substantial social risk given the non-compliance case and complaint relating to
resettlement in Harbin (discussed in section 10).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed rail projects in
  China. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) a simple design with one component (Bank's
  experience with rail projects in China showed that including many components affects implementation,
  given the limited resources of the implementing agency and the Bank for supervision; (ii) separating
  national policy considerations from a provincial level project (Bank's experience had shown that national
  policy considerations are best addressed through policy dialogue and technical assistance; and (iii)
  ensuring local support for resettlement plans (PAD, page 17).

  The implementation arrangements were similar to those of the previous rail projects. These
  included, entrusting the overall responsibility of overseeing the project (including monitoring and reporting
  and compliance with safeguards) to the China Railway Corporation (CRC), and construction activities to
  the Harbin - Jiamusi Railway Company (HRC) (PAD, page 18).

  The preparation team identified several moderate risks, and a substantial risk associated with social and
  environmental compliance. The mitigation measures included, preparation and public-disclosure of a
  Resettlement Action Plan. With this measure, the project risk was optimistically rated as moderate at
  appraisal (PAD, page 20). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for M&E, and safeguards
  and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 9 and 10). For safeguards, the local shortage of capable
  resettlement experts was not identified as an issue at the time.

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry: one, the mitigation measures incorporated at
  design for ensuring compliance with safeguards were inadequate, given the issues with resettlement
  during most of the implementation period, and two, there were shortcomings in M&E design. Neither the
  increased demand for rail passenger demand nor the decline in freight traffic, especially coal, were
  identified despite the fact that government policy was to reduce coal use for power and heat generation
  because of environmental concerns.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank organized a full scale implementation support mission yearly, with the international and national
 staff (ICR, paragraph 83). The Bank worked closely with the government and the implementing agencies in
 ensuring that the large railway project was completed to high quality standards, despite financing only five
 percent of the US$5.6 billion project. Besides the full-scale mission, the Bank organized a social safeguard
 mission every year to address issues relating to land acquisition, resettlement and monitoring social
 safeguards, and provided additional extensive technical guidance on social safeguards monitoring to the
 third- party monitor when the quality of the monitoring reports was found to be deficient. The support
 provided by the team aided compliance with financial management and the Bank appropriately declared a
 case of mis procurement which led to cancellation of US$7.5 million of the Bank loan (discussed in section
 10b).

 Overall Bank performance is assessed as moderately satisfactory, due to the moderate shortcomings at
 quality-at-entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was based on the Ministry of Railways (MOR) existing data monitoring and reporting
 systems. The systems had been effective for monitoring and evaluating the progress of Bank financed
 railway projects in China (ICR, paragraph 61). Baseline data for all the indicators were collected and target
 values specified at appraisal. The PAD (paragraph 39) notes that no special data collection was required,
 as the data for monitoring the performance indicators relating to the speed and frequency of trains were to
 come from the regular rail operations between the cities.

 There were five outcome indicators and two intermediate indicators measuring construction progress. Of
 the five key outcome indicators, two indicators (travel time of the fastest direct express passenger trains
 and the travel time of the fastest freight time between Harbin and Jiamusi), were appropriate for monitoring
 the PDO of improving urban mobility. The remaining three key outcome indicators (the average number of
 passengers per year and the average number of train pairs between Harbin and Jiamusi, and the annual
 rail freight between Harbin and Jiamusi) did not directly measure the PDO of measuring accessibility, as
 they only measured the additional capacity created under the project for moving passengers and freight.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Hajia Railway Company (HRC) was responsible for data
  collection for monitoring performance. The ICR (paragraph 63) acknowledges that the quality of
  resettlement monitoring was poor during implementation. For example, the independent resettlement
  monitor did not collect data at the village level and did not conduct analysis of resettlement activities,
  despite repeated remainders from the Bank. As a result, the HRC had to hire an additional third party to
  monitor resettlement activities. There were difficulties in collecting the 2020 and 2021 ridership and
  operations data on the new line (partly due to the disruptions to railway operations caused by the COVID-
  19 pandemic). These restrictions also made it difficult to carry out onboard surveys, an established
  practice and critical component of evidence-based ex-post evaluation of the first four World Bank
  financed high speed railway projects in China.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Bank team used the data collected by HRC to monitor progress, flag delays in implementation and
  take actions to address arising problems.

  In sum, M&E is assessed as modest due to the shortcomings in M&E design, quality of resettlement
  monitoring during implementation, the difficulties of collecting ridership and operations data, and
  conducting onboard surveys (partly due to the restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies, triggering four safeguard policies at appraisal; Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12) (PAD, page 8). No other safeguard policies were triggered during implementation.

   Environmental Assessment. An Environmental assessment was conducted at appraisal to address the
   environmental impacts of the project, and an stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was
   prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address such impacts (PAD, paragraph 65).

   Natural Habits and Physical Cultural Resources. These safeguards were triggered as there were a
   number of natural reserves and cultural heritage sites in the vicinity of the project. The PAD (paragraph 63)
   notes that the project alignment was carefully selected to avoid most of them. However, due to technical
   and socio-economic considerations, the alignment could not avoid passing through three of those sites. The
   PAD notes that in the three cases, measures were identified at appraisal and subsequently carried out to
   mitigate the adverse impacts on those sites.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



The ICR (paragraph 71) observes that overall environmental safeguard performance was satisfactory.
During implementation, the Hajia Railway Company (HRC) established an Environmental Protection
Leading Group, and each contractor also established its protection leading group with dedicated
environmental staff. The HRC also hired an independent external monitor to monitor performance
throughout implementation. At construction completion, an environmental acceptance monitoring report was
prepared as required under China's domestic procedures. This report concluded that environmental
protection and pollution control measures were implemented in full compliance with EIA and EMP
requirements. The team clarified that there were no issues with the safeguards on natural habitats and
physical cultural resources.

Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RAF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed to at appraisal. The RAP included grievance redress measures
(GRMs), arrangements for internal and external monitoring and livelihood restoration measures (PAD,
paragraph 56).

The PAD (paragraphs 57) noted that the project would involve land acquisition and resettlement. While the
major part of the acquisition would be in rural areas, resettlement was expected to be in the urban areas of
Harbin and Jiamusi. In total, about 14,342 people were to be affected by land acquisition. This included
about 4,620 (1,062 households in rural areas affected by land acquisition (3,494 people/844 households,
1,318 people/275 households affected by demolition, including 187 people and 57 households impacted by
both, 5,167 (1,210 households) in urban areas would be affected by demolition and relocation, and 4,550
people impacted by the resettlement of 39 enterprises. About 23,394 Mu4 (1 Mu = 0.067 hectares (ha)) of
land were expected to be permanently acquired. The ICR (paragraph 72) noted that in 2016, due to the
adjustment of railway tracks in downtown Harbin to Jingyang Street to Nanzhi Road to accommodate a new
railway line, additional urban buildings were to be demolished. As a result, a Supplementary RAP was
prepared and endorsed by the Bank.

There were resettlement issues throughout implementation. An independent resettlement monitor was not
selected until over a year after construction commenced, due to the lack of competition in the domestic
tendering process. This forced the Hajia Railway Company (HRC) to restart the process three times to find
a suitable company. Moreover, the competitively selected consultant lacked the necessary resources and
capability for a large railway project. The ICR (paragraph 63) notes that the quality of resettlement
monitoring was poor. For example, the independent resettlement monitor did not collect data at the village
level, and did not conduct an analysis as required, despite many trainings and repeated remainders by the
Bank.

The project's land acquisition and resettlement involved 10 counties/districts including 35 townships and
112 villages in two municipalities. About 28,387 persons were affected because of land acquisition, an
increase of 14,045 persons from what was included in the RAP. The project affected persons (PAPs)
included 21,682 persons (7,621 households) in rural areas and 6,705 persons (2,405 households) in urban
areas. About 23,752 mu (1,583 ha) of land was permanently acquired and 11,848 mu (790 ha) of land were
temporarily occupied during construction and restored after completion of construction.

The ICR (paragraphs 76 and 77) notes that compensation to the PAPs was based on an inventory survey.
Compensation to the PAPs was through a variety of sources, including cash compensation, different
schemes for income restoration, jobs to the affected laborers during project construction and providing




                                                                                              Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



   social security programs to the farmers who lost land. At project closing, RMB 5,954 million (US$933
   million) compensation payment was complete.

   The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that the complaints received by the GRM from PAPs were addressed by the
   local governments and the Hajia Railway Company. However, at project closing one resettlement case
   remained open. The ICR also notes that the Bank will continue to supervise the pending compliant case
   and follow-up actions until it is closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial management of the Harbin - Jiamusi Railway
   Company (HRC) at appraisal. The assessment concluded that there was some financial management risk,
   as the financial staff of HRC were from the Harbin railway line, which had not executed Bank-financed
   projects. The mitigation measures at design included: (i) management of Bank loan proceeds by the China
   Railway Corporation which was familiar with Bank policies; (ii) developing a financial management
   manual; and (iii) training the project financial staff from HRC. With these measures, the financial risk was
   assessed as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 33).

   The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that the project's financial management was satisfactory. The project's
   financial management system met the Bank's requirements and the interim unaudited financial reports
   were submitted, albeit with some delays. The annual financial reports were 'unqualified'.

   Procurement. The China Railway Corporation (CRC) was responsible for managing procurement. CRC
   had executed previous Bank-financed projects and had adequate experience and capacity. The overall
   procurement risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 52).

   The ICR (paragraph 81) notes that procurement activities were for the most part, in accordance with the
   procedures set in the loan agreement. However, there was one case where the supplier had been selected
   before the invitation of bids was submitted, and some equipment had been supplied before contract award.
   The Bank declared misprocurement and cancelled US$7.5 million of the IBRD loan.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any unintended impact.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Relevance of the PDO and
                                                                                efficacy were assessed as
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                substantial. Efficiency was
                                                                                modest.
                                                                                There were shortcomings at
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                Quality-at-Entry.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project which
IEG supports, with some adaptation of language.

1. Limited Bank financing can provide project stakeholders with confidence that economic,
fiduciary, and safeguard aspects of large infrastructure projects are adequately carried out.
This and the other rail projects financed by the Bank followed the Bank policies and procedures in
fiduciary management and environmental and social safeguards, despite the Bank's small financing
contribution (five percent of project costs). Capacity assessments, trainings, establishing project
management arrangements, preparation of adequate financial management, procurement,
environmental and social documents were carried out and prepared. All this gave the project
stakeholders confidence that these aspects of implementation were properly carried out.

2. For a railway or any other large infrastructure project to be successful (and cost-effective),
long term planning, strong government commitment, and an experienced implementing
agency are essential. In this project, the China Railway Company (CRC) took the major
responsibility for planning, financing and implementing individual projects, for creating delivery
mechanisms, for collaboration with local governments, and for administration of China's national
railway services. This enabled the contractors to make long-term commitments and brought costs
down.

3. Good project management is essential for the success of a large and technically complex
infrastructure investment projects. In this project, two parties, namely the Hajia Railway Company
(HRC) and the local government, each with quite different incentive structures and resource
windows were responsible for separate but interrelated tasks. The railway company was tasked with
the responsibility of building the project quickly, so had little incentive to take the time to examine
planning and engineering options to minimize impacts. The local government was tasked to acquire
land and relocate project affected persons on a timely basis to match construction schedule. This
misalignment of accountabilities created challenges and contributed to the delays in resettlement in
this project.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-HaJia Railway (P117341)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and complies with Bank Guidelines. The theory of change provided in the text provides a clear
link between the project activities, outputs and outcomes. The ICR illustrates with graphs and pictures. This
enables the reader to visualize the activities constructed under the project. The ICR candidly discusses the
issues regarding resettlement issues. The quality of evidence suffered because of the challenges associated
with restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The ICR provides plausible reasons for why some of
the targets were not met.

There is a minor shortcoming. The main text of the ICR at 22 pages is more than the recommended length of
15 pages. The ICR would also have benefitted from better editing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
