     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



                                                                            Report Number: ICRR0022880

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P117082                                 TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Tunisia                                 Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79170,IBRD-86440                   31-Dec-2015                                       66,238,996.46

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jun-2010                             30-Jun-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         52,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                          57,400,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                      58,208,996.46                                            0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Kishore Laxmikant         Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




 P118131_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P118131                                 TN-GEF Northern Tunis Wastewater ( P118131 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-96891                                31-Dec-2015                                          8030000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                             Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



 17-Jun-2010                                30-Jun-2016

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                    8,030,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                    8,030,000.00

 Actual                                                    0.00                                    8,030,000.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Objective: The objective of the Project is to: (a) provide an environmentally safe disposal system for
   the treated wastewater which will not be reused in agriculture in the North of Tunis; and (b) increase the
   quantity and quality of treated wastewater made available to farmers to encourage its reuse in agriculture in
   the Borj Touil area. (Schedule 1 of the Loan Agreement dated October 7, 2010 and para.25 of the Project
   Appraisal Document dated May 20, 2010).

   In addition, a Global Environmental Objective (GEO) under the Global Environmental Financing (GEF) part of
   the Project was "to support increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture, thereby reducing treated
   wastewater discharge from Greater Tunis into the Gulf of Tunis, an environmentally sensitive area of the
   Mediterranean Sea". (The GEO was not defined in the Loan Agreement or the GEF Grant Agreement; it was
   stated in para 28 of the Project Appraisal Document).

   For the ICRR, the original objective is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated wastewater which will not be
   reused in agriculture in the North of Tunis;

   Objective 2: To increase the quantity and quality of treated wastewater made available to farmers to
   encourage its reuse in agriculture in the Borj Touil area.

   Objective 3: To support increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture.

   Revised Objective: Under a Level I restructuring in August 2016, the PDO was revised as follows: "The
   objective is to provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated wastewater in the North of
   Tunis and increase availability for its reuse in the Project area". (Schedule 1 of the Additional Financing
   Agreement dated September 15, 2016).

   For the ICRR, the revised PDO is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: The original Objective was maintained: To provide an environmentally safe disposal system for
   the treated wastewater in the North of Tunis.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



   Revised Objective 2: To increase availability of treated wastewater for its reuse in the Project area.

   Objective 3: The original Objective 3 was maintained (since it was not specifically dropped during the
   restructurings): To support increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture.

   Split evaluation: Under the 2016 restructuring, there were significant changes that reduced the ambition of
   the project. Objective 2 was revised: the original focus on increasing the quantity and quality of treated
   wastewater made available to farmers to encourage its reuse in agriculture was changed to increasing
   availability of treated wastewater for reuse in the Project area. Of the two related PDO indicators, only the one
   regarding quality was retained while the PDO indicator pertaining to quantity was downgraded to an
   intermediate results indicator. Regarding Objective 3, while the PDO was not revised, there was significant
   downscaling of the outcome targets. Consequently, a split evaluation is undertaken in the ICRR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Aug-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 35 to 38 and ICR para. 20).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Changes in these components during project
   restructurings are discussed later in Section 2 under the respective restructurings.

   Component 1: Transfer of Treated Wastewater to Increase its Reuse in Agriculture: (appraised cost
   US$23.13 million; actual cost after additional financing US$33.69 million).

   This component was to include construction of a 1800 mm double pipeline to transfer treated wastewater
   (TWW) from its existing discharge point close to the El Khelj river up to a two-compartment 160,000 m3
   storage and regulation basin, construction of a pumping station, and purchase of key operational
   equipment.

   Component 2: Improvement of the Discharge of the Remaining TWW in the Mediterranean Sea:
   (appraised cost US$41.94 million; actual cost after additional financing US$39.00 million).

   This component was to include construction of one pressure pipeline to convey the TWW for about 5 km
   from the storage basin to the Raoued Beach; construction of a 6 km long submarine outfall discharging at a



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



  depth of 20 meters; and financing of studies to review in detail the design of the submarine outfall and
  supervision activities during critical phases of its construction.

  Component 3: Monitoring and Capacity Strengthening: (appraised cost US$3.43 million; actual cost
  after additional financing US$4.33 million).

  This component was to include financing for consulting services to strengthen: (i) water quality monitoring
  systems in the Project area; (ii) coordination mechanisms among agencies involved in wastewater
  reuse; (iii) key studies regarding detailed designs for improved TWW disposal through a submarine outfall in
  the South of Tunis and a new wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in the North of Tunis; and (iv)
  dissemination of TWW reuse experience through knowledge exchange events.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$68.63 million. At completion, the actual
  cost after additional financing was US$77.02 million (ICR Annex 3).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project cost was financed by a World Bank loan of US$39.4 million. Under the
  Additional Financing in August 2016, the amount of the loan was increased by US$18 million. At project
  closing, US$58.2 million had been disbursed against the total commitment of US$57.4 million.

  Co-Financing: At appraisal, the Global Environmental Fund (GEF) provided a grant of US$8.03 million.
  The Grant closed in June 2016. A total of US$ 8.03 million had been disbursed..

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution from the Borrower was US$8.60 million.
  Under the Additional Financing, it was reduced to US$7.57 million to reflect adjustments in estimated taxes
  in contracts. The actual Borrower's contribution was US$10.78 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 17, 2010 and became effective ten months later on April 14,
  2011. The original closing date was December 31, 2015. The closing date was extended three times and
  the actual closing date was June 30, 2021 or five and a half years after the original closing date, thus
  effectively more than doubling the project's implementation time period.

  Mid-Term Review: A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried out in February 2014.

  Restructurings: During its implementation period (2010 to 2021), the project underwent five restructurings.
  Changes included a revision of the PDO (Fourth Restructuring in August 2016); changes in some PDO
  indicators and intermediate results indicators (IRIs); changes in some components; reallocations between
  components; cancellations; and extensions of the closing date.

  First Restructuring: (May 1, 2014: disbursed amount US$3.18 million): This was a Level 2 restructuring
  undertaken after the MTR in February 2014. Project implementation had been delayed by the impacts of the
  Arab Spring in 2011 - as a result, disbursements were only around 4% of the allocated funds. The closing
  date was extended from December 31. 2015 to June 30, 2017 to allow completion of the delayed activities.
  Cost savings of about US$12.6 million had been realized as a result of competitive bidding for the project
  contracts. This amount was cancelled at the request of the Government of Tunisia (GoT) but It did not result



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



in any reduction in the originally planned activities. The Results Framework (RF) was adjusted to streamline
some indicators, including better definition and measurement of the PDO achievement. (ICR para. 27).

      The GEO reuse indicator target was reduced from 11 million cubic meters (m3) to 9 million m3.
      The PDO indicator regarding volume of water made available for irrigation was dropped as is was to
       be assessed to be an output level indicator.

Second Restructuring: (December 18, 2015; disbursed amount US$7.47 million). This was a Level 2
restructuring. The closing date of the GEF grant was extended from December 31, 2015 to June 30, 2016 to
allow for completion of the GEF-financed activities under Component 1. There were no changes in the
project's RF. (ICR para. 28).

Third Restructuring: (May 11, 2016; disbursed amount US$7.66 million). This was a Level 2 restructuring.
Disbursement categories of the GEF grant were consolidated into a single category for all GEF grant-
financed activities. (ICR para. 29).

Fourth Restructuring and Additional Financing: (August 10, 2016; disbursed amount US$8.45 million).
The Additional Financing provided U$$18 million to cover the increase in the cost of the submarine
outfall which had been underestimated during project preparation. The revised cost was based on detailed
studies carried out by specialized international consultants. (ICR paras. 21 to 23 and 30). Other changes
included:

      Revision of the original PDO; The original PDO was" to (a) provide an environmentally safe disposal
       system for the treated wastewater which will not be reused in agriculture; and (b) increase the
       quantity and quality of treated wastewater available to farmers to encourage its reuse in agriculture".
       It was revised to read "to provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated
       wastewater in the North of Tunis and increase availability for its reuse in the Project area". The
       rationale for the change was that the original PDO was predicated on the carrying out of necessary
       complementary investments in irrigation systems which were to have been achieved under a parallel
       project to be carried out by the Ministry of Agricultural Resources and Fishing (MARHP). With the
       cancellation of this project, it was assessed that the originally anticipated demand from the
       agriculture sector would not materialize. At the same time, with increasing urbanization, there was
       growing demand from other parties including developers and municipalities.
      Revision and downscaling of GEO indicator: Due to the lower demand anticipated from agriculture,
       the related GEO indicator was changed from the original "volume (m3) of TWW consumed in the
       Borj Touil irrigation perimeter, as measured by ONAS(National Sanitation Utility) and CRDA
       (Regional Commission for Rural Development) of Ariana" with a target of 11 million m3 to "average
       annual volume of TWW made available to farmers, developers or municipalities in the vicinity of the
       project" with a target of 3 million m3.
      Changes to PDO indicators: Two indicators in regard to quality of water at the Raoued beach were
       streamlined through better wording and better definitions of measurement, The changes were made
       to align the indicator with the MedPol Programme for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea to
       which Tunisia is a signatory. The changes were to provide a better measurement of the impact of
       the submarine outfall.

Fifth Restructuring: (December 10, 2019; disbursed amount US$42.99 million). This was a Level 2
restructuring. The project's scope was increased to add some essential upstream infrastructure works that
were originally to be financed by ONAS from its own funds. ONAS was not able to finance these due

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



   to financial constraints. The European Investment Bank (EIB), which was co-financing these upstream
   investments, was not able to commit additional funds to cover ONAS's requirements. Meanwhile, the Bank-
   financed project had accumulated a surplus of about US$13 million due to cost savings in US$ terms due to
   the depreciation of the Tunisian Dinar between 2016 and 2019. These savings were used to finance the
   transferred activities and required for urgent repairs to the WWTPs and wastewater pumping stations of the
   Northern Tunis wastewater system. (ICR para. 31). Other changes included:

         updating of the IRIs in the RF to account for the change in project scope;
         reallocations of funds between components;
         extension of the closing date from December 31, 2019 to June 30, 2021.

   Changes in Components: (ICR para. 24): The main changes were as follows:

         the activity for strengthening of reuse coordination mechanisms was switched from Component 3 to
          Component 1, as it included the design and development of a reuse pilot (Sidi Amor) in the Project
          area;
         the construction of the pumping station was switched from Component 1 to Component 2; as it was
          not directly related to reuse;
         some capacity building activities, previously to be financed under the Tunis Wet Sewerage Project,
          were now included under Component 2; this included the joint SONEDE-ONAS customer and billing
          system; and
         new activities were added to Component 1 under the 2019 restructuring.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD paras.7 to 13 and ICR paras.1 to 11).

Country Context: At appraisal in 2010, Tunisia' macroeconomic performance was one of the best in the
Maghreb region. The focus of its development strategy was a commitment to structural reforms, steady
investments in human capital and d infrastructure, pro-active macroeconomic management, and focus on
global trade integration. As a result, Tunisia was able to sustain a growth rate of 5% per year between 1990
and 2010, with a corresponding increase in the welfare of population and a poverty rate of 3.8%, one of the
lowest in the region. Tunisia had also made strong progress in the water sector. At appraisal, it was
estimated that 100% of the urban population and 90% of the rural population had access to improved
potable water, and 87% of the population had access to improved sanitation services. Water scarcity was
one of the most serious challenges facing the country exacerbated by climate change and increased water
resource demands. In 2010, water resources availability in Tunisia was only 407 m3 per capita compared to
a regional average of 1,100 m3 per capita and a global average of 6,600 m3 per capita. Climate change
projections anticipated a 5% to 20% reduction in rainfall. The agricultural sector utilized 80% of the
country's water resources with 90% of arable lands located in arid and semi-arid zones. Ground
water provided more than two thirds of the water supply but represented only 44% of the resource,
resulting in one-third of the country's aquifers being severely over-exploited. In addition to growing water
scarcity, the coastal and marine ecosystems in Tunisia were threatened by diffuse pollution from

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



agricultural drainage and from both treated and untreated wastewater discharges. The Gulf of Tunis was
identified as the biggest pollution 'hot spot' in the country with adverse economic and environmental
impacts, and a constraint for increasing tourism, a significant source of income in the area. To address
these issues, the Government of Tunisia (GoT), under its 2007-2011 National Development Plan, made it a
national priority to protect sensitive ecosystems, reduce nutrient discharges, and develop the use of TWW
as a non-conventional source of water for agriculture.

Sector and Institutional Context: At the time of appraisal, although 86% of the volume of wastewater
collected annually in the Greater Tunis area was treated in the existing wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs), the existing infrastructure did not allow for proper treatment and disposal of the effluents due to
(i) aging infrastructure and WWTPs, some of which had been in operation for over 30 years; (ii) WWTPs
operating at overcapacity; (iii) absence of nitrogen and phosphorus removal in the treatment processes;
and (iii) lack of submarine outfalls for efficient disposal. The low quality of the TWW conveyed through the
outdated transfer and disposal infrastructure created environmental and health risks and restricted its use in
the area. The TWW produced at two of the four WWTPs exceeded acceptable limits of Tunisian TWW
effluent quality standards. The quality parameters of the TWW, including concentration of fecal
coliforms, deteriorated further along the transfer infrastructure. This deterioration was caused by illegal
discharges of domestic and industrial untreated wastewater into the open channel, solid waste
contamination worsened by storm-water overflows and diffuse pollution from agricultural areas. This caused
health hazards for the local population. Contamination at the Raoued Beach limited its potential for tourism
and economic benefits. In terms of TWW reuse, although the Borj Touil irrigation perimeter represented the
main agricultural area in Northern Tunis, less than one-third of area was irrigated with TWW due to the
farmers' reluctance to use TWW of varying quality and aging irrigation infrastructure. The majority relied on
rain-fed agriculture with the risks of rainfall variability and its impact on crop production.

To respond to these challenges, the GoT initiated the National Program for Wastewater Reuse. Under the
Program, investments in Northern Tunis were to funded from different financing sources and implemented
in three segments. Segment 1 covering the upstream section of the TWW infrastructure was to be financed
by the European Investment Bank (EIB). Segment 2 covering the middle section was already implemented
by ONAS. Segment 3 was the downstream section which included (i) a double TWW effluent transmission
pipeline; (ii) construction of TWW transfer, pumping, storage (basin) and disposal (submarine outfall)
facilities. This segment was to be financed by the World Bank together with co-financing from a grant from
the GEF which would be directed to facilitating TWW reuse in the agricultural sector. The National Program
also foresaw investments in rehabilitation and extension of the irrigation systems at Borj Touil to enable
effective use of the TWW. These investments were to be implemented by the MARHP (Ministry of
Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries) under a parallel project which was also to be financed by the
World Bank. (The project was not realized; this limited the actual consumption of TWW).

The institutional structure is as follows: the Ministry of Agricultural Resources and Fisheries (MARHP) has
the overall responsibility for overseeing the water resources and agriculture sector. SONEDE (National
Water Supply Utility of Tunisia) has responsibility for drinking water supply. ONAS (National Sanitation
Utility) has responsibility for the sanitation sector.

Alignment with national priorities: The project objectives were consistent with the national priorities at
the time of appraisal and remain consistent with the national priorities prevailing at present. The GoT's
National Development Plan for 2007 to 2011 included among its priorities the protection of sensitive
ecosystems, reduction of effluent discharges in the Gulf of Tunis, and development of TWW as a non-
conventional source of water for agriculture. ONAS has developed a National Program for Wastewater

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



               Reuse to minimize wastewater discharge in the Mediterranean Sea by transferring it to irrigation perimeters
               in the country. The PDOs are also consistent with the GoT's 2020 National Environmental Protection
               Strategy under which reduction of wastewater effluents, pollutant loads, preserving marine ecosystems, and
               increasing water reuse are listed as key objectives. (ICR paras. 33 and 34).

               Alignment with the Country Partnership Strategy and Framework: The project objectives were
               consistent with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for FY10-13 prevailing at appraisal and generally
               remain so under the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-FY21. Under the CPF,
               Objective 2.1 is "improved access to services in lagging regions" which for the wastewater sector was
               understood to be supported through "improvements in municipal infrastructure (transport, and water and
               sanitation). Objective 2.2 is "enhanced economic opportunities in lagging regions". Although Northern Tunis
               is not considered a lagging region, the ICR (para. 33) indicates that the governorates benefiting from the
               project have higher poverty rates than average for the Greater Tunis area. The project also contributes
               indirectly to the CPF's Objective 1.1 "strengthened macroeconomic and fiscal management" through the
               institutional strengthening of ONAS and contributing to increasing its financial self-sufficiency. The project's
               PDOs are aligned with the GEF's "2020 Strategic Priority for Enhancing Resilience and Adaptation to
               Climate Change" and the CPF's cross-cutting priority of supporting Tunisia's climate change adaptation and
               mitigation efforts

               Prior Bank Experience: The Bank had a successful track record in supporting infrastructure projects in the
               region that focused not only on physical investments but also on institutional strengthening and capacity
               building. At the time of the preparation of the Project, the Bank was involved in two ongoing operations in
               the water and sanitation sector - the Second Water Investment Project and the Tunis West Sewerage
               Project implemented by ONAS, which was also the implementing agency for the Project.

               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDOs were
               consistent (and remain consistent) with the priorities in the national programs and the Country Assistance
               Strategy/Country Partnership Frameworks in regard to improvement of water and sanitation services and
               environmental protection. However, the CPF includes a special focus on "lagging areas"; the project
               focused on the Northern Tunis area which, as acknowledged in the ICR (para. 33) was not a lagging area in
               comparison with other areas in the region. The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated wastewater which will not be reused in
                             agriculture in the North of Tunis


                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)




Rationale
The ICR provides a diagrammatic theory of change (TOC). The overall TOC (relevant for all three objectives)
was that, to reduce wastewater-related environmental and health risks in the Northern Tunis area, it was
necessary to renew/rehabilitate existing wastewater-related infrastructure including collection and
transmission pipelines, WWTPs, pumping stations, storage basins, and outfalls for discharge into the
Mediterranean Sea. The TOC was based on the underlying concept that this would require investments in
three segments: upstream, middle, and downstream. The upstream segment was to be financed from funds
supplied by the European Investment Bank (EIB). The middle segment was to be financed by ONAS from its
own funds. The downstream segment was to be financed under the Project. It would deal with transfer and
disposal of the TWW through renewal/rehabilitation of transmission pipelines, pumping station, storage basin,
and submarine outfall. The Project would provide inputs of technical assistance and financing of investments.
The principal resulting outputs would be: (i) a double TWW effluent transmission pipeline; (ii) pumping station;
(iii) a two-compartment storage basin (for TWW for reuse and for disposal into the sea); and (iv) a submarine
outfall. The outcome in regard to Objective 1 would be improved quality of water at the Raoued beach (an
important environmental asset with touristic potential). The outcome in regard to Objective 2 would be
availability of adequate quality and quantity of TWW at the storage basin for reuse in agriculture, thereby
reducing strain on underground water resources. The outcome in regard to Objective 3 would be increased
reuse of TWW in agriculture. (This was to be enabled through the implementation of the planned parallel
project by MARHP).

The causal links and full results chain in regard to Objective 1 were clear. Since Objective 1 was not revised
during implementation and the changes in PDO were to provide greater clarity, Objective 1 is maintained
unrevised under the split evaluation.

Key Outputs: (as reported in the ICR paras. 38 to 43 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).12

      Construction of a 4.2 km pressure pipeline (1600 mm diameter) to convey TWW from the storage
         basin to the submarine outfall.
        Construction of a 6 km submarine outfall (1600 mm diameter).
        Construction of a pumping station at Choutrana WWTP, flow rate of 6m3/second.
        Rehabilitation of three pumping stations (Chatt Ghaba, Montplaisir, and Tunis Nord).
        Studies to review design of the submarine outfall.
        Key studies for the design of wastewater infrastructure in Tunis.

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR paras. 38 to 43 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The outcomes under Objective 1 were to be assessed on the basis of (i) reduction in the TWW from the
Northern Tunis WWTP discharged at the Raoued beach; and (ii) acceptable water quality at the sampling
points of the submarine outfall as defined in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). Efficacy is
assessed on the basis of both the original PDO indicators as well as the revised PDO indicators.
Achievements in the PDO and IR indicators were as follows:

      Original PDO indicator: Percentage of TWW from Northern Tunis WWTPs discharged at the Raoued
       Beach: (target 0%; actual 0%; target achieved).
      Revised PDO indicator: Percentage of seawater samples at Raoued Beach complying with imperative
       norms in total coliforms and fecal coliforms (respectively 10,000 TC/100 ml and 2,000 FC/ml):
       (baseline 80%; target 90%; actual 96%; target achieved). The original PDO indicator was revised to

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



         align it with the requirements under the MedPol Programme for Protection of the Mediterranean Sea
         to which Tunisia is a signatory and enable better measurement.
        Original PDO indicator: Adequate dilution and dispersion of TWW in the Mediterranean Sea at the
         sampling points of the submarine outfall as defined in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) -
         percentage of seawater samples meeting the norm NT106.02 in terms of fecal coliforms in the
         surroundings of the outfall: (baseline 92%; target 95%; actual 99%; target achieved)
        Revised PDO indicator: Average annual count of fecal coliforms in seawater samples in the
         surrounding area of the submarine outfall: (baseline 164; target 2,000; actual 106; target achieved).
         The RF in the ICR explains that the target of 2,000 is actually the upper limit of the relevant imperative
         standard and not a value to be reached.
        Revised PDO indicator: Average annual concentration of suspended solids in the TWW made
         available at the El Hissiene basin: (baseline 120%; target 30%; actual 19%;target achieved).

Efficacy of Objective 1 is assessed for two periods: Pre-2016 Restructuring and Post-2016 Restructuring. The
Pre-2016 Restructuring efficacy is assessed as High based on achievement of the original PDO indicator
targets. The Post-2016 Restructuring efficacy is assessed as High based on achievement of the revised PDO
indicator targets. The project achieved all the PDO indicator targets related to (i) reduction of TWW
discharged and improvement of water quality at the Raoued Beach and (ii) improvement in water quality at
the submarine outfall. The ICRR rates efficacy for Objective 1 as High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the quantity and quality of treated wastewater made available to farmers to encourage its reuse
in agriculture in the Borj Touil area.

Rationale
The overall theory of change (TOC) was presented earlier under Objective 1. Given the scarcity of
groundwater resources and uncertainties regarding adequacy of rainfall, it was assessed that, to encourage
farmers in the Borj Touil area to use TWW in agriculture, it was necessary to (i) improve the quantity and
quality of TWW to be made available to the farmers; and (ii) provide the necessary improvements in the
irrigation infrastructure to enable the farmers to utilize the TWW being supplied. The Project and its Objective
2 were to address the first requirement. The second requirement was to be provided under a parallel project
to be carried out by MARHP with local funds. As indicated in the TOC under Objective 1, the project
interventions (technical assistance and financing of investments) would result in an improvement in the quality
of TWW which would be transmitted to a two-compartment storage basin; the first compartment would store
treated TWW for reuse in agriculture and the second compartment would store TWW for disposal into the sea
via the submarine outfall.

The causal links and full results chain in regard to Objective 2 were clear. Of the two PDO indicators, one
"volume (m3) of TWW available for potential reuse in agriculture, measured at the storage basin, was



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



assessed to be an output level indicator at the 2014 restructuring. It continued to be monitored during
implementation but as an IR indicator. The PDO and IR indicators were relevant and measurable.

Outputs: (as reported in the ICR paras. 44 to 46 and Annex 1- Results Framework).

        Construction of 2.2 km double pipeline (1800 mm diameter) from discharge point to storage basin.
        Construction of 4.12 km double pipeline (2000 mm diameter) from Northern Tunis WWTP to the
         Ariana CRDA pumping station.
        Construction of two-compartment storage and regulation basin (capacity 160,000 m3) built over an
         area of 9.2 hectares.
        Construction of a pumping station (capacity 3 m3/second) to feed the outflow towards reuse
         infrastructure and the submarine outfall.
        Construction of vegetated filter and maturation tank at Sidi Amor reuse plant.

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR paras, 44 to 46 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The outcome under Objective 2 was to be assessed on the basis of the quantity and quality of TWW made
available at the storage basin for reuse by farmers. Achievement in regard to the targeted PDO and IR
indicators were as follows:

        Quality: PDO Indicator: "Average annual concentration of suspended solids in TWW at the entry point
         of the El Hissiene Basin". (baseline 120%; original target 30%; actual 19%; target achieved).
        Quantity: PDO Indicator: "Annual volume of TWW made available to farmers, developers and
         municipalities in the Project's vicinity" (baseline 0 m3 per year; original target 58 million m3 per year;
         actual 59.8 million m3 per year; target achieved).

The project achieved both its PDO indicator targets related to improved quality and quantity of the available at
the storage basin for reuse by farmers. The ICRR rates the efficacy of Objective 2 as High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase availability of treated wastewater for its reuse in the Project area.

Revised Rationale
The overall theory of change (TOC) was presented under Objective 1. The original Objective 2 was
formulated as increasing the quantity and quality of TWW made available to farmers in the Borj Touil area,
The focus on farmers was predicated on carrying out improvements in the irrigation infrastructure available to
farmers to enable them to reuse the TWW supplied under the Project. These improvements were to have
been carried out under a parallel project to be prepared and implemented by the MARHP. The project did not
materialize and the required improvements in infrastructure were not carried out. This significantly reduced
the ambition of the project since it limited the scope for reuse of the TWW in agriculture. Under the 2016

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



restructuring, Objective 2 was revised to extend availability of TWW to other potential users including
developers and municipalities.

The causal links and results chain were clear. A change in the PDO indicators was that, while the PDO
relating to quality of TWW was retained, that for quantity of water was downgraded to an IR
indicator. However, the IR indicator continued to be measured during implementation.

Key Outputs; (as reported in the ICR paras. 44 to 46 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The outputs remained the same as reported under Objective 2 above.

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR paras. 44 to 46 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The outcome was to be assessed by the availability of TWW at the storage basin for reuse by farmers,
developers and municipalities in the Project area. Achievement of the PDO indicator was as follows:

        Quality: PDO Indicator: "Average annual concentration of suspended solids in TWW at the entry point
         of the El Hissiene Basin". (baseline 120%; original target 30%; actual 19%; target achieved).
        Quantity: Intermediate Results Indicator: Average annual volume of TWW made available to farmers,
         developers and municipalities in the project area; (baseline 0 m3; target 58 million m3' actual
         59.8 million m3; target achieved).

 The project achieved its PDO indicator target related to improved quality and the IR indicator target related to
the quantity of the TWW available at the storage basin for reuse in the Project area. The ICRR rates the
efficacy of Objective 2 as High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture.



Rationale
The overall theory of change (TOC) was presented earlier under Objective 1. Considerations in regard to
reuse of TWW in agriculture were presented under Objective 2.

Key Outputs: (as reported in ICR paras. 47 to 48 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

        Construction of a vegetated filter and maturation tank.
        Construction of a pumping station.
        Establishment of a laboratory to analyze TWW quality

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)




                                    Establishment of a demonstration center at the Sidi Amor reuse pilot project.
                                    Signing of TWW reuse agreement between ONAS and Tunis Bay Project Company for 4,000 m3/day.

                              Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR paras. 48 and 49 and Annex 1 - Results Framework).

                                    Original PDO indicator: "Volume (in million m3) of TWW consumed in the the Borj Touil irrigation
                                     perimeter:": (baseline 0 m3 per year; original target 11 million m3 per year; actual 4.8 million m3;
                                     target substantially underachieved)..
                                    Revised PDO indicator: "Average annual volume of TWW made available to farmers, developers, or
                                     municipalities in the vicinity of the Project area". (baseline 0 m3;target 3 million m3 per year; actual
                                     1.46 million m3 per year; target substantially underachieved).

                              The original (pre-2016 restructuring) and revised (post-2016 restructuring) PDO indicator targets were
                              substantially underachieved. The ICRR rates the pre-restructuring and post-restructuring efficacy of Objective
                              3 as Modest, resulting in an overall efficacy rating of Modest for Objective 3.



                              Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed above in Section 4, the ICRR rates the efficacy of the project objectives as follows:

                            Objective 1: (To provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated wastewater which will not be
                            reused in agriculture in the North of Tunis) - High

                            Objective 2: (To increase the quantity and quality of treated wastewater made available to farmers to
                            encourage its reuse in agriculture in the Borj Touil area) - High

                            Objective 3: (To support increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture) - Modest..

                            Assessment of overall efficacy: Based on scores of 3 for High, 2 for Substantial, and 1 for Modest, the
                            average score for the three objectives is 2.3 resulting in an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1

                                                                                                                                Page 13 of 24
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  As discussed above in Section 4, the ICRR rates the efficacy of the project objectives as follows:

  Objective 1: (To provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated wastewater which will not be
  reused in agriculture in the North of Tunis) - High

  Revised Objective 2: (To increase availability of treated wastewater for its reuse in the Project area) - High

  Objective 3: (To support increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture) - Modest

  Based on the above, the ICRR rates the overall efficacy as Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
(Reference ICR paras.54 to 58 and Annex 4).

Economic Efficiency

The ICR reports (Annex 4) that the post-completion assessment of economic efficiency was carried out
generally using the methodology adopted at appraisal. A cost-benefit analysis was carried out. Quantifiable
economic benefits included the following:

      Benefits to local tourism were estimated using an avoided-cost method taking into account the additional
         transport cost, added energy cost, and CO2 emissions. (appraisal estimate 4.6 million TND per year;
         post-completion estimate 8 million TND per year).
        Benefits from international tourism were valued at the estimate willingness-to-pay of foreign tourists
         visiting Tunisia for improvements in sea water quality (appraisal estimate 4.5 million TND per year; post-
         completion estimate 27 million TND per year based on estimated additional earnings for the tourism
         industry).
        Benefits to fisheries were based on estimated increases in the earnings of local fishermen following from
         the improvement in water quality (appraisal estimate 6.6 million TND per year; post-completion estimate
         0.7 million TND per year derived from a revised method of computation designed to more specifically
         estimate incremental benefits for the fishermen in the project area).
        Benefits to public health were estimated at 1.9 million TND per year post-completion.
        Benefits to real estate values: were estimated at 2.2 million TND per year post-completion.
        Benefits to farmers were estimated based on the cost advantage to farmers from using TWW as
         compared to other water sources (appraisal estimate 2.2 million TND per year; post-completion estimate
         - increasing from 2 million TND to 5 million TND per year).




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



Economic costs included the cost of investments and incremental operations and maintenance (O&M)
expenses. All costs and benefits were estimated net of taxes,

Assessment of economic efficiency: The economic efficiency indicators used were the Economic Internal
Rate of Return (EIRR) and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) at a discount rate of 8% calculated over a
period of 20 years. On this basis, the post-completion EIRR and ENPV were estimated at 15.2% and TND 172
million respectively compared to estimates of 15.8% and TND 107 million at appraisal and 17.5% and TND 129
million at the Additional Financing. The post-completion EIRR is substantially higher than the discount rate of
6% to 8% prescribed in the OPCS guidelines on economic analysis of investment projects. The ICRR rates the
project's economic efficiency as Substantial.

Implementation Efficiency

Project Duration: As compared to the planned implementation period of 5.5 years (65 months), the actual
implementation period was 11 years (132 months)., including three extensions of the project's closing date. As
acknowledged in the ICR (para. 58), there were significant implementation delays. In part, these delays were
caused by external factors e.g. the impact of the Arab Spring of 2011 on decision-making in key GoT agencies.
But delays were also caused by the extended time required in the preparation and implementation of
a submarine outfall to international standards, for the first time in Tunisia. Additional time was also required to
complete the activities added under the Additional Financing and the 2019 restructuring.

Project Cost: As compared to the estimated cost of US$86.63 million(appraisal plus Additional Financing), the
actual cost was US$77.02 million. The reduction in cost was fortuitous to a significant extent - the project
benefited from the depreciation of the Tunisian Dinar which resulted in cost savings in US$ terms. Nevertheless,
there were substantial increases in costs in some important components, including the submarine outfall, that
required additional financing. Part of the additional financing was directed to financing of activities taken over
from the EIB financed project since EIB was not able to increase its committed funding.

Based on the above considerations, the project's implementation efficiency is rated as Modest.

Overall rating of efficiency: Based on the above, the ICRR rates the Project's efficiency as Modest (which is
also the rating in the ICR).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  15.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               15.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                          Before 2016             After 2016
Indicator
                          Restructuring           Restructuring
Relevance                 Substantial             Substantial
Efficacy                  Substantial             Substantial
Objective 1               High                    High
Objective 2               High                    Not rated
Revised Objective 2       Not rated               High
Objective 3               Modest                  Modest
Efficiency                Modest                  Modest
                                                  Moderately
                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                  Satisfactory
Outcome Rating
                          (value = 4)
                                                      (value = 4)
Disbursement             US$8.45 million              US$49.76 million
Disbursement
                         14.5%                   85.5%
percentage
Weight value             4*14.5% = 0.58          4*85.5% = 3.42
Total weight             0.58 + 3.42 = 4.00
Overall Outcome
                         Moderately Satisfactory
Rating
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and operational risks: These are rated Moderate. While ONAS has substantial experience in
maintaining and operating wastewater collection, treatment and transmission equipment, the submarine
outfall constructed to international standards will require special attention to keep it operating efficiently.
Fuller use of the storage capacity at the TWW storage basin will also depend upon progress made in future
in developing the necessary irrigation infrastructure to encourage farmers to increase reuse of TWW in
agriculture. Greater use of TWW by developers and municipalities will require informational campaigns to
overcome reluctance to reuse TWW in their activities.

Financial risks: These are rated Moderate. Sustaining the benefits of the project will depend upon
ONAS's ability to carry out its functions effectively and efficiently. ONAS's ability to do so will depend upon
the adequacy of funds available to it for carrying out its functions. Despite progress during the project
implementation period, ONAS's operating revenues were not sufficient to fully cover its operational expenses
at the time of project closing. While the GoT has been approving periodic increases in tariffs, subsidies from

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



the GoT were still required for ONAS to cover its operating expenses. ONAS's financial sustainability will
depend upon the GoT policy in regard to increasing tariffs and adjusting subsidies.

Institutional risks: These are rated Moderate. Fuller reuse of the TWW stored at the storage basin will
depend upon the success in enabling potential users to access and utilize the TWW. This will require
significant coordination between the relevant GoT and municipal agencies to facilitate the establishment of
the required infrastructure. In the case of agriculture, it will depend upon future actions to improve the
irrigation infrastructure to enable farmers to reuse TWW. For other users, it will depend upon the
establishment of adequate transmission and connection systems.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project's strategic relevance and PDO were well aligned with the priorities in GOT's national
  development plans and the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy. The original project design included
  activities related to rehabilitation of the irrigation system at the Borj Touil perimeter. The decision by the
  GoT to implement this as a separate project simplified the Project design but significantly increased the
  risk to achievement of project outcomes in case of delays or non-implementation of the parallel project.
  However, at the request of the GoT, project preparation was accelerated to fit within the GoT's requested
  time frame. This provided a relatively small window for the realization of the project. The preparation
  period was short at about seven months. The ICR acknowledges (para. 91) that, as a result, project
  readiness was moderate at the start of implementation. In particular, in regard to the submarine outfall,
  which was to be constructed and operated to international standards, important feasibility-related
  activities (hydrodynamic modeling, plan for sea water quality monitoring) were deferred to the
  implementation period, and contributed to delays in the construction and operationalization of the outfall.
  Subject to these limitations, technical, financial and economic aspects were well covered at appraisal.
  Appropriate arrangements were included in regard to environmental and social aspects. The risk
  assessment was generally relevant and adequate mitigation measures were proposed. Regarding
  implementation arrangements, the decision to implement the project through ONAS's existing own
  technical, financial, legal and administrative departments (rather than through a separate
  dedicated Project Implementation Unit) contributed to capacity building within ONAS. The design of the
  Project's Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system had some weaknesses in regard to formulation of
  some PDO and IR indicators, and lack of baseline values. These had to be addressed during
  implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project experienced serious delays, particularly in the earlier years of implementation. While the
 project was approved in June 2010, by the time of the first restructuring in May 2014, only about 4% of the

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



 Bank and GEF funds had been disbursed and by the time of the Additional Financing in August 2016, only
 about 13% of the funds had been disbursed. The Bank carried out a MTR in February 2014. and the
 supervision team intensified its supervision efforts thereafter. Implementation progress picked up after the
 2016 restructuring during which significant changes were made including revision of the PDO and
 modifications of some PDO and IR indicators. Following the restructuring, the supervision team proactively
 followed up with ONAS on implementation progress, including technical quality management of the sub-
 projects, contract management, and administrative actions required to expedite progress. Hand-on support,
 coaching and training, including in regard to procurement and financial management, were provided by
 Bank specialists as needed.

 The Bank fielded a total of 23 supervision missions during the implementation period of 11 years. The
 project had four TTLs over the implementation period. The missions were adequately supported by
 safeguard and fiduciary specialists. The back-to-office reporting in the ISRs was candid with DO ratings
 ranging from Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory over the implementation period. Following the 2016
 restructuring, DO and IP ratings ranged from Moderately Satisfactory to Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR paras. 81 to 85),

 The Project's implied theory of change (TOC) had generally clear causal links and results chain except in
 the case of the GEO indicator related to consumption of TWW for reuse which was predicated on the
 implementation of the parallel MARHP projects relating to improvement of irrigation systems and
 infrastructure. However, this indicator was retained in the Results Framework (RF) during implementation
 since it was a pre-requisite to maintain GEF financing. It was later downgraded to an IR indicator. ONAS
 had the responsibility for collecting all Project-related data required for the RF. The RF elaborated data
 sources, data collection methodology, and specific responsibilities. In addition to the RF, as part of the
 Environmental and Social Management Plan (EMSP), the Project also established a well-functioning M&E
 system to monitor dispersion and dilution through water quality monitoring in the area surrounding the
 submarine outfall, which was a first in Tunisia. This included detailed provisions for the monitoring of
 additional parameters to measure TWW quality, sea water quality, and ecology, as well as the operation of
 the related infrastructure. However, the RF as designed, had some weaknesses, including lack of unclear
 formulation of some PDO and IR indicators, and missing baseline values which had to be addressed during
 implementation. Also, as the ICR reports (para. 82), many of the chosen indicators could be monitored only
 after the infrastructure facilities had been completed which is typical for this type of project.




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)




b. M&E Implementation
  Shortcomings in the M&E framework as designed were addressed during project supervision. The nature
  of some of the indicators limited utilization of the Project's M&E system in the first half of project
  implementation. To compensate, ONAS contracted a specialized firm to carry out sea water quality
  monitoring activities at selected sampling points before, during, and after construction of the submarine
  outfall.. ONAS also collected data related to the quality of TWW at different points of the transfer
  infrastructure which were a useful monitoring tool once the infrastructure was fully operational. Monitoring
  of the TWW reuse indicators required ONAS to coordinate with CRDA and GDA which was facilitated by
  the implementation of the Sidi Amor pilot project for TWW reuse. During implementation, the supervision
  team made improvements to the RF, including simplifying the number of indicators, improving definitions
  to better align the indicators with the PDO, obtaining detailed information on data sources and
  methodology, and refining M&E criteria. Once the MARHP project was dropped, the PDO was adjusted
  and the reuse indicator restructured to account for the reduction in the Project's scope. The ICR
  acknowledges (para. 82) that there were some shortcomings in baseline data which were not updated in
  the RF during implementation. Another shortcoming was that, under the 2016 restructuring, when the
  PDO regarding availability of TWW was revised, the only PDO level indicator related to quality of the
  TWW. The PDO indicator in regard to quantity (volume) of TWW had been downgraded to an IR indicator
  earlier.



c. M&E Utilization
  ONAS utilized the M&E system to monitor implementation progress, including contract follow-up and
  management, and to guide decision-making. Because of the limitations in the RF which constrained
  monitoring of some sea water quality related indicators to later stages of implementation when the
  facilities were completed, ONAS took complementary actions to meet the requirements of the ESMP by
  directly contracting with a specialized firm to carry out the required assessments.

  On balance, the ICRR rates the quality of the Project's M&E system as Substantial with moderate
  shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   (Reference ICR paras. 86 to 88).

   The Project was designated as Category A due to the potential negative impacts related to the nature and
   size of the planned works, the complexity of their implementation, the nature and quantity of wastewater
   involved, and the Project influence area that goes beyond the location of the submarine outfall into the Gulf

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



  of Tunis. The safeguard policies triggered at appraisal were Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). These remained through the implementation period. No other
  safeguards were triggered.

  Environmental: The ICR reports (para. 87) that, in compliance with the requirements of OP 4.01, ONAS
  prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) that was regularly updated and publicly
  disclosed to reflect changes made during project restructurings, including the dispersion modeling studies
  and the inclusion of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). Environmental and Social Management Plans
  (EMPs) were prepared for the various Project investments. The ICR reports that their provisions were, for
  the most part, adequately implemented throughout the Project's lifetime. The ICR does not report on any
  cases of adverse environmental impact or significant cases registered under the GRM.

  Social: The ICR reports (para. 88) that, in compliance with the requirements of OP 4.12, a Land Acquisition
  Plan (LAP) was prepared and implemented. The ICR reports that the Project did not require any
  resettlement of persons or production sites and did not pose risks in terms of losses to income or livelihoods
  for affected farmers and other persons. The expropriation process followed the LAP provisions and there
  were no compliance issues. However, there were two cases related to compensation of two plot owners that
  remained unresolved at project closing. The Project team informed IEG that the cases involved disputes in
  land titles and settlement was delayed by frequent postponement of the court hearings. As of February
  2022, one of the cases had been resolved; the other was still pending resolution. The Bank's Safeguards
  team is monitoring progress of the case.

  The safeguards risk rating in the last ISR filed before project closing was Moderate.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (Reference ICR paras.74, 80, 89 and 90).

  Procurement: Early on during implementation, procurement activities were significantly affected by the
  impact of the Arab Spring of 2011 on the behavior of key GoT agencies. Decision-making was affected by
  the multiplication of procurement review committees and duplication of procedures. In some cases, these
  reviews led to disagreements between the Bank and the High Commission for Public Contracts (HCPC)
  that was the principal GoT agency overseeing procurement. In particular, there was a major disagreement
  regarding the award of the contract for the submarine outfall which significantly delayed the award of the
  contract. The ICR acknowledges (para. 80) that some of the procurement-related issues including that
  for the submarine outfall, could have been handled better by the Bank. Also, after the 2019 restructuring,
  some of the upstream activities that were originally included under the EIB-financed project were moved to
  the Project, and required extra due-diligence on the part of the Bank procurement specialists to ensure
  their acceptability under Bank requirements. The ICR does not report any case of mis-procurement. The
  Project finished with a Moderately Satisfactory rating for procurement due to some ongoing contracts after
  the project closing. These are to be financed from ONAS's own funds and the Bank team is monitoring until
  final payments are made to the contractors.

  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (para. 89) that, during implementation, ONAS followed
  adequate FM procedures in regard to recording of Project-related transactions and balances. preparing of
  financial statements, and arranging for external audits. The reporting was found to be generally

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



   acceptable. The FM ratings were Moderately Satisfactory through most of the project implementation due
   to delays in submission of project-related financial and audit reports. The Project closed with no overdue
   audit or interim financial reports. The ICR does not report any case of ineligible expenditures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
   Gender: The Project was not gender-tagged. However, the potential indirect effects of the Project in
   increasing tourism, are expected to provide opportunities to women in tourism-related entrepreneurship and
   employment possibilities in the hotels and hospitality workforce. The TWW reuse in agricultural areas could
   also stimulate crop-related artisanal products. The ICR reports (para. 64) that workshops under the Sidi
   Amor TWW reuse pilot project generated substantial interest from women.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: Although the Project did not directly target low-income
   groups, these groups along with others, are expected to benefit through the impacts of increased tourism
   and reuse of TWW in agricultural activities that would help increase employment and incomes.

   Institutional Strengthening: The Project contributed to institutional strengthening and capacity building in
   ONAS including hands-on support for improving project implementation activities; improved commercial
   billing and collection through the joint SONEDE-ONAS billing system; and improvements to ONAS's internal
   Information Technology (IT) systems including its Geographical Information Systems (GIS), SCADA, data
   center, and internal messaging system. The Project increased ONAS's experience in following international
   best practice in the design and set-up of comprehensive water quality monitoring system. These would be
   useful for planning and implementing additional submarine outfalls in Tunisia. The Sidi Amor reuse pilot
   project has provided lessons for strengthening coordination between key stakeholders involved in similar
   activities.

   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The Project supported ONAS's plans for mobilization of private
   capital through public-private partnerships (PPP). It indirectly supported the preparation of the Tunis
   Sanitation PPP Support Project (P162957) and financed studies to the design of the El Hissiene WWTP
   which is planned to be developed under a Build-Operate-Transfer model. The improved environmental
   conditions at Raoued Beach are expected to stimulate growth of private business including restaurants,
   hotels, and water-based recreational activities linked to increased tourism in future.

   Climate Change Adaptation: The Project supported the reuse of TWW in agricultural and other activities,
   thereby contributing to increasing Tunisia's water security and resilience to climate change effects.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               The ICRR rates Bank
                                                                               performance regarding Quality
                                                                               at Entry as Moderately
                                                                               Satisfactory due to insufficient
                                                                               readiness for implementation
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               and some weaknesses in design
                                                                               of the Results Framework, This
                                                                               leads to an overall rating of
                                                                               Moderately Satisfactory for Bank
                                                                               performance.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 98 to 102).

The ICR provides a number of lessons learned from the project's experience. Based thereon, the
IEG derives the following lessons:

Fostering coordination and cooperation, before focusing on institutional change, is key to
achieving stakeholder engagement and results for TWW reuse activities: The Project's
experience has shown that the establishment of formal intersectoral committees for cooperation is
an essential part of project design. TWW reuse is at the end-point of a vertical value chain that
(i) spans various jurisdictions (Ministries of Environment, Health and Agriculture); (ii) encompasses
issues ranging from upstream industrial and solid waste pollution affecting the quality of the
wastewater; (iii) efficacy of the wastewater treatment system which can lead to tensions between the
TWW providers and users; (iv) behavior and willingness of farmers to reuse TWW for crop
production; (v) regulatory and pricing issues, and competition with other water sources. In the case
of the Project, the Sidi Amor TWW reuse pilot project created a platform to bring the different
stakeholders to the same table; initiate dialogue that would not happen otherwise; and foster
cooperation mechanisms.

Tackling marine pollution requires a holistic environmental remediation approach. The
submarine outfall financed by the Project addressed the main source of contamination at Raoued
Beach. However, coastal waters are the recipients of various sources of pollution whose control falls
under different jurisdictions (e.g. municipalities improving their storm-water and solid waste
management; industries managing their effluents; agriculture controlling fertilizer usage). Multi-
sectoral approaches may be necessary for achieving this type of objectives.

Preparation teams and Bank management need to balance Project readiness and pressure to
deliver with extended implementation timelines: The Project was prepared under a tight timeline
to be able to respond to the GOT's request. Although the decision may be the right one in the


                                                                                                 Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)



circumstances prevailing at the time, Bank management and teams need to account for extended
implementation timelines to ensure proper designs and ensure quality.

Implementing projects in rapidly deteriorating conflict and fragile environments requires
proactive action, time and flexibility: In situations of conflict and fragility of governance, it is
necessary for Bank teams to act early and as frequently as necessary to correct the course of
implementation. Without project restructurings, closing date extensions, and flexibility in the Bank's
procurement procedures, achievement of the PDO would not have been possible and opportunities
for additional benefits incorporated in the Project would have been lost.

An additional lesson derived by IEG from the experience under the project is the following:

In projects where the realization of important outcomes depends upon the prior or in parallel
implementation of activities not funded under the project (as was the case under this
project), project design needs to give particular attention to mitigating the risks involved in
case these intended complementary investments are delayed or not executed. In the case of
the project, the dropping of the planned parallel project to be executed by MARHP significantly
reduced the ambition of the project and limited the realization of an important outcome - the reuse of
TWW in agriculture.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and generally follows the OPCS guidelines (except in regard to length - 34
pages compared to the recommended 15 pages or less). It provides a good diagrammatic theory of change in
regard to the causal links and full results chain, and the reporting is outcome-focused. The analysis is generally
evidence-based but constrained to some extent by some weaknesses in the Project's M&E system. The ICR
provides relevant lessons that are derived from the Project's experience. Given the nature of the project
interventions (wastewater collection, treatment, storage and disposal), further elaboration regarding the
safeguards issues during project implementation would have been useful. The ICR does not report what were
the safeguards ratings at project closing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
TN: Northern Tunis Wastewater CLOSED (P117082)




                                                                              Page 24 of 24
