     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022885

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P149895                                       NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55300,IDA-55310                           31-Jul-2021                                          10,550,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Jun-2014                                   30-Jun-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              12,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                               11,659,010.29                                                 0.00

 Actual                                           10,550,000.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Kavita Mathur                  Victoria Alexeeva               IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project aimed to facilitate access of Honduras and Nicaragua to regional risk insurance through
   membership in the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF). CCRIF was the first multi-country
   catastrophe risk pooling and financing facility that transfers partial sovereign disaster risk to the international
   reinsurance market and provides countries with liquidity following natural disasters. In 2014, the facility was
   restructured into a Segregated Portfolio Company (SPC) to facilitate expansion into new products and
   geographic areas and since then the facility is known as CCRIF SPC.


                                                                                                       Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1,
   page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6):

   " To enable the access of the Recipient (Honduras and Nicaragua) to efficient sovereign risk
   insurance associated with tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall."

   The Government of Honduras' evaluation of its fiscal situation and competing political priorities delayed its
   decision to the join the CCRIF SPC and sign the Credit Agreement for this IDA project. Honduras hesitation to
   move forward with CCRIF membership at appraisal was also partly attributable to the delayed availability of
   excess rainfall coverage, which later became available for the 2016/2017 policy period. Since Honduras did
   not meet the deadline for the signing of the credit agreement, the World Bank withdrew the credit offer to
   Honduras on January 18, 2017.

   Revised PDO:

   " To enable access of Nicaragua to efficient sovereign risk insurance associated with geophysical and
   climate-related events."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Apr-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were two components (PAD, page 7).

   1. Payment of the entrance fee to the CCRIF SPC for Honduras and Nicaragua. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$4.5 million. The estimated cost after project restructuring was US$1.0 million. The actual
   cost was US$1.0 million. This component aimed to assist Honduras and Nicaragua to join the CCRIF
   SPC by financing their entrance fees (equivalent to the first years' insurance premium).

   2. Payment of annual insurance premium to the CCRIF SPC for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
   estimated cost at appraisal was US$19.5 million. The estimated cost after project restructuring was
   US$10.6 million. The actual cost was US$10.6 million. This component aimed to assist Honduras and
   Nicaragua purchase catastrophe insurance coverage offered by the CCRIF SPC during the first three years
   of membership. Annual insurance premiums would initially cover risk due to tropical cyclones and
   earthquakes during year one. Upon availability of an additional excess rainfall product in year two, this
   component could also be used towards financing coverage against excess rainfall.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



  Revised component 2. At project restructuring, component 2 was revised as follows: One, financing
  the annual insurance premiums for Nicaragua for two more years (premiums were to be on a decreasing
  basis for the final two years); and two, as new sovereign risk insurance became available for geophysical
  and climate-related events, Nicaragua could access sovereign risk insurance for geophysical events
  (including, but not limited to, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides), and climate-related events
  (including, but not limited, to tropical cyclones and excess rainfall).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$24.0 million (US$12.0 million each for Honduras and
  Nicaragua). The revised estimate after project restructuring was US$11.6 million. The actual cost was
  US$11.6 million.

  Project financing. An IDA credit of US$24.0 million financed the project (US$12.0 million each for
  Honduras and Nicaragua). The revised estimate after Honduras withdrew from the project was
  US$11.6 million. The amount disbursed was US$10.5 million. The difference between the revised estimate
  and the amount disbursed was due to parameter policy changes. The team clarified that when a country
  selects CCRIF policies they can choose from several parameters choices such as: (i) attachment point -
  deductible measured by event return period modelled losses; (ii) exhaustion point - highest limit of
  coverage, also measured by return period modelled losses; and (iii) ceding percentage - amount of risk
  within the attachment point and exhaustion point they will be ceding to the international markets.
  Many permutations of these choices determine premium costs. The team also clarified that the estimates of
  the IDA credit at appraisal were based on the most likely policy choices for Nicaragua, but Nicaragua chose
  slightly less expensive premiums. Hence the difference between the IDA credit and the amount disbursed.

  Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. The Ministry of Finance
  covered the last two years decreases in the percentage of the premium financed by the IDA credit line
  (discussed below).

  Dates. The Bank approved the project on June 18, 2014, and the project was scheduled to close on June
  30, 2019. However, the project closed two years behind schedule on June 30,2021.

  Restructuring. The following main changes were made with the Level 1 restructuring on April 19, 2017.

        With the withdrawal of IDA credit to Honduras, the project name was changed to "Nicaragua
         Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project".
        As discussed in Section 2d, the project scope was expanded to allow for sovereign risk insurance to
         geophysical and climate-related events, and the PDO was revised to reflect this change.
        The closing date was extended by two years from June 30, 2019, to June 30, 2021. With this, the
         annual insurance premiums was extended to six years.
        Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories and disbursement estimates were
         changed, due to the extension of the closing date.

  These main changes were made with the Level 2 restructuring of the project on July 19, 2019.

        The percentage of expenditures to be financed under component two was increased to 80 percent of
         the expenditures for insurance premium in year five and 70 percent in year six.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



         The disbursement estimates were updated.

   Split rating: Since the PDO was revised through a Level 1 restructuring, following the methodology,
   this review is based on a split rating of the PDO when 33 percent ( US$3.5 million) was disbursed
   before restructuring, and the balance 67 percent (US$7.0 million) after restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Both Honduras and Nicaragua are highly vulnerable to the adverse effects associated
with earthquakes, hurricanes and other hydro-meteorological events. Annual economic losses due to such
events were estimated to be around 2.8% and 1.8% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Honduras and
Nicaragua between 1990 and 2012. The fiscal costs associated with such disasters was a
significant liability for the two countries and their national budgets. The limited ability of these countries to
absorb fiscal shocks due to such events was their limited external borrowing capacity and limited financial
tools. Therefore, cost-efficient means to safeguard against extreme events, more affordable insurance
premiums, and readily available resources that could be mobilized quickly following a natural catastrophe
was important to the countries.

Government and Regional Strategy. Both Honduras and Nicaragua through XXXV Council of Presidents
of the Central America Integration System (SICA) approved a program titled "Comprehensive Central
American Disaster Risk Management Policy" (PCGIR) on June 30, 2010. The program adopted by the
countries called for integrating Disaster Risk Management (DRM) and climate adaptation in their economic,
social, and environmental regional policy frameworks. The PCGIR policy also committed the SICA countries
to invest in fiscal protection through insurance mechanisms, and promoting the creation and frameworks of
subsidiary protection that cover social groups traditionally considered "non-insurable".

The PDO were well-aligned with the 2020 Government strategy of Nicaragua for financial protection against
disaster relief and the adverse effects of climate change. The four strategic objectives of the strategy are: (i)
assess and quantify disaster risk and the adverse effects of climate change; (ii) evaluate and implement
financial instruments for disaster risk retention and transfer; (iii) promote the inclusion of disaster risk
analysis and climate change adaptation in budgetary processes and public expenditure monitoring; and (iv)
strengthen the legal and institutional framework for DRM. The strategy specified a mix of instruments,
including financial instruments for disaster risk retention (budget resources, the National Disaster Fund,
contingent credit lines, reallocation of resources from credit lines, and extended credits) and for risk transfer
(systematic insurance of public assets and parametric insurance) and climate finance instruments. This
strategy was currently undergoing approvals and is expected to be adopted in 2022. The ICR provides no
information on when the strategy is likely to be adopted.

Disaster risk financing remains one of the government's top priorities. This is evidenced by the fact that the
last two years' decreases in the percentage of the premium financed by the Bank credit were financed by
the government. The government also fully financed the most recent renewal for year 2021/2022.

Bank Strategy. The PDO continues to be well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, DRM was a
critical theme in both the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Honduras for 2012-2014 and for the

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



               CPF of Nicaragua for 2013-2017. The PDO is well-aligned with the CPF of Nicaragua for 2018-2022. The
               third pillar of the CPF mentions the need for increasing the number of instruments that provide access to
               liquidity on time after a disaster (CPF, page 23).

               Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has financed previous DRM policies in Nicaragua and Honduras.
               For example, the Bank supported reforms for establishing the National system for DRM through the Natural
               Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project and provided Emergency Recovery Credit following the devastation
               caused by Hurricane Felix in September 2007. The Bank supported Honduras in its recovery from
               Hurricane Mitch and establishing a formal DRM system through the Natural Disaster Mitigation Project
               which closed in 2010, and followed this through a new DRM project that was approved in 2012. The
               rationale for using regional IDA funding was that by working with other COSEFIN (The Council of Ministers
               of Finance of Central America and the Dominican Republic) countries through CCRIF SPC and by
               collaborating regionally with the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) countries, Honduras and Nicaragua
               could increase insurance coverage per premium dollar by 50 percent, as compared to acting independently
               (PAD, paragraph 23).

               The cost-efficient means to safeguard against extreme events, affordable insurance premiums, and readily
               available resources that could be mobilized quickly following a natural catastrophe was important to
               Nicaragua and the PDO continues be fully aligned to the Bank strategy for Nicaragua. However, Honduras
               did not sign the credit agreement, and the PDO had to be revised. Honduras hesitation to move forward
               with CCRIF membership was partly attributable to the lack of insurance coverage for excess rainfall at
               appraisal. Therefore, the relevance of the revised PDO is assessed as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enable the access of Honduras and Nicaragua to efficient sovereign risk insurance associated with tropical
                             cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project strategy was to improve disaster risk management in Honduras and
                             Nicaragua through transferring risk from these countries to international markets. The theory of change
                             envisioned that: (i) financing the entrance fee of these countries to the CCRIF SPC would ensure their
                             eligibility for catastrophic risk coverage for tropical cyclones, earthquakes and excess rainfall; and (ii)
                             financing the annual insurance premium of these countries would enable them to access lower premium rates
                             than the simulated price for comparable risk insurance purchased individually by the countries in the market.
                             These outcomes were likely to aid in strengthening the financial protection of the countries from disasters


                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



caused in part by human exposure and vulnerability and enable them to respond quickly to addressing the
impacts of disasters.

The intended outcomes are based on the following assumptions: (i) the CCRIF SPC is able to place
reinsurance contracts without substantial cost increases compared to budget projections; (ii) countries honor
their participation agreements and there are no subsequent regulatory or legal changes that impede their
continued ability to purchase insurance from the CCRIF SPC; and (iii) some outcomes are contingent on the
occurrence of eligible triggering events that are beyond the control of the project (for example, some events
may cause damage and no payment is triggered because the event did not meet the pre-agreed threshold).

Outputs (ICR, pages 14 - 18 and paragraph 53).

      Nicaragua became the first country to join the CCRIF SPC, after signing the Participation Agreement
       on April 15, 2015. Nicaragua used the credit proceeds to make the following payments to CCRIF SPC:
       (i) the entrance fee (US$ 1 million) in August 2015; and (ii) the annual insurance premium for
       earthquake and tropical cyclone coverage for policy year 2015/2016 (US$1 million) in August 2015
       and for policy year 2016/2017 (US$1.5 million) in June 2016.

      As indicated above, the IDA credit for Honduras was withdrawn due to the delays in Honduras signing
       the Financial Agreement.

Outcome.

The PDO indicator " Honduras and Nicaragua as members of CCRIF are eligible for catastrophe risk
coverage and have received payment in the case of a covered (insured) event" was partially achieved.
Nicaragua, as a member of CCRIF, became eligible for catastrophic risk coverage. However, since Honduras
did not sign the credit agreement, it was ineligible for catastrophe risk coverage.

Efficacy before restructuring is assessed as modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enable access of Nicaragua to efficient sovereign risk insurance associated with geophysical and climate-
related events.

Revised Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change enumerated above is relevant to the revised PDO for Nicaragua
and that the sovereign risk insurance is available for Nicaragua for disasters caused due to geophysical
events (including, but not limited to earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides), and climate-
related events (including, but not limited to, tropical cyclones and excess rainfall). At the time of restructuring,
new risk insurance products were available (Restructuring Paper).


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



Outputs.

      As indicated above, Nicaragua became the first country to join the CCRIF SPC on April 15,
       2015. Since 2015, Nicaragua renewed its CCRIF policy for earthquakes and tropical cyclones
       coverage for seven consecutive years and for excess rainfall coverage for five years. The policy
       provided for increasing insurance coverage and/or lower attachment point for a given premium
       amount (The insurance coverage refers to the maximum amount for a given peril and the attachment
       point (insurance deductible) is the value at which an insurance payment is triggered).

      By project closure in June 2021, the excess rainfall policy choice provided a coverage limit of US$3.0
       million with a premium of US$0.5 million. The earthquake coverage limit increased by 29 percent from
       US$23.0 million to US$29.6 million. For the tropical cyclone policy, the government chose to increase
       the exhaustion point and reduce the premium to the 2019/2020 level. This resulted in a decrease in
       coverage limit by 48 percent (from US$32.3 million to US$16.8 million), and an increase in the
       exhaustion point by 16 percent (from US$34.6 million to US$40.2 million).

      Nicaragua had access to the complementary World Bank-executed Disaster Risk Financing Technical
       Assistance, aimed to strengthen the knowledge base of government stakeholders of general disaster
       risk management (DRM) concepts, such as public financial management, data management and
       coordination. Government officials also had opportunities to participate in workshops and events
       organized by the CCRIF SPC on comprehensive DRM and climate change adaptation that covered
       topics such as rainfall modelling and the economics of climate adaptation.

Outcomes.

The intended outcomes of the project were that as a member of CCRIF SPC, Nicaragua was eligible for
catastrophic risk coverage and receive payment within a month of the occurrence of a covered (insured)
event, and at a lower than simulated price for a comparable product purchased individually in the market.

      On June 1, 2020, the government renewed the earthquake, tropical cyclone and excess rainfall
       policies for the policy year 2020/2021. Nicaragua benefitted from the 50 percent discount offered by
       the CCRIF SPC to support its members' COVID-19 response. As such, Nicaragua received coverage
       equivalent to a premium of US$3.35 million for a premium payment of US$2.3 million, representing a
       45.8 percent in total coverage.

      The CCRIF SPC made five payouts to Nicaragua, within fourteen days of the event. The first payout of
       US$500,000 was made in the wake of the magnitude 6.1 earthquake that occurred on June 9, 2016.
       That same year, Nicaragua received a payout of US$1.1 million following Hurricane Otto. In
       November 2020, after hurricane Eta, the CCRIF SPC made payouts totaling US$10.7 million under
       the tropical cyclone and excess rainfall policies. In addition, after hurricane Iota, the CCRIF SPC paid
       out US$19.9 million under the tropical cyclone policy. Resources from the CCRIF SPC were used for
       obtaining resources to respond to the emergency after hurricanes Eta and Iota such as: (i) provide
       hygiene kits, blankets, food and other relief materials to 38,117 families that were placed in shelters;
       (ii) remove soil and trees from main roads and highways; (iii) rehabilitate the main sections of the
       national road network to facilitate transit of people and trade flows; (iv) finance logistics costs to
       mobilize personnel to carry out the damage and loss assessment; and (v) rehabilitate the "Nuevo
       Amanecer" hospital in the Biwi area located in the North Caribbean Autonomous Region, which was

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



                                     one of the most affected areas. All payments were made within 14 days of the event, evidencing that
                                     efficient sovereign insurance is an important instrument to ensure short-term liquidity in the aftermath
                                     of a disaster, thus enabling the government to respond to the emergency until other funding is
                                     secured.

                                    The real price of insurance coverage (insurance premium rate) resulted in 41 percent savings on
                                     average (as compared to the simulated market price that Nicaragua was able to obtain had it secured
                                     disaster insurance individually in the market) (ICR paragraph 42).

                              Overall, efficacy after restructuring is assessed as substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Appropriate conditions were not in place to ensure insurance requirements were in place.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                             All payments were made within 14 days of the event, evidencing that efficient sovereign insurance is an
                            important instrument to ensure short-term liquidity in the aftermath of a disaster, thus enabling the
                            government to respond to the emergency until other funding is secured. Overall efficacy is assessed as
                            substantial after project restructuring.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic efficiency at appraisal focused on the benefits from the Central American countries pooling risks.
   This analysis showed that Honduras and Nicaragua could reduce the cost of catastrophic risk insurance by 27
   percent or 41 percent when transferring catastrophic risk with other Council of Ministers of Finance of Central

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



America and Dominican Republic (COSEFIN) countries. As a group, the COSEFIN countries could reduce
commercial premiums paid by close to 45 percent should they chose to transfer risk through the CCRIF SPC
(PAD, paragraph 44).

Since the analysis at appraisal was not conducted specifically for Nicaragua, the economic analysis at closure
focused on the benefits to Nicaragua. Since 2015, Nicaragua purchased a total of 17 policies for three types of
hazards (tropical cyclones, hurricanes and excessive rainfalls) from the CCRIIF-SPC. Total payments made in
terms of gross premiums to the CCRIF SPC were about US$12.0 million (of which US$4.0 million was financed
by this project). During this period, four pay out triggering natural hazard events impacted Nicaragua. These
events were the magnitude 6.1 earthquake in June 2016, Hurricane Oto in November 2016, and Hurricane Eta
and Iota in November 2020. The total amount of payouts received by Nicaragua within the indicated period
amounted to approximately US$32.3 million (ICR, paragraph 47) .

Economic analysis. Since the economic analysis at appraisal focused mainly on outlining the benefits of risk
pooling, and not for Nicaragua specially. the economic analysis at project closure focused on the benefits to
Nicaragua specifically, as the revised PDO no longer included multiple countries. The ex-post economic analysis
for Nicaragua indicated a very high Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 61 percent and that the
interventions were economically viable and beneficial to the country. The analysis converted inputs (insurance
premia) into results (financial protection). Sovereign catastrophe risk insurance can protect against sudden
macroeconomic shocks that impact fiscal performance and a country’s long-term economic development with
negative consequences. The ICR (paragraph 48) observes that several options were considered using different
discount rates (4%, 6% and 8%). The ex-post analysis showed a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$16.1 million
(at 4% discount rate). The analysis showed a NPV of US$14.3 million (6% discount rate) and a NPV of US$12.8
million (at 8% discount rate). These were as compared to the NPV of 16.1 million at the baseline, indicating that
other scenarios were economically viable. The ex-post EIRR was 61%.

Operational issues during implementation. There were initial delays due to the delays in Honduras signing
the financing agreement 18 months after the project was approved. This eventually led to the withdrawal of the
IDA credit to Honduras. However, since then disbursements were made on time, indicating that critical
measures were already in place before the project was approved (ICR, paragraph 62). At closure, all the project
activities were completed in Nicaragua, albeit with an extension of the project closing date by two years.

The project efficiency is substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



                                                                                   91.00
ICR Estimate                                              61.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Outcome under Original Objective. Relevance of the PDO is assessed as substantial. Efficiency is assessed
as substantial. Efficacy of the PDO - to enable the access of Honduras and Nicaragua to efficient sovereign risk
insurance associated with tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall - is assessed as modest. The
outcome before the project restructuring is moderately unsatisfactory.

Outcome under Revised Objective. Relevance of the PDO is assessed as substantial. Efficiency is assessed
as substantial. Efficacy of the PDO - to enable access of Nicaragua to efficient sovereign risk insurance
associated with geophysical and climate-related events." is assessed as substantial after project restructuring.
The outcome after restructuring is satisfactory.

Overall Outcome. Weighing by the amounts disbursed before and after restructuring (0.33*3+0.67*5 = 4.34),
the overall outcome is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The risk to sustainability of the development outcome is assessed as low to
moderate. As part of the sustainability measures, the percentage of the premium financed by the IDA credit
decreased over the last two years, with the Ministry of Finance (MOF) consistently providing the balance.
During the final year of the project, the MOF covered 30 percent of the premium. The government
commitment to DRM was further demonstrated by the government fully financing the most recent renewal of
the premium for 2021 - 2022 (ICR, paragraph 80).

Further, at the regional level, Panama joined the CCRIF SPC as a new member. and Guatemala joined in
2019. Further, the ICR (paragraph 81) notes that membership among the COSEFIN countries is likely to
increase with El Salvador and Honduras expected to finalize their membership, further underscoring the
facility's long-term sustainability as a disaster risk insurance mechanism.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



  The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons from the initial establishment of the CCRIF, the
  Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project, and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
  (OECS) and Haiti Catastrophe Insurance Projects. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) using IDA
  resources for limited and targeted subsidies can help in establishing lasting insurance programs such as
  the CCRIF SPC (the OECS project which used national and regional IDA financing to cover the cost of
  entrance fees and insurance premiums for the first three to four years of the operation, enabled the
  countries to use the instrument with two of the four countries having insurance payouts during the project.
  This led the countries to internalize the premium cost in their annual budget decision-making processes
  and continue membership following project closing); (ii) a simple design to ensure timely and cost-
  effective coverage options according to the risk profiles of the countries; (iii) the required mechanisms
  and institutions are in place to ensure that when payments are made, they are utilized along with other
  risk financing institutions, such as reserve funds, contingent credit and budget allocations; and
  (iv) technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to improve the value of the CCRIF membership
  in the context of their countries DRM needs (PAD, paragraphs 24 to 29). The flexible design allowed
  selection of the parameters and products to adjust to changing priorities and needs. The design also
  incorporated sustainability measures, such as requiring Nicaragua to finance part of the premium in the
  last two years.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal including moderate risks due to challenges that may derive from
  project design and ability of Honduras and Nicaragua to continue as CCRIF SPC members after project
  closing. With mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as moderate as appraisal (PAD,
  paragraph 38). Although the credit to Honduras was withdrawn, the mitigation measures proved to be
  adequate given that Nicaragua has renewed its membership for 2021 - 2022. The arrangements made at
  appraisal for M&E and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in sections 9 and 10).

  There were minor shortcomings in Quality at Entry. It is not clear if the project was ready for
  implementation, and if Honduras had an adequate understanding of the product. Eventually Honduras did
  not meet the deadline for signing the credit agreement and the regional project ended up with only one
  country.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted supervision missions twice a year on average, with fourteen implementation Status
 Results (ISR) reports filed over roughly a seven year implementation period. The supervision team
 comprised relevant technical experts in DRM and financial protection and a small team of fiduciary and
 safeguards specialists commensurate with the level of effort needed to support the simplified project
 implementation (ICR, paragraph 78). The supervision team regularly consulted with the Ministry of Finance
 and the CCRIF SPC, and carried out the project restructurings in a timely fashion to address the project
 requirements. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the continuity of leadership was
 maintained, with two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime.

 Because of the delays by Honduras in signing the contract, the Bank lowered the rating of implementation
 progress from Satisfactory to Moderately Unsatisfactory. However, after the withdrawal of Honduras, the

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



 Project was restructured and implementation progress was measured only for Nicaragua. A satisfactory
 rating was maintained throughout the remainder of the project.

 The quality of supervision was highly satisfactory.

 In sum, overall Bank performance was highly satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objective was clearly specified and the theory of change was adequate. The one key
 outcome indicator was that both Honduras and Nicaragua are eligible for catastrophic risk coverage and
 receive payment in the case of a covered (insured) event. This indicator was appropriate for monitoring
 project performance.

 The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that the M&E system was designed to be in line with Bank requirements.
 The Bank coordinated with the Ministry of Finance and the CCRIF SPC to ensure that the premium
 payments were made on time, and that Nicaragua made policy parameter selections that were
 communicated to the CCRIF SPC well in advance of the annual June 1 CCRIF SPC deadline.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 71) notes that the Bank met with the Government of Nicaragua, the Ministry of
  Finance and the CCRIF SPC on an annual basis to assess if the premium payments were made on time
  and that the risks selected by the country were covered by the Facility. The CCRIF SPC provided its
  annual reports, including its unaudited and audited financial statements for Bank review.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project monitored the insurance payouts to Nicaragua following significant disaster events. The time
  taken for the payouts and the amounts of the payouts were used to assess the performance of the
  regional risk pool and to inform continual refinements of the insurance products and their coverage.

  In sum, the M&E design was appropriate, functioned as designed, and utilized to monitor implementation
  and the achievement of project activities. Therefore, the quality of M&E is assessed as substantial.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category C project. As the project activities did not include any physical
   assessment, no Bank environmental or social safeguards were triggered at appraisal. The PAD (paragraph
   52) noted that the insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and as a result
   would not have any safeguard implications. The ICR (paragraph 74) observes that the overall the
   project's social impacts were positive, as it contributed to the government's efforts to manage residual risk
   and strengthen its capacity to respond to and recover from disasters.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that financial management was satisfactory
   during implementation. The Ministry of Finance maintained adequate accounting records of all transactions
   with the CCRIF SPC and had a qualified accountant and support staff. Annual audited financial statements
   were submitted on time and all significant audit observations were addressed when the project closed.

   Procurement. The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that procurement was satisfactory during
   implementation. The only contracts financed by the project were the participation agreements between
   Nicaragua and CCRIF SPC for providing insurance services. The selection of the CCRIF SPC to
   provide insurance coverage was through a single-source basis using a modified version of the direct
   contracting method prescribed by Bank guidelines. The direct contracting of the CCRIF SPC was
   appropriate, given that CCRIF SPC was the only provider of the specific insurance coverage that the
   project intended to finance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---

d. Other
    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)



                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   There were minor shortcomings
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory
                                                                                   in Quality at Entry.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The review draws the following main lessons of implementing this project, with some adaptation of
language.

1. Catastrophe multi-risk pooling at the regional level can be a cost-efficient solution to
enable countries to access quick liquidity following a disaster event. Insurance mobilizes
additional capital from outside the country and contributes to the overall reduction of the gap
between a government's contingent liability to catastrophic events and the amount of readily
available resources that can be mobilized. The lesson from this project is that effectively transferring
part of their disaster risk to capital and reinsurance market can help in solving a significant portion of
the countries' immediate liquidity needs in the aftermath of a disaster.

2. Capacity building to countries is key to continue access to risk insurance and develop own
financial protection strategies. Knowledge on exposure stemming from an understanding or risk
profiles presented by the CCRIF SPC aided the Nicaragua in making other risk-based decisions.
The capacity building activities provided under this project helped Nicaragua in taking essential
steps to incorporate disaster risk management and climate adaptation in its urban and sector
development policies.

3. Tailored capacity building and analytical support by the Bank can help in facilitating
country participation in risk-pooling insurance. Honduras decision to withdraw early in the
implementation in this project was rooted on institutional barriers, including
inadequate understanding of the products, and hesitation to use IDA resources for premium
payment. Since then, the disaster risk financing agenda in Honduras had evolved, and Honduras
has developed and adopted a disaster risk financing operational plan (2021). The ICR notes that this
plan is framing Honduras' current engagement with the CCRIF SPC.

The IEG draws the following lesson from this project.

Use of national and regional IDA resources can help countries test and access new
insurance instruments. Through this project, which had funding from national and regional IDA
sources, Nicaragua was able to obtain insurance for disasters associated with tropical cyclones,
earthquakes and excessive rainfall at lower premiums, due to its participation in a regional insurance
pool, rather than obtaining insurance individually.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NI Catastrophe Risk Insurance (P149895)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The project provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR is concise and
internally consistent and provided useful lessons. The theory of change articulated in the ICR is logical and
provides clear links between project activities, their outputs and the intended outcomes. The main body of the
text adheres to the recommended length.

The ICR would have benefitted from making clear judgements about whether there was a design failure in
terms of supporting an instrument that was not a good fit for Honduras.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
