     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022883

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P133116                                   Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84230                                31-Dec-2019                                        150,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2014                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      150,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                                            Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of China's Qinghai Xining Water Environment Management
   Project as articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 15) was identical to the one stated
   in the Loan Agreement (page 5) and aimed to:

   "reduce water pollution and pilot potential sustainable reuse of wastewater in Xining Municipality."



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



   Parsing the PDO: The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

   Objective1: To reduce water pollution in Xining Municipality.

   Objective 2: To pilot potential sustainable reuse of wastewater in Xining Municipality.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following five components:

   1. Construction of Storm water and Waste water Collection Systems (appraisal cost: US$139.80
   million, Bank financing: US$100.60 million, actual cost: US$134.00 million, Bank financing:
   US$102.80 million). This component aimed to reduce water pollution by construction of 128 km of waste
   water and rain water collection pipes along rivers and urban waste water distribution networks, including: (i)
   construction of 34 km of storm water and wastewater collection pipes from Datong Wastewater Treatment
   Plant to Ningda Road toll gate along Beichuan River for No. 5 Waste water Treatment Plant; and
   construction of 16 km of storm water and wastewater collection pipes from Yangjiawan Village to Duoba
   along Xichuan River for No. 4 Wastewater Treatment Plant; and (ii) construction of 34 km of wastewater
   collection pipes for No. 3 Wastewater Treatment Plant, and the affiliated access road and other urban
   facilities , and construction of 44 km of storm water collection pipes in Beichuan Area.

   2. Comprehensive Storm water Management and River-Bank Environmental Restoration (appraisal
   cost: US$35.90 million, Bank financing: US$25.80 million, actual cost: US$23.40 million, Bank
   financing: US$23.40 million). This component aimed to apply Low Impact Development (LID) strategies,
   greening and landscaping, to increase natural infiltration and reduce peak run-off and non-point source of
   pollution to Beichuan River. A systematic approach would be adopted to treat this area through a set of
   project activities including (a) LID storm water management in Beichuan Area; and (b) River-bank
   environment restoration along the banks of Beichuan River. Typical LID features, such as increased
   vegetation covers, vegetative swales, bio-retention basins, permeable pavements, and water re-use, would
   be incorporated into the storm-water management and rainwater harvesting system. Typical stream-bank
   restoration work includes residue soil cleaning, and planting of diversified native vegetation along stream-
   banks; construction of porous walk path, access roads and green byways; installation of lighting systems,
   environment sanitation facilities, greening of the water supply catchment areas; and other environmental
   amenities. This would further enhance the water quality in the receiving water body of Beichuan River.

   3. Integrated Gully and Canal Improvement (appraisal cost: US$28.70 million, Bank financing:
   US$20.60 million, actual cost: US$21.10 million, Bank financing: US$21.00 million). This component
   would stabilize gully/canal bank slopes and reduce Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Chemical Oxygen
   Demand (COD), and Total Suspended Solids (TSS) discharge into surface water by improving the
   environment along canals and gullies. The main project activities would include (i) integrated improvement
   of 10.4 km Chaoyangdian Canal with wastewater collection pipes, access road, affiliated structures and

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



  environment sanitation facilities; (ii) integrated improvement of 0.9 km Liujia Gully with channel
  normalization, slope protection, and box culvert construction; and (iii) integrated improvement of 0.9 km
  Shengou Gully with canal normalization, slope protection, wastewater collection pipe construction, and
  environment sanitation facilities.

  4. Wastewater Reuse (appraisal cost: US$1.80 million, Bank financing: US$1.50 million, actual cost:
  US$1.40 million, Bank financing: US$1.40 million). This component would pilot the reuse of treated
  wastewater by construction of a transfer station and pipes, as well as Technical Assistance (TA) in the
  areas of reclaimed wastewater policies and technologies. The project activities would include: (i)
  construction of treated wastewater pumping station and affiliated monitoring facilities with a capacity of
  5,000 m3/day at No.5 Wastewater Treatment Plant (under construction, to be commissioned in 2014) and
  approximately 5 km of water transmission pipes; and (ii) technical assistance for study on economy and
  policy schemes for stimulating reclaimed wastewater reuse, and study on impact of reclaimed wastewater
  reuse on domestic soil and vegetation.

  5. Project Management and Capacity Building (appraisal cost: US$31.30 million, Bank financing:
  US$1.20 million, actual cost: US$14.70 million, Bank financing: US$1.00 million). This component
  aimed to improve Xining’s capacity in integrated water environment management. It would support: (i)
  project management activities: construction supervision, and Management Information System (MIS); (ii)
  consulting services: study on Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E); technical support on integrated water and
  environmental management, reclaimed wastewater policies, regulations and technical issues; and technical
  and management workshops; and (iii) domestic and overseas training and study tours.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project costs were estimated at US$246.60 million, inclusive of price and physical
  contingencies, interest during construction and front-end fee. The actual cost according to the ICR Data
  Sheet (page 2) was US$203.20 million. the difference came from a downward revision of the borrower
  contribution by US$43.40 million.



  Financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan worth US$150 million. According to the ICR Data
  Sheet (page 2) the loan was fully disbursed.



  Borrower Contribution. The project was expected to receive local counterpart funding of US$96.60 million
  from the financial budget of Xining Municipal Government (XMG). During implementation this amount was
  revised downwards to US$53.20 million, which were fully disbursed (ICR Data Sheet page 2). In a further
  communication, the project team explained that the borrower contribution was reduced due to "three main
  factors: (1) cost savings by up to 15% due to bidding; (2) appreciation of USD versus RMB; and (3) changes
  to investment priorities based on the government 5-year plan, which was newly approved during project
  implementation. On point (3) 16km of pipeline was prioritized for Government-funding as part of the
  infrastructure investment plan and was therefore excluded from the World Bank funded project."




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)




   Dates. The project was approved on September 25, 2014 and became effective five months later on
   February 16, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on July 28, 2017, which was about 2.5
   years after effectiveness. While the PAD did not include a specific date for the MTR, it was conducted within
   a reasonable timeframe relative to effectiveness. The project closed on June 30, 2021 compared to an
   original closing date on December 31, 2019. The 18 months extension in the closing date was necessary to
   allow for the completion of "the six bridges under Components 1 and 4, which formed part of the affiliated
   urban facilities to transport waste water and recycled water pipelines (ICR, paragraph 20)."

   The project was restructured once (Level 2) on December 31, 2019, when the amount disbursed was
   US$101.76 million. The following changes were introduced as part of the restructuring: the project closing
   date was extended by 18 months, from the December 31, 2019, to June 30, 2021; funds were reallocated
   between disbursement categories; a new disbursement category (4) was created and allocation with the
   undisbursed amount for all project activities under categories (1), (2), and (3); and the disbursement rate of
   loan proceeds under civil works category was increased from 88% to 100% (retroactively from July 15,
   2015).

   According to the ICR (paragraphs 20, 21, and 22) these changes were relevant and necessary to allow
   sufficient time to achieve the PDOs, to accommodate cost savings and maximize the use of IBRD financing;
   and to accommodate a change in Government investments following the 13th Five-Year Plan (FYP, 2016–
   2020).

   While not explicitly mentioned in the ICR, this Review concludes that the changes introduced as part of
   the restructuring did not impact the Theory of Change.

   In a further communication, the project team explained that "Extension of time was to enable to activities
   and results described in the ToC to be achieved as originally intended within the changing context of the
   regulatory environment, i.e., the upgrade to technical standard for bridges. While the bridges needed to be
   redesigned to suit the upgraded standard, this did not fundamentally change the scope, nor the purpose
   and function of the bridges with the result that the wastewater and recycled water pipelines were able to be
   built across the rivers. Three changes were made with regard to disbursements: reallocation between
   categories, creation of a new category, change to the rate of loan disbursements under civil works category.
   These changes did not change the scope of the activities, but focused on maximizing the use of the loan
   resources. Given the disbursement changes did not alter the scope of activities, including their purpose and
   results, the project therefore remained aligned to the original project design and no changes to the ToC
   were required."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Located in the Huangshui River Basin, and at the confluence of the Nanchuan and
Beichuan Rivers, Xining is a city with a set of serious water resource shortage issues. The available water

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



resources per capita is less than 600 m3 per year; which places Xining in the category of areas with severe
water shortages based on international standards
(500-1000 m3 per year). The annual water consumption of Xining municipality is estimated to be 675 million
m3 in 2012 with an over withdrawal of 196 million m3. Further, the water environment conditions are
declining, mostly due to increasing pollution from municipal water discharges, but also from increased
industrial, and rural discharges. This Project will complement large investments by Xining Municipality in
building Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTP). Also, it would complement the Bank financed Xining Flood
and Watershed Management Project (XFWMP), which aims at improving the protection of property and
safety of people from flood events and bring about sustainable utilization of land and water resources in
Xining Municipality.

Previous Bank Experience. As mentioned above, the project complemented the Bank financed Xining
Flood and Watershed Management Project (XFWMP). The Bank has a long experience of implementing
projects in China, in addition to extensive regional and global experience in implementing Watershed
Management projects in different countries.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Bank-China Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2013-2016). The CPS was hinged on the joint study “China 2030: Building a
Modern, Harmonious, and Creative Society (China 2030)” prepared by the Bank and the Development
Research Center of the State Council (DRC). The CPS focused on three main themes: (i) green growth; (ii)
inclusive development; and (iii) mutually beneficial relations with the world.

At completion, the PDOs continued to be aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY20–FY25), contributing to Engagement Area 2: Promoting greener growth. Specifically, under Objective
2.2: Reducing Air, Soil, Water, and Marine Plastic Pollution the project would contribute to reducing
pollutant discharge into freshwater as one of its two PDOs. Under Objective 2.4: Strengthening Sustainable
Natural Resources Management, the PDO was aligned with the aim of ‘demonstrating integrated water
resource management’ and through the pilot and studies on water reuse provides analytical underpinnings
to help ‘implement market approaches to water scarcity and pollution challenges’

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the water resources
development plan and water pollution control plan stated in the Xining Urban Development Master Plan
(2030) and the Integrated Rehabilitation Plan of Huangshui River Basin (2011-2015). The PDO was also in
line with challenges and priorities outlined in China's 12th (2011–2015) FYP including the aim for water
conservation and environmental protection.

At completion, the PDO was aligned with the national challenges and priorities outlined in China’s14th FYP
(2021–2025). The objectives of the 14th FYP included: (i) Strengthening the construction of water
conservancy including management and protection of rivers and to restore the aquatic ecosystem to
provide clear waters and green banks; (ii) Continuing to improve environmental quality including to improve
the water pollution prevention, with particular reference to reductions in COD and ammoniacal nitrogen
(NH3-N) discharge to waterways; (iii) comprehensively improving the level of environmental infrastructure
including to increase the utilization rate of wastewater resources in water-scarce cities and (iv)
comprehensively increasing resource use efficiency including to encourage the use of recycled water. In
addition, the PDO was aligned with the objectives of the Sponge City Program launched in 2014. The
Program selected 30 pilot cities across China, including Xining in 2016, and aimed to: (a) adopt and
develop LID concepts, which improve effective control of urban peak runoff, to temporarily store, recycle,
and purify storm water; (b) upgrade the traditional drainage systems using more flood-resilient


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



               infrastructure; and (c) integrate natural waterbodies, such as wetlands and lakes, and encourage multi-
               functional objectives within drainage design such as provision of green space and enhancing of ecosystem
               services.

               The PDO was also in line with several United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
               commitments in the UN Habitat New Urban Agenda (NUA). Specifically, the PDO was directly linked to
               SDG 6 (ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all) and SDG 11 (make
               cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable).

               The statement of objectives was clear and focused. The PDO was aligned with the Bank strategies and
               Government priorities. Further, reducing water pollution and improving watershed management was
               expected to continue to be a priority for China in the coming years.

               Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce water pollution in Xining Municipality.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support the construction of
                             waste water and storm water collection pipes, provide technical assistance on water logging in Xining city,
                             support the development and implementation of low impact development (LID) for storm water and river bank
                             environment restoration. The project would also support integrated gully and canal improvement and improve
                             capacity through supporting local and international study tours. These activities combined were expected to
                             result in improved storm and waste water management leading to reduced water pollution. Anticipated long
                             term outcomes included: improved water quality, water security and water-based eco-systems in Xining
                             leading to improved wellbeing of local residents and enhanced tourism and economic opportunities.

                             The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. Land acquisition
                             and resettlement will be completed in a careful and timely manner; 2. The Project Leading Group (PLG) and
                             the Project Management Office (PMO) would be carefully staffed and trained; 3. Design consultant competent
                             to complete innovative LID design; 4. PMO M&E capacity would be sufficient to carry out early baseline
                             monitoring; and 5. Timely availability of counterpart funding.




                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



The activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain and the stated
assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, unless referenced otherwise):

1. Total project beneficiaries reached 365,000 compared to a target of 319, 000 (exceeded).
2. 104.2 km of storm water and wastewater pipes were constructed (no target provided).
3. 34 km access road were constructed (no target provided).
4. 14 bridges were constructed (no target provided).
5. 490,523 m2 riverbank area were restored on east and west banks of the Beichuan River (no target
provided).
6. 363,323 m2 green area was established on the east and west banks of the Beichuan River (no target
provided).
7. Three channels were reconstructed (no target provided).
8. 118,300 m2 green area in gullies/canals (no target provided).

Outcome

      By project completion 365,000 people (target exceeded, PDO outcome indicator 1) benefited from
       reduced water pollution. According to the ICR (paragraph 30) beneficiaries were defined as "those
       residing in areas benefiting from sewerage networks connected to WWTPs, riverbank restoration, and
       gully and canal improvement, based on annual population statistics from Xining City and project
       district counties."
      As a result of the project investments, the average volume of storm water collected reached 1,400 m3
       per day exceeding the target of 1,068 m3 per day (Intermediate Indicator 9) and the average volume
       of wastewater collected reached 82,0820 m3 per day exceeding the target of 81,452 m3 per day
       (Intermediate Indicator 6). The volume of wastewater was delivered to WWTP No.3 and No.5
       represents 62% of the combined WWTP capacity. The wastewater was treated to remove 1,202 tons
       of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) per year exceeding the target of 727 tons of BOD per year
       (PDO outcome indicator 2, baseline was 0.00 tons per year), also, 2,862 tons of Chemical Oxygen
       Demand (COD) per year exceeding the target of 1,767 tons of COD per year (PDO outcome indicator
       3, baseline was 0.00 tons per year), and 251 tons of NH3-N per year compared to a target of 151 tons
       of NH3-N per year .
      Water treatment also reduced the Total Suspended Solids (TSS) load flowing into the river systems by
       1,096 tons per year exceeding the target of 985 tons of TSS per year (PDO outcome indicator 4). The
       reduction in TSS transport in storm water runoff directly to the river was achieved through increased
       runoff infiltration with LID infrastructure (ICR, paragraph 32). The calculated result of 1,096 tons per
       year was based on an assumed TSS load removal rate of 30% and annual runoff reduction of 45%.
       The TSS load reduction was also supported by the decreased soil erosion flowing into the river
       system (Intermediate Indicator 8), which was calculated to be 3,072 tons per year at project closing
       exceeding the target of 2,880 tons per year (ICR, paragraph 32).
      Based on the above-mentioned assessment and the evidence provided in the ICR, the project
       successfully reduced water pollution in Xining Municipality. The targets for the four outcome
       indicators, as noted above, were all exceeded. The ICR (paragraph 34) explained that the higher
       population increase in the project areas resulted in higher wastewater volumes. In a further


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



         communication, the project team explained that "the increase in beneficiaries was about 14% due to
         improved living conditions and co-benefits of ecological and environment improvement as described in
         ICR paragraphs 50 and 51. This level of population increase, which is actually an important part of the
         project outcomes, was not expected during project appraisal. The population increase is logically
         linked to some of the other targets since increasing population will result in increased wastewater
         flows and therefore increased BOD, COD and NH3-N total load removal from wastewater. The
         population increase is therefore a strong factor in over achieving the targets for Indicators 2, 3, 6, 7.
         Indicators 2, 3 and 7 are also affected by the performance of the wastewater treatment plants;
         operational improvements also influenced the over-achievement of these targets. Based on the
         discussions with the clients, if there were no such a population increase, the related targets would still
         have been achieved but not over-achieved so much as they have been. The Achievement of the
         remaining targets is independent of population growth."
        The results also showed that point and non-point source pollution loads from sewage and rainfall
         runoff were both reduced. In addition, reduced water pollution was also reflected in the water quality
         monitoring data for the Beichuan River. Monitoring data in 2021 (after the project intervention) showed
         that downstream water quality improved to Class II compared to Class V in 2012 for the same
         location.

Therefore, and based on the evidence provided, the efficacy with which objective 1 was achieved is rated
High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To pilot potential sustainable reuse of wastewater in Xining Municipality.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support pilot-scale water reuse,
including infrastructure and TA for studies on sustainability of water recycling. As a result of these activities,
recycled water infrastructure would be constructed including a pumping station and 5 km of recycled water
pipeline. Also, study reports on the use of recycled water would be completed including: policy schemes for
stimulating reclaimed waste water reuse; and the impact of the use of reclaimed waste water on domestic soil
and vegetation. All these results would contribute to piloting the sustainable water reuse of waste water in
Xining municipality. Anticipated long term outcomes included: improved water quality, water security and
water-based eco-systems in Xining leading to improved wellbeing of local residents and enhanced tourism
and economic opportunities.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. Land acquisition
and resettlement will be completed in a careful and timely manner; 2. PLG and PMO would be carefully
staffed and trained; 3. Design consultant competent to complete innovative LID design; 4. PMO M&E capacity
would be sufficient to carry out early baseline monitoring; and 5. Timely availability of counterpart funding.



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



                            The activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain and the stated
                            assumptions were logical and realistic.

                            Outputs

                            The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, unless referenced otherwise):

                            1. Transfer pumping station and auxiliary monitoring facilities with a processing capacity of 5,000 m3/day was
                            completed (target achieved).
                            2. 5 km recycled water pipeline was constructed (target achieved).
                            3. Two TA studies were completed (no target provided).

                            Outcome

                                    By project completion, the volume of treated water reused (PDO outcome indicator 5)
                                     reached 1,289,000 m3 per year exceeding the target of 985,000 m3 per year. The constructed
                                     pumping station under the project was pumping treated waste water at the rate of 5,000 m3 per day
                                     (equivalent to 1,825,000 tons per year) from waste water treatment plant (WWTP) number 5 (ICR,
                                     paragraph 35).
                                    According to the ICR (paragraph 36) the pilot use of recycled waste water was demonstrated through
                                     using 3,500 m3 per day "for diverse purposes including Beichuan River Wetland Park irrigation,
                                     municipal water trucks, village irrigation, and No.5 WWTP dosing water." However, the reuse
                                     sustainability was not measured as the impacts and potential of wastewater reuse were not known at
                                     project appraisal (ICR, paragraph 36).
                                    Reuse sustainability was assessed through two studies: (a) the environmental impact of using
                                     recycled water and (b) future potential recycled water demand and supply targets, quality
                                     requirements, pricing system, risk management, incentives, and supporting legislation and policies.
                                     According to the ICR (paragraph 36) "the first study showed no significant negative impact on soil or
                                     vegetation. The latter study put forward three key recommendations: (a) strengthening water
                                     resources management by incorporating reclaimed water use into the annual water use plan and
                                     undertaking stringent water resources management assessment, (b) introducing a price difference
                                     between tap water and recycled water, and (c) constructing the pattern of utilization of domestic
                                     sewage as a resource by establishing and improving the safe operation and supervision system of
                                     recycled water use."
                                    Based on the above-mentioned assessment, it is plausible to concluded that the project successfully
                                     achieved objective 2 and produced the analytical underpinning for future expansion of sustainable
                                     recycled water use. This was expected to enhance the water security in Xining. Therefore, the efficacy
                                     with which this objective was achieved is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Overall efficacy is rated High. The project successfully reduced water pollution in Xining Municipality
  (Objective 1). The targets for the four outcome indicators were all exceeded. The project also successfully
  piloted potential sustainable reuse of wastewater in Xining Municipality (objective 2) and produced the
  analytical underpinning for future expansion of sustainable recycled water use. Finally, the target for the
  outcome indicator assessing objective 2 was exceeded.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

     The cost-benefit analysis indicated that the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the
      Demonstration of Water Reuse for Reclaim Water component was estimated at 19.1%. The Financial
      Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of the reclaimed water subproject was estimated at 8.9%.
     For components of wastewater collection, integrated gully improvement and storm water management
      and river-bank environmental restoration, a least-cost analysis or Cost-effectiveness Approach (CEA)
      was adopted to compare alternatives and select the best design options to strive for the achievement
      objective.
     Sensitivity analysis shows that EIRR would be 12% under assumption of 10% decrease in economic
      benefits and10% increase in total costs, while reducing total revenues by 10% and increasing capital and
      operating costs by 10%, still showed a FIRR of 6.2%.

ex-post

     The economic analysis followed the same approach adopted at appraisal. Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA)
      for Demonstration of Water Reuse for Reclaim Water Component included the investments and O&M of
      the demonstration of water reuse for recycled water. The CBA was adopted to set the water reuse tariff
      level to ensure that the internal rate of return (IRR) was at par with the expected profitability. The
      recommended recycled water tariff was CNY 3.5 per m3 if the IRR was at 10%.
     Cost-effectiveness approach (CEA). For components of wastewater collection, integrated gully
      improvement and stormwater management and riverbank environmental restoration, a least-cost
      analysis or CEA was adopted to compare alternatives and select the best design options to achieve the
      objective. According to the ICR (paragraph 40) "the final costs were 82% of the appraised cost estimates
      which also resulted in reduced cost to the counterpart from their funding." However, there was no
      assessment/mention of the impact of the cost savings on the quality of the works and the workers'
      conditions/salaries.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



      Implementation efficiency. According to the ICR (paragraph 43) all project activities were completed at
       costs below the appraisal and restructuring estimates, mostly due to bidding savings. The project
       extension was justified to achieve the PDO since the construction season on the Qinghai-Tibetan
       Plateau was only six months every year because of its long and harsh winter (ICR, paragraph 43). All
       project activities were completed before the revised closing date and the loan was fully disbursed.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post internal rate of return (IRR) was 10%, which was lower than
the estimated 19% at appraisal. That said, the ICR (paragraph 41) explained that the Demonstration of Water
Reuse for Reclaim Water Component constituted only 1% of the total project cost, and water tariff was a key
factor that was considered to ensure that the internal rate of return (IRR) was at par with the expected
profitability. Overall, the evidence showed that the project was implemented efficiently with 82% of the appraisal
costs, and the extension of the closing date was justified as noted above without having "a serious effect on
implementation efficiency (ICR, paragraph 45)."

Therefore, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     1.00
 Appraisal                                                 19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     1.00
 ICR Estimate                                              10.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated High. The project successfully reduced
water pollution in Xining Municipality (Objective 1). The targets for the four outcome indicators were all
exceeded. The project also successfully piloted potential sustainable reuse of wastewater in Xining Municipality
(objective 2) and produced the analytical underpinning for future expansion of sustainable recycled water
use. Finally, the target for the outcome indicator assessing objective 2 was exceeded. Efficiency was rated
Substantial as the project was implemented efficiently with 82% of the appraisal costs.

Based on a High rating for both Relevance of Objectives and Overall Efficacy and a Substantial rating for
Efficiency, the Outcome is rated Highly Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following two risks were discussed by the ICR:

1. The risk related to the timely handover of O&M plans. According to the ICR (paragraph 82) O&M
plans, including funding plans, were approved by the relevant industry departments for all assets built under
the project. Most O&M plans were handed over from the PMO to the asset owners; except for the more
recently completed assets which would be temporarily operated by one of the PIUs until formal handover can
take place. Follow-up from the PMO would be required to ensure adequate transfer to asset owners and
subsequent implementation. This risk would be mitigated by ensuring that the PMO continued to apply the
MIS to follow up in an efficient and effective manner. Also, Legislation provisions for O&M dictate the asset
owner responsibilities and specify requirements for public funding of O&M costs (ICR, paragraph 82).

2. The risk related to the uptake of TA study policy and planning recommendations. According to the
ICR (paragraph 83), some of the follow-up actions outlined in one of the recycled water TA studies "might
prove challenging, including: enforcing surface water and groundwater withdrawal limits for some recycled
water users, ensuring required government subsidies to establish a price difference between recycled water
and tap water, improving infrastructure such as augmentation and improvement of wastewater treatment,
and expanding recycled water distribution and associated monitoring facilities." This risk was mitigated
through the strong alignment of the recycled water pilot with the national and provincial plans to increase
water recycling. In particular, the Implementation Plan of Qinghai Province to Promote the Utilization of
Wastewater Resources (‘Implementation Plan’, 2021) showed a clear commitment to increasing recycled
water use and highlights the need for policy changes. The PMO also continued to advocate for the uptake of
recommendations in line with the Implementation Plan and has reported that recycled water will be included
in the water resource allocation plan for Xining City. Further, the water logging study under Component 5
helped direct future efforts on implementation of hybrid gray-green infrastructure (for example, further
implementation of LID interventions) through mapping and characterization of waterlogging in Xining. Finally,
the selection of Xining as a pilot Sponge City and ongoing support for the implementation of the Sponge City
Program was expected to mitigate the risk that these recommendations might not be adopted (ICR,
paragraph 84).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        The project was designed to contribute to the implementation of Xining municipal government
          plans to adopt an integrated water resources management strategy and the municipal 12th Five-
          Year Plan (FYP) by focusing on water pollution reduction from municipal sources and increased


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



      reuse of wastewater in the Huangshui River basin. The project objectives were in line with the
      Bank strategies and Government priorities (see section 3 for more details).
     The project design benefited from experiences and best practices on water environment
      development in China and from similar projects in Latin America and Caribbean,
      Africa, Europe and Central Asia Regions (PAD, paragraph 27). Three notable lessons were
      reflected in the design: application of participatory approach in integrated gully and canal
      management; including O&M and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) as parts of the
      project components; and using appropriate design standards for infrastructure components that
      reflect socioeconomic realities and forecasts of population growth.
     The project design was innovative as it featured low impact development (LID), which was
      emerging as global best practice for pollution control through storm water management,
      and community participatory approaches, which were to benefit from the Bank’s global knowledge
      (ICR, paragraph 6). The LID approach was aligned with the emerging Sponge Cities practice in
      China and with international best practices in LID in the United States, Sustainable Drainage
      Systems (SuDS) in the United Kingdom, and Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD) in
      Australia. In addition, the community participatory approach promoted active stakeholder
      participation in the design and implementation of improvements in the Chaoyangdian Canal,
      Liujiagou Gully, and Shengou Gully (ICR, paragraph 52). This ensured support for implementation
      of the innovative approaches which also benefited from the Bank's global expertise and capacity-
      building study tours to the United Kingdom and Germany.
     The project design also benefited from focused, technically-sound and well-defined components
      that were logically linked to achieving the PDOs (ICR ,paragraph 53). In addition, the design
      leveraged the available wastewater treatment infrastructure to maximize the water quality
      outcomes from the project's wastewater and stormwater network investments (ICR, paragraph
      53).
     Implementation arrangements were adequate with clear leadership and division of responsibilities
      between the several agencies involved in the project implementation. According to the ICR
      (paragraph 55) the project had a good level of implementation readiness with advanced
      procurement arrangements, which "allowed for four contracts to be signed and commitments to
      reach 34% of the loan value within the first six months of implementation."
     The risk assessment at appraisal identified several risks and included adequate mitigation
      measures (ICR, paragraph 54). The overall risk rating at appraisal was Substantial. The key risks
      identified related to delays in land acquisition and resettlement, delays in provision of counterpart
      funding, inexperience with LID design and implementation, ineffective cross-sector coordination,
      and low capacity of PMO for implementation and compliance requirements. However, the risk of
      possible changes to infrastructure design standards was overlooked and later resulted
      in implementation delays. According to the ICR (paragraph 54) "the mitigation measures to
      manage risks relating to inexperience with LID design and ineffective cross-sector coordination
      proved successful in managing the changes to infrastructure design standards when they
      occurred."
     M&E benefited from a well designed Results Framework that included logical and measurable
      indicators to assess the two PDOs (see section 9a for more details).
     Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory, with minor shortcomings related to overlooking
      the risk of possible changes to infrastructure design.




                                                                                                Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted regular support missions, provided adequate training opportunities, and expert
        advice (ICR, paragraph 80). In total 14 Bank supervision missions were conducted with missions
        carried out at least twice a year, except for 2020 when only one mission was conducted due to
        COVID-19-related travel restrictions. Missions included high-level discussions, technical work
        sessions, and field visits. Two different task team leaders were assigned by the Bank for project
        supervision and support.
       The project implementation benefited from the task team's support on various aspects of
        implementation including quality of works, technical issues, fiduciary compliance, and environmental
        and safeguards compliance. The Bank team also offered opportunities for the PMO staff to join
        procurement and safeguards training and workshops.
       The task team supported the procurement of consultants to improve the quality of M&E in 2018,
        resolution of implementation challenges, and restructuring to provide extension of time to meet
        project objectives (ICR, paragraph 80).
       Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and the results
        indicators as reported in the PAD. Overall, the ToC in the ICR was sound and reflected well the
        relation between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes.
       The PDO was to be assessed through five PDO outcome indicators. PDO outcome indicators 1- 4
        were to measure objective 1. These indicators were as follows: 1. Direct project beneficiaries,
        2. Volume(mass) of BOD pollution load removed by treatment plant under the project, 3. Volume
        (mass) of COD pollution load removed by treatment plant under the project, and 4. Reduction of
        TSS flowing into river system per year. Objective 2 was to be measured through one
        indicator: Volume of treated wastewater reused. The ICR (paragraph 59) noted that "the level of
        sustainable wastewater reuse could not be known at appraisal and therefore sustainability was not
        linked to a specific indicator."

                                                                                                Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



        The PDO outcome indicators were directly connected to the stated objectives, measurable and had
         reasonable targets. All baselines for the five PDO indicators were set at 0.00. Outcome indicators 2
         and 3 aimed to capture point source pollution reductions, while indicator 4 aimed to capture non-
         point source pollution. According to the ICR (paragraph 49) "these indicators measure water
         pollutants, which have reduction goals articulated in the 14th FYP,26 thereby aligning measured
         project outcomes well with national priorities."
        The Results Framework included 8 intermediate outcome results indicators to track project progress
         to achieve the PDOs. The intermediate outcome indicator 7 (Reduction of NH3-N load flowing into
         the river systems) aimed to measure point source pollution reductions. Intermediate Indicators 6, 8,
         and 9 measured storm water and waste water collection, reduction of erosion, and reduction of
         storm water runoff which directly correlate to the reduction of the key pollutants (ICR, paragraph
         60). Intermediate Indicators 10 and 11 measured the percentage of completion of gully and canal
         improvement and environmental and sanitation facilities for tracking the physical completion of
         assets related to objective 1. Finally, intermediate indicator 12 measured the percentage completion
         of TA studies which correlated to understanding the sustainability of the recycled water pilot and
         therefore provided a sufficient progress measure to achieving objective 2.
        Overall, M&E design was sound with relevant indicators at both the outcome and intermediate
         outcome levels. The set of indicators reflected in the RF allowed for measuring the progress of the
         project as well as assessing the achievement of the PDO. This Review is in agreement with the ICR
         (paragraph 49) that "the wording of Indicators 2 and 3 could have been clearer to clarify that this
         project only financed wastewater collection systems and not the WWTPs."



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 61) "the results were collected on time according to the original
         Results Framework." The MIS tracked project management, contract management, accounting
         and financial reporting, and M&E data. M&E activities benefited from capacity building and
         support that was provided by consultants to consolidate data and report through annual M&E
         reports and semiannual implementation progress reports. M&E capacity benefited from capacity
         building and support was provided by consultants to consolidate data and report through annual
         M&E reports and semiannual implementation progress reports.
        The ICR (paragraph 61) noted that there were data inconsistencies between the M&E reports and
         MIS outputs early in the project implementation. These were caused by the time lag between the
         actual implementation progress and the delayed data entry into MIS. By late 2016 these
         inconsistencies were resolved by the PMO.
        Restructuring. The design of the Results Framework was not revised during the project
         restructuring despite the unexpectedly high population growth in the project areas, which was
         attributed to the project outcomes and resulted in exceeding the project targets. According to the
         ICR (paragraph 62) a decision was taken not to revise the Results Framework because:" (a) the
         FYP data had not been updated and (b) given the unprecedented population growth and
         innovative nature of the project interventions, there was no basis of assumption for revising the
         targets."




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 63) "the M&E data, in addition to information recorded in the
           MIS, were used effectively to inform project implementation and support decision-making."
          By mid-2018, the PMO provided the Bank team with an updated Results Framework before each
           implementation support mission. This facilitated in-depth discussion of results and resolution of
           project implementation issues on a regular basis.
          Effective utilization of the M&E data guided the PMO to the areas where implementation needed
           be improved. In turn, this improved contract management and disbursement performance as the
           project progressed (ICR, paragraph 63).
          Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated High. This rating reflects a sound design with adequate
           implementation arrangements, and effective utilization of M&E data to inform project
           implementation and support project management decisions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Environmental risk rating of the project was Category A (full assessment). Four Bank Safeguard
   Policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP
   4.09), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12 ), and Indigenous People (OP 4.10). The project was expected
   to result in some adverse impacts such as land acquisition and resettlement due to construction activities,
   as well as social disturbance during construction period. Also there were ethnic minority villages which
   might be impacted by the project. At the appraisal stage, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) were prepared.
   Also, an Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF), a Resettlement Plan (RP) and a Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF) was developed. The documents were disclosed on the Xining Municipal
   Government’s website on December 5, 2013, the RAP, RPF and EMDF were disclosed on December 18,
   and the World Bank InfoShop on December 24, 2013.


   According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "all safeguards policies were complied with."



   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 66) "the ESMP was
   implemented by the client with satisfactory track records, with mitigation measures incorporated into
   designs and contracts. There are no pending environmental safeguard issues after the project closing. In
   addition, the regular monitoring for effluent quality from the WWTPs indicates that it meets the required
   standard."

   Compliance with Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09). "This policy was triggered because of the likely use of
   pesticides in the planted areas. The PMP was prepared by local experienced experts for plant protection,


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



  and it proved adaptive and effective to local situations during project implementation with satisfactory rating
  of implementation (ICR, paragraph 67)."

  Compliance with Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). This policy was triggered because permanent
  land acquisition and temporary land acquisition were involved for the project construction. According to the
  ICR (paragraph 67) "the land acquisition resettlement for project activities and associated activities was
  implemented satisfactorily and completed in compliance with the RAP." The construction was all carried out
  on previously acquired land by two associated projects (the No.5 WWTP and the Integrated Treatment
  Project of Beichuan River), there were no land acquisition costs for the project. The final resettlement
  impacts were 223.8 ha of land acquisition and 1,207,539.86 m2 of physical displacement (including
  1,181,600 m2 of residential houses and 25,939.86 m2 of nonresidential houses). According to the ICR
  (paragraph 70)"compensation and livelihood restoration for PAPs were implemented in compliance with the
  RAP and related regulations." Of the 1,343 households affected physically, 1,335 households chose to
  resettle in the new replacement apartments, and 8 households chose cash compensation. A four-stage
  Grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was established under the project for safeguarding transparent,
  timely, and effectively redressing of the grievances. "According to the PMO, complaints raised during the
  resettlement process were addressed by the GRM, without any legacy issues. However, there was
  inadequate documentation of the GRM operation, which is therefore an area that could be improved (ICR,
  paragraph 72)."

  Compliance with Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). During the project implementation no minority village
  or community were found in the project activity area, therefore an Ethnic Minority Development Plan was
  not prepared (ICR, paragraph 73). The issue was monitored by the external monitor under the supervision
  of the PMO and the Bank.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 77) "the project had an adequate project
  financial management (FM) system that provided, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely
  information that the loan was being used for the intended purposes." Accounting and financial reporting
  were in line with the regulations issued by the Chinese Ministry of Finance and the requirements specified
  in the Loan Agreement. There no significant FM issues reported throughout project implementation (ICR,
  paragraph 77). FM issues raised during implementation of in audit reports were resolved in a timely
  manner. Audit reports were all with unqualified audit opinions. In addition, the withdrawal procedure and
  funds flow arrangement were appropriate. The loan proceeds were disbursed on time (ICR, paragraph 77).

  Procurement. The project experienced weaknesses in procurement at the early stage of implementation
  due to the "lack of procurement management capacity, differences between the Bank’s and domestic
  bidding policies and practices, unfamiliarity with the Bank’s bidding process and ineffective
  communications among various parties (ICR, paragraph 74)." Procurement performance improved as it
  benefited from frequent supervision by the Bank. This also ensured satisfactory compliance with
  the Bank’s procurement policies. The ICR (paragraph 76) noted that while procurement post reviews
  identified long delays and numerous cost variations for most contracts, "all issues were handled and
  processed appropriately in accordance with the conditions of the contract. No major quality issues were
  reported."


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   According to the ICR (paragraph 51): "The success of LID and environmental restoration interventions has
   encouraged private investment, population growth, appreciated land value and facilitated peer-to-peer
   learning between municipal institutions. As cited in the client’s ICR, more than 2,100 acres of land on the
   right bank of the Beichuan River has been developed and used by four real estate development companies,
   with an additional eight companies expected to carry out further large-scale development. This has
   quickened the urbanization rate, for example, in Seongbuk where the real estate development is expected
   to result in an urbanization rate increase from 50% to 63%. Moreover, the value of the land in this region
   has increased from CNY 200,000 per mu* to CNY 4.5 million per mu."

   *mu is a Chinese unit of area equivalent to 0.0667 ha.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following three lessons are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1.If public and private financing are both available to support urban development, there is a
higher chance that urban development needs will be successfully met. The project experience
showed that public financing for water management in turn allowed the entry of commercial
financing for other developments. For example, the benefits from collection of wastewater and
improved ecological environment resulted in increased land value in the project area and
subsequent development area. This ecological development by the Government using public
resources, in this case international development financing, had dual benefit as it attracted private
sector investment in the area, through housing and retail, and therefore improved the growth rates,
economic vitality, and standard of living; and the sale of land provided revenues to the Government
allowed counterpart funds to be used for further development of essential infrastructure and
provision of public services. This therefore shows the benefit of Government investing early in public

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



services provision, such as a good ecological environment, to stimulate commercial financing and
development of vibrant communities with high standard of living.

2. If consistent institutional strengthening and a focused design are emphasized in Bank-
funded operations, there is a higher chance that implementation will be effective and
objectives will be achieved. The ownership, commitment, and capacity of the client combined with
the focused and realistic design were an essential combination for smooth implementation and
achievement of all objectives despite project delays. These aspects ensured project sustainability in
terms of embedded capacity for O&M of assets. Moreover, LID interventions and the demonstrable
project outcomes in reducing water pollutions drew the attention and commitment of leaders at all
levels of Government, as evidenced in requested for tours of the project-financed infrastructure.
Consistent capacity building throughout implementation transformed the PMO from paper-based to
digital project management, allowing for greater effectiveness. Although there was initial slow uptake
and quality issues with the MIS, in the end, the MIS was the backbone of this
capacity transformation.

3. If a high level of implementation readiness combined with close project implementation
support are availed to the project, there is a higher chance that implementation will be
consistent and results will be timely delivered. Implementation readiness allowed for the early
launch of some procurement processes. Moreover, the short status review missions strengthened
regular contact and support quickened the pace of implementation. Moreover, this evident support
from the Bank encouraged the provincial government authorities to build trust and confidence in the
project, resulting in the Government’s strong commitment and support.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from a robust M&E system that successfully tracked the progress of
activities and the achievement of the PDO. The ICR also included references to any external sources of
information.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes. However, the
sustainability of the reuse of waste water was not fully assessed due to the absence of indicators to directly
measure this element of the PDO.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the two objectives.
The discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and
what the project actually achieved on the ground.


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Qinghai Xining Water Environment Mgmt. (P133116)



Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify most of the
assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was adequate. The efficiency analysis could have benefited from
covering other project components beyond waste water reuse which constituted only 1% of the total project
costs.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written. It included a comprehensive yet concise coverage of the
implementation experience and candidly reported on shortcomings. The reporting on safeguards was detailed
and included an explicit statement on compliance. The ICR also commented on the status of the final audit
reports for the project. However, the project outputs reported in Annex 1 lacked their corresponding output
targets.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                Page 20 of 20
