     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022850

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132277                                   Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83700                                31-Dec-2019                                         100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-May-2014                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       100,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Fernando Manibog              Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 2) and the Financing Agreement of July 7, 2014 (p. 5),
   the objective of the project was “to improve transport safety and efficiency along the selected transport
   corridors and to promote non-motorized trips within the pilot green corridor in Jiaozuo City”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component A: Safe System Integrated Corridor Management (appraisal estimate US$52.85 million,
   actual US$57.33 million): This component was to finance i) carrying out of transport safety data collection,
   performance monitoring and evaluation, and remedial measures development; ii) implementing civil works,
   traffic management measures and intelligent transport systems (ITS) along the selected corridors and
   adjacent areas; and iii) developing road safety education facilities, carrying out of road safety education
   campaigns, and improvement of post-crash medical services.

   Component B: Green Corridor Development (appraisal estimate US$6.5 million, actual US$1.61
   million): This component was to finance the development of a green corridor dedicated to pedestrians and
   cyclists, which was to link the downtown area and a scenic tourist area in the mountains north of the city.
   Activities were to include the construction of a new road section in the mountains, rehabilitation of the
   sections along the Qunying River and existing urban roads, and provision of safe intersections, Non-
   Motorized Transport (NMT) facilities, green corridor signage and markings, and lighting, greening and
   landscaping along the corridor.

   Component C: Public Transport Improvement (appraisal estimate US$37.34 million, actual US$37.84
   million): This component was to assist Jiaozuo Municipality to improve the service quality of its public
   transport system through: i) constructing a bus interchange adjacent to the railway station; ii) upgrading and
   constructing bus depots; iii) expanding the advanced bus operation system; and iv) procuring new buses.

   Component D: Institutional Strengthening (appraisal estimate US$3.06, actual US$2.97 million): This
   component was to support the implementation of the project through: i) providing trainings and study tours
   to relevant officials and staffs; ii) carrying out of technical assistance studies on urban transport; and iii)
   providing technical consultancy and software for project management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$200.19 million. Actual cost was US$139.92 million due
   to lower contract prices, depreciation of the Renminbi, and design optimization.

   Financing: The project was financed by a US$100 million IBRD loan, which was fully disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$100.19 million. Actual contribution was
   US$39.92 million.

   Dates:




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



         The project was approved on May 15, 2014, became effective on September 30, 2014 and closed
          on June 30, 2021 (original closing date was December 31, 2019). The Mid-Term Review (MTR) took
          place on June 12, 2017.
         On July 19, 2018, the project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date by 18 months from
          December 31, 2019 to June 30, 2021 to allow for the completion of activities which were delayed by
          many domestic review and clearance procedures due to complex and innovative activities, multiple
          sectors coordination and consultation, and lack of experience of implementing a Bank financed
          project at early stage; ii) amend the target dates for achieving end of project indicator targets in line
          with the proposed revised closing date; iii) increase the disbursement percentage for civil works from
          43 percent to 85 percent to reduce the pressure of counterpart funds due to government debt risk
          management; and iv) reallocate savings from category 3 to categories 1 and 2.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), over the last three decades China had experienced rapid economic
development with an average annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate of 9.9 percent. China’s
economic growth was mainly fostered by industrialization and infrastructure development. Resource-based
cities (which rely on local mineral or other natural resources to develop exploitation or processing as their
primary industry) contributed significantly to the export-oriented economy. However, due to poor planning
and intense use of non-renewable resources, many of these resource-based cities experience several
challenges including unbalanced economic structure, pollution, and ecological damage, as well as
unemployment and poverty.

This rapid growth resulted in rapid urbanization and motorization in cities with vehicle ownership increasing
yearly by about 25 percent on average during the five years before project appraisal. Lessons from other
cities showed that such a substantial increase, if not properly managed, had the potential to increase road
accidents, traffic congestion, air pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Also, cities with
sustainable urban transport systems indicate that road safety improvement, public transport development,
and nonmotorized transport (NMT) promotion were key solutions to address these urban transport
challenges.

The city of Jiaozuo was selected as project city since it was going through a socioeconomic transformation
from being a coal city to becoming a green-theme city that could leverage and benefit from multiple tourist
attractions in the municipality. To accelerate its socioeconomic transformation, Jiaozuo Municipality
identified the transport sector as one of the key sectors for development during the next few years. In order
to attract more tourism, improving connectivity of the city with tourist spots and other cities was essential.
Furthermore, rapid motorization increased road accidents and fatalities.

The objective of the project supported the government’s 2017 "Opinion on Facilitating the Sustainable
Development of Resource-Based Cities", which required the establishment of schemes to compensate
resource exploitation and mechanisms to aid declining industries. Also, the objective of the project was in
line with Jiaozuo's 12th Five Year Plan (FYP) (2011-2015), which emphasized contributing to energy saving



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



               and emission reduction targets, primarily through public transport prioritization, introduction of cleaner fuels,
               and promotion of environmentally friendly transport modes.

               At appraisal the project supported the government’s 12th FYP, which emphasized the transformation of
               resource-exhausted regions nationwide. At project closing the objective of the project supported the green
               development and shared prosperity strategies of China’s 14th Five Years Plan (2021-2025).

               The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY20-
               25), which focuses, as one of its three key engagement areas, on greener growth by facilitating the
               transition to a lower carbon energy path, reducing air pollution, strengthening sustainable natural resource
               management, and promoting low-carbon transport and cities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve transport safety and efficiency along the selected transport corridors.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as adopting a Safe System approach,
                             designing, constructing, and operating four selected corridors, as well as improving road safety awareness,
                             traffic regulation compliance and emergency medical response would causally result in the outcome of
                             improved transport safety and efficiency along the selected transport corridors. Also, training of relevant
                             entities at Jiaozuo, conducting targeted TA studies on needs assessment as well as providing project
                             management support to the PMO and purchase of project management software would directly result in the o
                             strengthening of institutional capacity to support the above stated objective. The TA and institutional
                             strengthening results chain also applied to PDO2.

                             The project made the following key assumptions:

                                       i. The adoption of a Safe System approach would lead to an overall improved transport system in
                                          Jiaozuo and the reduction of traffic fatalities and injuries in the long term;
                                      ii. Comprehensive interventions were necessary to systematically address the gaps and weaknesses in
                                          the following areas: safety awareness and knowledge of road users, the institutional capacity of road
                                          safety management, the development of transport infrastructures, the enforcement of traffic laws, and
                                          the emergency response of past crashes. Eventually, those interventions would foster a culture that
                                          prioritizes safety and supports the long-term vision of zero road fatality and serious injuries.

                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)




   iii. Institutional strengthening and provision of relevant training opportunities would help build a safety
         culture for road users, particularly professional drivers, women, and vulnerable groups

According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), the four transport corridors were selected as they were major
corridors in downtown area and had serious congestion and/or safety issues.

Outputs:

      A road safety training center for commercial drivers and a safety education center for the public were
         developed to provide road safety training. According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), the center
         was named Science Popularization Base by the provincial government to highlight the benefits the
         center generated for the public at large.

      Books and road safety education were developed for primary and secondary school students
         (grades 1-9) to acquire knowledge on road safety, transport, and traffic law through systematic
         learning. A total of 130,000 copies of the books were printed.
        The project also launched a road safety campaign. According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), the
         Project Management Office (PMO) engaged consultants to assess road users’ mode preference,
         behaviors, safety awareness, road safety issues and trends, recommend road safety campaign
         actions based on the assessment result and develop road safety campaign materials. Five videos
         were developed and broadcasted on Jiaozuo TV, advertisement screens at public places were
         installed, and a blog and public account of the Public Security Bureau covered topics such as drunk
         driving, fatigue driving, seat belt usage, running the red light, and distracted driving. Jiaozuo TV and
         Public Security Bureau jointly launched a special program for transport and road safety, which shared
         the latest transport news and road safety cases in a timely manner. In addition, various posters had
         been developed and pasted at rural/urban community centers, schools, expressway annexes, and
         vehicle management stations to increase citizen’s road safety awareness.
        A road safety steering committee was set up at the municipal level to monitor the road safety situation
         in Jiaozuo, review action plans and strategies, and coordinate resources to reduce road crashes.
        A Safe System Integrated Corridor Management was established, achieving the target of being
         established.
        18.6 kilometers of project corridor were improved, achieving the target of 18.4 kilometers.
        Bus priority was introduced in the project corridors to reduce the passengers’ travel time and increase
         traffic efficiency through signal priority and dedicated lane for buses. Furthermore, the project
         implemented an advanced bus operation system to monitor real time information to users through
         electronic boards at bus stations resulting in reduced running time of buses along the corridors,
         improved reliability of bus service, and increased bus user satisfaction.
        286 buses, complying with the latest emission standards issued by the government in 2018, were
         procured under the project.
        The percentage of buses equipped with an Intelligent Transport System (ITS) increased from 86
         percent to 100 percent in 2021, surpassing the target of 93 percent.
        A Road Safety Steering Committee (RSSC) was established. The responsibility of the RSCC include
         safety data collection, analysis of accident causes, proposing remedial measures and monitoring and
         evaluating the safety performance in the project corridors. The target of the RSSC being operational
         was achieved.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)




      The project trained 584 government officials and staff, surpassing the target of 112 officials and staff.
         Trainings were provided in project management, social and environment safeguards, procurement
         and contract management, green transport, and road safety.

Outcomes:

      The number of transport related facilities measured by a three-year rolling average along the project
         corridors decreased from 4.7 in 2014 to 2.3 in 2021, surpassing the target of a three-year rolling
         average of three transport related facilities along the project corridors.
        Travel time by public transport during peak hours on the project corridors decreased from 55.1
         minutes in 2014 to 45 minutes in 2021, surpassing the target of 49.4 minutes.
               o On Jiefang road the travel time decreased from 20.5 minutes to 16.8 minutes, achieving the
                 target of 16.8 minutes.
               o On Renmin road the travel time decreased from 17 minutes in 2014 to 16 minutes in 2021,
                 achieving the target of 17 minutes. According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022) the
                 project optimized the road design by developing a bus dedicated lane, shortening intervals
                 between intersections, channelizing intersections, and providing safety islands for pedestrians.
               o On Ta’nan road the travel time decreased from 17.6 minutes in 2014 to 12.2 minutes in 2021,
                 surpassing the target of 15 minutes.
        User satisfaction ratio of public transport services increased from 69.9 percent in 2014 to 90.28
         percent in 2020, surpassing the target of 75 percent. The user satisfaction ratio of women increased
         from 68.4 percent in 2014 to 90.79 in 2020, surpassing the target of 75 percent.
        Road safety awareness of 60,298 people was raised, surpassing the target of 60,000 people. The
         indicator was measured through counting drivers/visitors who received road safety training and
         education in the two centers. However, the ICR did not state how “raising” of awareness was actually
         measured and if tests or skills assessments were conducted, making an evaluation of the behavioral
         outcomes challenging.
        Annual bus ridership increased from 95.6 million in 2014 to 103 million in 2017 but significantly
         decreased to 44.4 million in 2021, not achieving by a wide margin the target of 128 million. Reason for
         the decrease were related to the Covid-19 pandemic, the rapid growth of private cars, e-bikes, and
         shared bikes as well as the impact of extensive road construction on bus operation.
        After the installation of an ITS including cameras as well as after the redesigning of taxi stops and
         roadside parking along the corridors, data from Jiaozuo traffic police showed illegal park/stop at
         roadside along the corridors declined 46.4 percent from 2017 to 2021 and drivers less often run the
         red light.

The key outcome under this objective was related to bus ridership. While bus ridership increased during most
of implementation, it dropped to less than half the target by 2021. It is not clear to what extent this decrease
was related to the COVID-19 pandemic and to what extent it was related to other circumstances such as the
rapid growth of private cars, e-bikes, and shared bikes, which would work against a return to public bus
ridership once pre-pandemic conditions return. Also, the ICR stated that extensive road work affected bus
operations. Taking everything together, notably the weak evidence on behavioral outcomes of the road safety
awareness program and the sharp (and likely permanent) decline in bus ridership, the achievement of this
objective was Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote non-motorized trips within the pilot green corridor in Jiaozuo City.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as constructing a
pathway for bicycles and pedestrians and bus interchange adjacent to the railway station, upgrading and
constructing five bus depots, expanding the advanced bus operating system, and procuring 286 new buses
were to result in the outcome of promoting non-motorized trips within the pilot green corridor in Jiaozuo City.

The project made the following assumptions:

     i. Developing greenway for pedestrians and cyclists would result in promoting non-motorized trips and
        contribute to decarbonization agenda for transport sector;
    ii. Procuring low emission buses and bus operation system directly would contribute to reducing travel
        time and CO2 emission and increasing user satisfaction level;

Outputs:

      A 17.35 kilometer long greenway was constructed, which connected the most popular parks in
       Jiaozuo (Fengshanzheng Park, People’s Park, Longyuan Lake Park, and Dashahe Park) surpassing
       the target of 16.9 kilometers.
      Overnight parking capacity was increased from 526 parking spots in 2014 to 1,114 parking spots in
       2021, surpassing the target of 1,027 parking spots.

Outcomes:

      The annual number of non-motorized trips within the green corridor was 1.15 million, significantly
       surpassing the target of 200,000 trips. According to the Bank team (April 19, 2022), this outcome did
       not have a baseline as the greenway did not exist at preparation stage. The figure was incremental.
      According to the ICR (p. 15), the reason for the substantially higher usage of the greenway was
       related to: i) the cancellation of the mountain section, which was replaced with a connection to
       Dashahe Park and most of the greenway being in urban area which was frequently used by citizens;
       and ii) the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and non-motorized transport modes becoming more
       popular. It is not clear to what extent other initiatives and activities not related to this project impacted
       non-motorized trips. Also, the ICR did not provide a baseline to assess this outcome.
      The number of student cards sold by the bus company increased from 44,556 in 2013 to 90,252 in
       2020. According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), the increased sale of student cards was
       primarily caused by the opening of 21 dedicated bus lines for schools, which was due to the project
       interventions, as well as the low price of the card, which was supported by the government policy.




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



                            Achievement of the objective was Substantial given the substantially higher number of non-motorized trips
                            within the green corridor.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved or exceeded the majority of its targets. However, there were two methodological
                            shortcomings in the assessment of the evidence: (1) the relative share of the Covid-19 pandemic versus the
                            rapid growth of private cars and e-bikes in accounting for not achieving the bus ridership target is unclear;
                            and (2) a baseline analysis for the green corridor was lacking, although the task team did explain credibly that
                            the greenway did not exist before hence the measured results were incremental. On balance, given the
                            strong performance in achieving output targets and significant outcomes, overall efficacy is rated Substantial,
                            with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   Both, the PAD and the ICR conducted a traditional economic analysis.

   The PAD (p. 11) conducted a cost-benefit analysis for the physical investment components whose direct
   economic benefits could be quantified (components A, B and C), which accounted for 98 percent of the total
   project cost. The analysis took into account the following direct economic benefits: i) passenger travel time
   savings; ii) vehicle operating cost savings; iii) reduction of traffic accident costs; iv) tourism revenue increase;
   and v) bus vehicle replacement savings. A 12 percent economic discount rate was applied.

   The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project was estimated to be 17.39 percent and the net
   present value (NPV) was estimated to be US$ 142.04 million.

   The ICR (p. 16) updated the PAD’s economic analysis by using the actual project costs. The ICR conducted a
   traffic analysis based on actual traffic on the project corridors and updated a traffic forecast for future
   years accordingly. The ICR applied the “with-project” and “without-project” approach. The economic benefits
   were identified as: reductions in vehicle operation costs, passenger travel time costs, bus maintenance costs,
   road crash costs and emission as well as promotion of tourism development. According to the Bank team (April

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



19, 2022), all costs and benefits are incremental in the economic analysis. The EIRR calculation only includes
the costs of the project and the benefits created by the project. Local government did not implement major
activities in the selected corridors before project implementation except conducting routine maintenance. Also,
the Bank team stated that the mountain section was replaced with a connection to Dashahe Park, a large
wetland park developed by Jiaozuo along the Dasha River and attracting thousands of visitors, the connection
with Dashahe Park actually increased the usage of the greenway.

The ICR calculated an EIRR of 18.3 percent, which was slightly higher than at appraisal mainly due to lower
capital costs. However, the ICR would have benefitted from separate EIRR calculations for the buses sub-
project and the greenway sub-project since the latter shows a six-fold increase while the bus sub-component
collapsed to lower ridership than the baseline due to the Covid-19 pandemic. It is not clear how the ICR
estimated benefits of future bus use.

Operational Efficiency:

The project experienced significant implementation delays and required an extension of 30 months. Delays were
related to: i) complex domestic clearance procedures; ii) many implementation units which lacked experience in
implementing Bank-financed projects; iii) challenging cross-sector coordination; iv) land acquisition issues; v)
regional air pollution control in winter; and vi) Covid-19 related restrictions. Also, several activities were
cancelled due to implementation issues including the mountain segment of the green corridor and the bus
interchange at north plaza of the railway station (see section 8b for more details). These delays are indicative of
an inefficient use of Bank resources.

Taking the lack of clarity in regards of future benefits of bus use and indication of an inefficient use of Bank
resources, the efficiency of the project was Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        98.00
 Appraisal                                                   17.39
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        98.00
 ICR Estimate                                                18.30
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given the objective’s alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (FY20-25), which focuses, as one of its three key engagement areas, on greener

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



growth by facilitating the transition to a lower carbon energy path, reducing air pollution, strengthening
sustainable natural resource management, and promoting low-carbon transport and cities. Efficacy was
Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. Finally, Efficiency was Modest due to lack of clarity in terms of how
the ICR estimated benefits of future bus use and significant operational inefficiencies.

Taking everything together, the project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Bus ridership substantially decreased in 2021 to lower than the baseline in 2014 since bus riders shifted to
other modes of transportation such as cars and e-bikes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Given that
bus riders have made investments for other modes of transportation, there is a high likelihood that those
people will not return to going by public buses once the pandemic is over. Therefore, the risk to the
development outcome have already materialized and are likely to persist.

According to the ICR (p. 19), the road safety training center, which the project supported, was recognized by
the transport department of Henan province and the Minister of Transport as a regional road safety training
center. Also, the center was named by the science and technology department of Henan province as science
popularization base. Over 1,000 visitors from other cities in Henan province and other provinces have come
to the center since its opening in April 2020. Furthermore, the ICR (p. 19) stated that the books on road
safety for school children that were developed under the project have been recommended to the Ministry of
Education to be included in the recommended books for primary and secondary schools. Finally, the ICR (p.
27) stated that Jiaozuo has adequate budget for the operation and maintenance of the assets the project
delivered. This indicates that these three project outputs are likely to sustain.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 6), the project design was built on lessons learned from the Bank’s engagement
  in urban transport development in China and other countries around the world. These lessons included: i)
  importance of adapting a Safe System approach, which requires that the road transport system be
  designed to expect and accommodate human error in order to achieve the long-term vision of zero road
  fatalities and serious injuries; and ii) applying an Integrated Corridor Management (ICM) approach, which
  concentrates all required interventions in one or a few selected corridor(s) in an integrated manner to
  seize on synergies and maximize benefits.

  According to the PAD (p. 9), the Bank identified the following risks: i) lack of experience of PMO to
  implement first Bank infrastructure investment project; ii) Safe System approach requires shared
  responsibility and accountability among all relevant stakeholders, including the road designers, road

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



  operators and road users. Failure to address the institutional issue may jeopardize the long-term
  sustainability of project outcomes; iii) lack of capacity at local agencies to implement ICM and Safe
  system approach; and iv) growing government borrowing poses a potential risk to the timely availability of
  counterpart funds. The Bank team mitigated these risks by: i) providing training on Bank's procurement,
  financial management and safeguards policies to the PMO and PIUs; ii) establishing a Road Safety
  Steering Committee (RSSC) to be the lead agency for overseeing all road safety related issues in
  Jiaozuo; iii) hiring experienced consultants to assist the PMO and PIUs in designing project components;
  and iv) conducting a fiscal analysis which concluded that Jiaozuo Municipality was to have sufficient
  resources to provide counterpart funds.

  The Bank team did not identify any risk related to land acquisition and resettlement. According to the
  Bank team (March 9, 2022), during the consultation period for the bus interchange at the North Square of
  railway station, located at state-owned land and thus requiring no land acquisition, residents who used
  the land for leisure and entertainment activities did not express any concern. However, they objected the
  construction of the bus interchange when the contractor entered the site as no other recreation area was
  found near the proposed site. In compliance with the World Bank safeguards policy, the PMO and district
  government conducted many rounds of additional consultations and meetings and finally decided to drop
  the construction of the bus interchange, terminate the signed contract, and optimize the bus station
  design along the Zhanqian road. Furthermore, for the Dabeizhang bus depot, the land of the bus depot
  belonged to two different districts that had different compensation policies, which led some affected
  households with less favorable compensation policy to seek the same compensation standard as other,
  which resulted in a lot of communication with the affected households to reach a compensation
  agreement.

  The project’s design was complex involving many layers of coordination among several different entities
  including the Jiaozuo Municipal Government (JMG), the project leading group (PLG), the PMO and PIUs.

  The design of the project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted regular supervision missions on a biannual basis (13 in total). Throughout
 implementation the Bank team provided training and technical assistance to address implementation
 bottlenecks such as slow implementation progress and disbursement. The Bank team was sufficiently
 flexible to adapt project activities when needed. For example, when there were issues with the construction
 of a mountain segment of the green corridor in regard to environmental regulation, the Bank team
 cancelled this activity.

 Some of the mitigation measures, stated above, were insufficient and resulted in implementation delays
 and slow disbursement due to lack of experience of PMO with the Bank’s financial management and
 procurement processes. Also, approval procedures were complex and coordination between the different
 entities was challenging. The project design did not identify the risk of the government’s requirement on air
 pollution control in winter, which frequently resulted in the suspension of construction activities. Also, the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



 design did not identify the risk of resettlement difficulties and delays in the provision of compensation
 payments due to compensation requirements being too high for some households. Furthermore, the Bank
 team did not foresee that the construction of the interchange at north square of railway station would be
 challenging even though the land was state owned. Neighboring residents were using it for recreational
 activities and no replacement was nearby. As a result, the project activity had to be cancelled.

 In July 2018, the Bank extended the closing date by 18 months to allow for the completion of activities.

 According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), the team addressed slow disbursement by providing training
 guidance to prepare quality bidding documents and mitigate the risk of complaints during procurement or
 contract disputes during construction, all of which could delay procurement and implementation progress.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified. The project’s theory of change and how key activities
 and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound and reflected in the Results Framework. The
 selected indicators encompassed all outcomes of the PDO and included a baseline and target. Also, all
 indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable and relevant.

 According to the PAD (p. 8), the PMO was to be responsible for reporting implementation progress and
 collecting actual data for each indicator regularly. According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), M&E was
 well embedded in institutional arrangements.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), the intermediate indicators were adequately measured
  annually while the PDO indicators were measured and reported at the end of project implementation. The
  Bank team further stated that overall, M&E data were considered as reliable and of good quality. For
  example, for traffic fatality data, the Ministry of Public Security had a dedicated system for traffic police to
  report and record traffic crashes and fatalities, which was the official channel of traffic crashes data in
  China. For bus travel time data, buses travel time along the corridors was monitored through intelligent
  bus operation system at real time as all the buses had been equipped with GPS devices. The bus users’
  satisfaction rate was based on a satisfaction survey that collected feedback on bus service from 3,000
  bus users.




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



  According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), M&E functions are likely to be sustained after project
  closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 22), the M&E data was used to identify implementation bottlenecks and inform
  decision making. For example, implementation delays in regard to the green corridor, bus interchange,
  and bus depots were identified and addressed in a timely manner. However, the ICR (p. 23) stated that
  M&E data resulting from PDO indicators was not used to monitor implementation progress since not all
  PDO indicators had annual targets. This was an inappropriate approach since Bank projects (and their
  M&E systems) should be outcome-oriented. Measuring outcomes only at project closing is not adequate.
  According to the Bank team (March 9, 2022), annual targets for intermediate results indicators were
  used for monitoring implementation progress.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). According to the ICR (p. 23) the project developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
   a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), an Environment Management Plan (EMP), and Environment Codes of
   Practices (ECOPs).

   The project also conducted a social screening and did not find any ethnic minority communities affected by
   the project.

   Since the project was the first Bank project for the PMO, the PMO lacked familiarity with the Bank’s
   safeguard policies. Therefore, the PMO hired external social and environment monitoring agencies to
   provide technical support, conduct regular visits of project sites, monitor the implementation of land
   acquisition and resettlement, environment management and compliance of the project with the RPF, RAP,
   EMP, and ECOPs.

   According to the ICR (p. 24) progress reports were submitted by the PMO on a biannual basis. Also, a
   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established for households affected by land acquisition and
   resettlement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 25) the PMO at the Jiaozuo Municipal Financing Bureau (JMFB) was responsible
   for the project’s Financial Management (FM). The Bank team conducted trainings on FM to build capacity
   within the PMO, which was weak at the early stage of implementation and improved over time. All audit
   reports were verified, no ineligible expenditures were identified, and funds went through designated
   accounts. However, the project experienced delays of disbursement due to the PMO’s weak capacity as
   well as the contractors being unable to submit invoices and supporting documents in a timely manner. As a
   result, the project’s FM was mostly rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout implementation.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 25) the PMO was not familiar with the Bank’s procurement procedures such as
   international competitive bidding, technical specification requirements and contract variations. As a result,
   procurement processes experienced delays. Also, the procurement plan, which had been prepared during
   project preparation, was overly ambitious in terms of the timeline for land acquisition and resettlement
   issues. To address these issues, the PMO hired a procurement agent to assist in the preparation of
   bidding documents, procurement, and contract negotiations resulting in the improvement of the project’s
   procurement performance. The project’s procurement was mostly rated Moderately Satisfactory
   throughout implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 High relevance of objectives,
                                                                                 substantial efficacy, with
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 moderate shortcomings, and
                                                                                 modest efficiency.
                                                                                 Bank team did not identify
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    implementation risks, which
                                                                                 resulted in delays.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)



12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27-28) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        For complex projects with multiple cross-sector activities and implementing entities
         that are not familiar with Bank processes, it is critical that the Bank allows for
         sufficient learning time before project implementation starts. In this project, the PMO did
         not have any experience with Bank processes. Even though the Bank team provided
         training in critical areas, disbursement and implementation were delayed resulting in the
         need to extend the project’s closing date.
        To ensure sustainability, the project’s design needs to include interventions in several
         areas that address the complexity of reducing traffic fatalities This project included a
         variety of different activities such as improving existing infrastructures and enforcement
         capacity, providing road safety training and building institutional capacity allowing to tangle
         the challenge from different angles.
        The government needs to ensure adequate consultations with key stakeholders at all
         levels, including at the community level, which is critical for a smooth and successful
         project implementation. In this project, the Bank team did not foresee that the construction
         of the interchange at north square of railway station would be challenging even though the
         land was state owned. However, neighboring residents were using it for recreational activities
         and no replacement was nearby. As a result, the project activity had to be cancelled.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the lessons learned
provided a good learning experience for future projects in this area. The ICR did not discuss attribution of
project activities with outcomes and did not provide an adequate evaluation of actual achievement versus
baselines. Also, ICR would have benefitted from separate EIRR calculations for the buses sub-project and the
greenway sub-project as well as providing more detailed information on critical areas such as M&E
implementation, Bank supervision and what type of trainings the project provided to government staff. Overall,
the ICR’s quality is rated Substantial but only marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improve (P132277)




                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
