     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022889

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P133129                                   AR - Youth Employment Support Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                 Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84640                                31-May-2018                                        425,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jan-2015                               31-Jul-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         425,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          425,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      425,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project's objective, as stated in the Loan Agreement, was "to improve access of vulnerable youth
   populations to labor markets, increasing their employability by supporting the expansion and strengthening of
   Government employment programs." This ICRR concurs with the ICR's assessment (p. 15) that this statement
   contains a single evaluable objective, as project documents and indicators treat improved access to labor
   markets and increasing employability as the same thing, and support for the expansion and strengthening of



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



   government employment programs is viewed as an output in support of that outcome. Section 4 will therefore
   assess achievement of one objective.

   Outcome targets were revised at two project restructurings. A 2018 restructuring made one target more
   ambitious, which does not require a split rating for assessment purposes. However, a 2020 restructuring
   revised two outcome targets downward. This ICRR will therefore conduct a split rating based on the 2020
   restructuring, at which point US$328.57 million, or 77.2% of total Bank financing, had been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Mar-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   1. Improvement and provision of orientation and training services offered to JMyMT program
   participants (appraisal: US$190.33 million, of which IBRD US$169.01 million; closing: IBRD US$100.94
   million) was to improve the quality and relevance of services offered to participants in the "Youth with More
   and Better Jobs" (JMyMT) program, ensuring that an integrated package of training services (basic skills
   and technical training) is offered by providers that are independently assessed and certified, following clear
   curricula and objectives. It had four subcomponents:

          Labor orientation workshops and training courses was to provide required workshops and
           development of a work program for each participant entering the program.
          Expansion and strengthening of a job competency-based certification system was to finance the
           development of labor competency-based standards, the design of curricula and corresponding
           teaching materials, training of evaluators, assessment of participants' labor competencies,
           accreditation and quality certification of professional training institutions, teacher training at those
           institutions, and strengthening of Sector Councils responsible for overseeing training programs.
           These activities were to be financed on an output-based model.
          Strengthening of capacity to provide training and employment services was to provide information
           technology (IT) equipment and related furniture for about 150 municipalities for use of program
           participants in orientation and job search workshops, job clubs, and IT courses.
          Technical coordination was to strengthen project implementation.

   2. Coverage consolidation of the JMyMT program (appraisal: US$475.69 million, of which IBRD
   US$169.9 million; closing: IBRD US$262.77 million) was to maintain the program's coverage at around

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



  200,000 youth per year, reaching about 35% of potential beneficiaries. It was to finance cash transfers to
  eligible participants enrolled in the program, including monthly stipends (for those participating in program
  activities and on-the-job training) and incentives linked to completion of specific program activities.

  3. Strengthening and improving the performance of the network of Employment Offices
  (EOs) (appraisal: US$100.21 million, of which IBRD US$85 million; closing: IBRD US$60.23 million) was to
  incorporate new methodologies and management practices in existing and new EOs. The Ministry of Labor,
  Employment and Social Security (MTESS) was to enter into an agreement with each participating province,
  municipality, or non-governmental organization specifying the services to be delivered by the EO, including
  targets on performance indicators and the administrative procedures to be followed to monitor
  implementation. It had two subcomponents:

        Strengthening the employment services network was to finance activities such as regional and
         national workshops and provision of technical assistance to participating EOs.
        Output-based financing for eligible EOs was to provide support linked to outputs that MTESS
         considers most critical: placements in formal jobs, enrollment in/provision of services of employment
         clubs, placement in private sector on-the-job training projects, and enrollment in professional training
         courses.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  At appraisal, total project costs were US$767.29 million, with US$425 million from the International Bank for
  Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and US$342.29 million from the Borrower. The project fully
  disbursed as planned.

  The project was approved on January 15, 2015 and became effective on May 7, 2015. It was restructured
  three times:

        On October 27, 2016, to change institutional arrangements and reallocate proceeds among
         disbursement categories, and to revise one output target. Specifically, to reflect new government
         priorities following the 2015 presidential elections, new survey and evaluation activities were
         introduced, and IT training activities were cancelled as the MTESS decided to proceed with its own
         funds.
        On February 6, 2018, to revise components and costs, adjust the results framework, and extend the
         closing date. Following a 2015 change in presidential administration and the June 2017 project mid-
         term review, it was decided to prioritize private-sector employment opportunities for program
         beneficiaries (through increased emphasis on on-the-job training), and funds were shifted from
         training to stipends. The results framework was modified, with several output targets adjusted
         (targets on placement in formal employment were revised downward to take into account more
         challenging labor market conditions), and one outcome target was made more ambitious. The
         closing date was extended due to slow progress during the first two years of implementation.
        On March 28, 2020, to revise components and costs, adjust the results framework, and extend the
         closing date. Following presidential elections in 2019, the project was amended to ensure
         continuous support for the JMyMT program under difficult macroeconomic conditions as well as full
         disbursement of loan proceeds. The closing date was extended for another 16 months; technical
         assistance activities were added to assess the effectiveness of employment policies; and funds were


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



          added for both training and stipends. Two outcome targets on formal employment of graduates were
          made less ambitious because of unfavorable economic conditions, and two new outcome indicators
          were added for better measurement of labor market insertion rates (comparing program participants
          with a comparison group, to control for the effects of the overall labor market).

   The project closed almost three years later than originally scheduled, on July 31, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were strongly relevant to Argentina's country conditions. While there had been significant
gains since the 2002 economic crisis in overall growth and poverty reduction, pronounced inequalities
between urban and rural areas remained. A growth slowdown starting in 2012 had created challenges to
employment generation. After reaching its lowest level of 6.7% in 2011, the unemployment rate had started
to increase gradually and was 7.5% in the second quarter of 2014. There was also a decline in labor force
participation rates, producing an overall decrease in the percentage of the population employed by nearly
1.5 points from 2011 to 2014. Access to formal, stable jobs remained out of reach for many workers,
especially for youth, and even more so for young women.

At the time of appraisal, government policy had been shifting away from income-support programs toward
active labor market interventions. Responding to the need to structure pathways into work for unemployed
youth, the government launched an employment and skills training program (JMyMT) for the 18- to 24-year-
old population in 2008, targeting unemployed youth with incomplete secondary education. It covered
interventions in labor orientation, finishing secondary school, accumulating experience and skills through
internships, providing specific training, and finding productive employment either as salaried workers or
through self-employment. By 2014, the program covered all provinces and municipalities containing 85% of
the youth population, and about 200,000 youth had participated in one or more program activities each
year. In 2011-2012, the formal employment rate of former JMYMT participants was 20.8%, compared to
9.1% in a control group. Building on that success, in January 2014 the government launched
a complementary initiative, "Support to Argentina's Students" (PROGRESAR), aimed at completion of
formal education by youth with a family income below minimum wage, as well as additional training
opportunities.

The government recognized that, while these programs had been successful, there was a need to make
them even more effective and inclusive by increasing Employment Offices' (EOs') engagement with and
registration of participants in training activities, and by guaranteeing acceptable standards of services
throughout the country, including professional training and opportunities for work experience. The
objectives remained highly relevant to government strategy through successive presidential administrations
during the project's lifetime; while the 2015-2019 center-right government prioritized on-the-job training and
the participation of employers, it remained committed to improving the employability of vulnerable youth.

The objectives were also highly relevant to Bank strategy at appraisal and closing. The FY2015-18 Country
Partnership Strategy contained a thematic engagement area of "Asset Availability of Households and

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



               People," under which the results area "Improving Employability of Argentina's Youth" contributed to a
               specific outcome of doubling the relative chance of labor market insertion for 400,000 young people. The
               project also employed an output-based approach, which the CPS identified as a key lesson to guide the
               design of new operations. The FY2019-22 Country Partnership Framework had an objective on "Building
               Skills for the Future," with a focus on increasing training and retraining programs, including those who have
               left the formal education system without the necessary skills to find high-quality and productive jobs.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access of vulnerable youth populations to labor markets, increasing their employability by supporting
                             the expansion and strengthening of Government employment programs (original outcome targets)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change underpinning both the project and the JMyMT program it supported held that improving
                             and expanding the supply of orientation and training services, expanding the demand for these services
                             among vulnerable youth through stipends, and strengthening and expanding the intermediation activities of
                             EOs to connect vulnerable youth to both orientation and training services and employment opportunities,
                             would increase vulnerable youth access to labor markets and increase their employability.



                             Outputs

                             The number of certified professional training institutions increased from 150 in 2014 to 250 in 2021, meeting
                             the target of certifying 100 institutions.

                                        163 labor competency norms were developed and formally registered.
                                        1,225 individuals were trained as professional training instructors.
                                        26 Sector Councils for Lifelong Learning and Labor Competency Certification were strengthened. The
                                         ICR did not specify the characteristics of this strengthening.

                             93,185 program participants took a professional training course under the project, not reaching the original
                             target of 170,000, but exceeding the revised target of 91,500 participants.

                             162,294 program participants joined an on-the-job training activity in the private sector under the project,
                             exceeding both the original target of 78,000 and the revised target of 85,000 participants.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



481,235 program participants joined a labor orientation workshop under the project, exceeding both the
original target of 270,000 and the revised target of 380,000 participants.

The project provided financial support to the MTESS for technical assistance activities aimed at strengthening
the EO network, as well as output-based financial incentives to EOs for the delivery of training and labor
mediation services.

      32,045 program participants were placed in a formal job by an EO under the project, exceeding both
       the original target of 30,000 and the revised target of 25,000 participants.
      11,616 female program participants were placed in a formal job by an EO under the project, not
       reaching the original target of 12,000, but exceeding the revised target of 10,000 participants.
      131,012 program participants were enrolled in an employment club by an EO under the project,
       exceeding both the original target of 75,000 and the revised target of 70,000 participants.
      53,056 program participants were enrolled in a professional training course by the EO and placed in
       on-the-job training in the private sector under the project, not reaching the original target of 80,000,
       but exceeding the revised target of 46,500 participants.



Outcomes

The number of beneficiaries of labor market programs increased from 660,000 in 2014 to 1,471,462 in 2021,
exceeding the target of 930,000 beneficiaries.

      Of those, the number who accessed the services of EOs increased from 630,000 in 2014 to 1,389,000
       in 2021, exceeding the target of 965,000 beneficiaries. (Note: This metric was duplicative. If a
       participant received more than one service, they were counted more than once.)
      The number of beneficiaries of training and retraining programs rose from 330,000 in 2014 to 685,446
       in 2021, not reaching the target of 780,000 beneficiaries (note: as above).
      The number of female beneficiaries of labor market programs increase from 347,160 in 2014 to
       777,966 in 2021, exceeding the target of 489,180 beneficiaries.

The percentage of JMyMT program participants who have left the program and are employed in the formal
market was 25.2% at baseline in 2014, but fell to 20.6% in 2021 (see reasons below), not reaching the
original target of 27%.

      The percentage of female JMyMT program participants who have left the program and are employed
       in the formal market was 16% at baseline in 2014, but fell to 13.5% in 2021, not reaching the original
       target of 22%.

The number of EOs obtaining at least 150 outputs in the preceding 12 months rose from 60 in 2014 to 159 in
2021, exceeding both the original target of 120 and the revised target of 140 EOs.

The formal labor market insertion rate of participants immediately after completing the first training
activity was 25.8% in 2021, while it was only 4.9% in 2021 for a comparison group. For females, the rate of
formal labor market insertion for program participants immediately after completing the first training
activity was 17.3% in 2021, while it was only 2.6% for a comparison group. This indicator was added at the

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



                            2020 restructuring to take into account macroeconomic and labor market conditions. The target, a 20%
                            difference between the treatment and comparison groups, was far exceeded. However, as the ICR (p. 17)
                            notes, non-randomized selection criteria for the two groups may have produced systematic bias that obscured
                            other factors, including a higher rate of informal employment in the comparison group; the comparison group
                            was chosen ex post, and it included enrollees who did not participate in any program activities. In addition,
                            the PAD (p. 4) had noted significant differences between a treatment and comparison group on this same
                            indicator in 2011-2012, calling into question the project's contribution to improving the relative situation of the
                            treatment group.



                            Despite achievement of most outputs, targets for employment of program participants in the formal labor
                            market were not met, likely because of the highly adverse macroeconomic context (ongoing recession and a
                            10% drop in GDP in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, causing an increase in the unemployment rate
                            from 6.5% in 2015 to 11.4% in 2020). Achievement of the objective under the original outcome targets is
                            therefore rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Improve access of vulnerable youth populations to labor markets, increasing their employability by supporting
                            the expansion and strengthening of Government employment programs (revised outcome targets)

                            Revised Rationale
                            The percentage of JMyMT program participants who have left the program and are employed in the formal
                            market was 25.2% at baseline in 2014, but fell to 20.6% in 2021, not reaching the revised target of 24%.

                            The percentage of female JMyMT program participants who have left the program and are employed in the
                            formal market was 16% at baseline in 2014, but fell to 13.5% in 2021, not reaching the revised target of 19%.



                            With revised targets not met, achievement of the objective under the revised outcome targets is rated Modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)




  Rationale
  Although there was strong achievement of intermediate results, these did not fully translate into gains in
  formal employment among program participants. The ICR speculated convincingly that the shortfall was due
  to the unfavorable macroeconomic environment, especially from 2018 forward, further exacerbated by the
  COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis found an internal rate of return (IRR) of 23.1%, acknowledging that many of
the project's benefits -- increase in human capital accumulation and social cohesion, reduction in inequality and
risk of crime and violence -- could not be quantified. The analysis (PAD, pp. 59-67) compared the costs of the
project with the expected flow of additional income to be received by participants over their lifetimes. It was
reasonably assumed that program participation would positively affect a young person's probability of being
employed, formality in employment, and salary, and that these differences would continue throughout their
economically active life. The number of beneficiaries was estimated using historical JMyMT data and trends.
Estimations for wages, employment status, and formality for the treatment and control groups were drawn from
the 2013 urban household survey.

The ICR's ex post analysis took into consideration the actual costs associated with the program and anticipated
economic benefits based on the actual number of beneficiaries and increase in the likelihood of being formally
employed relative to the comparison group. The results were based on a finding that, on average, the program
produced US$5,087 in net salary gains per participant over their economically active lifetimes. Using a discount
rate of 3%, the assessment found a net present value of US$4.1 billion and an IRR of 22.2%.

Operational efficiency was adequate. The project's closing date was extended twice for a total of 28 months, but
these extensions contributed to full disbursement of the loan during a period of time when the Argentine Peso
underwent significant devaluation. Project outputs exceeded what was planned, and unitary costs per participant
and unit of service were lower than anticipated (ICR, p. 47). However, there were some shortcomings. Monetary
amounts assigned to the output-based financing mechanisms sometime lagged behind inflation, eroding their
incentive potential. Early in the project period, shortages of training services meant that participants often
experienced "significant delays" after enrolling in JMyMT or completing an orientation activity (ICR, p. 25). The
incompatibility of the Universal Child Allowance program (in effect through 2016) with JMyMT discouraged
participation in the latter; beneficiaries were not permitted to enroll in both programs simultaneously. Similarly,
changes in 2015 to the eligibility criteria and payment for PROGRESAR participants weakened incentives to
participate in JMyMT, resulting in migration of over 100,000 people to PROGRESAR that year (ICR, p. 24).
Finally, while the project's objectives remained a priority among successive presidential administrations, shifts in
ministerial arrangements and personnel slowed project implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
Appraisal                                                   23.10
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
ICR Estimate                                                22.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was highly relevant to country conditions, government strategy, and Bank strategy across its
lifetime. Relevance is rated High. Although it achieved or overachieved most of its planned outputs, the
project did not reach either its original or revised targets for formal labor market insertion of participants, likely
due to unfavorable macroeconomic conditions. The outcome indicators added at the last project restructuring to
control for the poor labor market were not adequate indicators of achievement. Efficacy is therefore rated
Modest under both the original and revised outcome targets. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to a favorable
economic analysis and indications of adequate implementation efficiency. Taken together, these ratings indicate
that there were significant shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results, producing an
Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 28), transition after project closing should be smooth, as the project was
implemented using existing MTESS organizational and management structures. The JMyMT program
continues to receive both political support and federal budget funding, and a follow-on project is under
preparation by the Bank. Institutional strengthening achieved under the project, including improvement in
competency-based training and certification programs, the incorporation of output-based financing
mechanisms for service providers and EOs, strengthening of the MTESS management information system,
and expansion and strengthening of the EO network, is likely to be sustained. The International Monetary
Fund is projecting improved economic growth for Argentina in the near term, which should reactivate labor
markets and therefore enhance potential labor market outcomes among former project beneficiaries.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design drew from the Bank's extensive prior experience in active labor market programs in
  Argentina over the preceding two decades (PAD, p. 11), including a seasoned task team. Lessons
  learned from predecessor projects included the adequate capacity of the government to deploy income
  transfer and employment programs, but also the importance of transparency and accountability in the
  administration of benefits, and the need for sound monitoring systems to track funds and results and to
  ensure compliance with eligibility criteria and program regulation. Previous experience also drew
  attention to the need for: (a) emphasis on outcomes, rather than inputs or processes, to maintain focus
  on results; (b) use of output-based financing mechanisms wherever possible; (c) recognition of the multi-
  dimensional challenges of youth employment, calling for multi-pronged project design; (d) development of
  a strong monitoring system at the outset against agreed standards; (e) adequate budget availability for
  activities related to the indigenous peoples safeguard; (f) anchoring the competency-based training
  system in a demand-driven approach determined by the needs, interests, and characteristics of
  employers; (g) flexible and modular provision of services; and (h) focus on the performance of EOs.
  Based on these lessons and experiences, project design developed multiple strategies to reach different
  segments of the target population, relying on a wide network of service providers that included non-
  governmental organizations, labor unions, private training providers, public universities, EOs, and
  employers to deliver orientation and training services.

  Risk assessment at entry was rated substantial overall due to the potential impact that macroeconomic
  trends might exert on the labor market (PAD, p. 13). Individual risks were rated low to moderate, with
  specific attention to the complex financial structure for disbursement of loan proceeds; mitigation involved
  careful design of disbursement mechanisms and strong planned implementation support from the Bank,
  especially over the project's first few months. There was also political risk stemming from planned
  national elections in October 2015, though support for youth employment policies across the political
  spectrum combined with strong engagement of the Bank team with policy makers across all sectors were
  mitigating factors. Risk related to stakeholder coordination was identified at appraisal (PAD, p. 56), but
  with no substantive risk management measures. Weak coordination at the local level materialized during
  the early stages of implementation and resulted in a limited supply of training services (ICR, p. 25).
  Participants experienced significant delays after enrollment. The limited supply of training offerings also
  hindered the implementation of skills development pathways tailored to the individual needs of
  participants, who had to settle for whatever training was available.

  It was also a shortcoming that the results framework did not contain outcome indicators that could
  adequately measure the project's contribution to achievement of the objectives. As explained earlier, this
  issue was caused by the severe negative impact of the economic downturn on employment opportunities,
  which could not have been fully anticipated by the task team at appraisal.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



 The task team was based in the Bank's Buenos Aires office, contributing to close and ongoing support for
 project implementation. During multiple restructurings, the Bank team kept up with changes in the priorities
 of various presidential administrations as well as the overall implementation environment. Bank guidance
 and support in the areas of financial management, procurement, and safeguard policies were effective.
 Changes to the results framework at the 2020 restructuring partly addressed shortcomings, though the
 definition of the comparison group weakened the utility of the added outcome indicators.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Results monitoring, and evaluation were to be based on three sources of data: the management
 information system (MIS) of the Employment Secretariat, where detailed data on activities related
 to JMyMT were collected; the database for social security contributions (SIPA), managed by the Federal
 Tax Authority; and the information system that integrates performance data from all participating EOs. All
 training activities were to be registered on the Register of Training and Employment Agencies, an MIS used
 to analyze the program's performance. Given that the project used an output-based model, the monitoring
 system for outputs was considered critical, and its performance was to be monitored carefully by the Bank
 team, particularly in the first year of project implementation. MTESS was also to continue with the regular
 impact evaluation strategy that had been in place for MJyMT since its creation, which combined data from
 the program's registry, the SIPA database, and the Permanent Household Survey.

 The results framework contained adequate indicators to measure intermediate results related
 to beneficiaries taking advantage of services and institutional strengthening. However, the potential impact
 of a highly negative macroeconomic environment was not anticipated during preparation, leaving the two
 most important outcome indicators inadequate to measure project achievement, as formal employment
 levels were negatively affected by labor market conditions outside the project's control.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, the MTESS published monthly reports that covered project indicators, and the
  Bank also monitored the EO MIS for data on outputs. External technical audits were conducted regularly
  to ensure the internal consistency of the various databases and registries on project participants and
  activities, including stipend payments, registration of trainees with the social security agency, and formal
  labor market insertion of program participants.

  At the 2020 project restructuring, two additional outcome indicators were added to single out the results
  attributable to the program. However, those indicators -- on differences in labor market insertion rates for

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



  participants who completed at least one orientation or training activity versus those who had not -- may
  have contained systematic bias in the definition of the comparison group, limiting their utility. In addition,
  the planned impact evaluation strategy was not implemented due to loss of key staff and internal
  reorganization at MTESS.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Employment Service's MIS was a critical tool available to inform program implementation, but the
  ICR reported that "this potential remained largely untapped." Furthermore, "MIS interfaces at the EO
  level were conceived largely as a data collection tool rather than as management tools that could be
  used by EOs to improve their performance" (ICR, p. 26). Findings based on MIS data were used,
  however, to inform a 2019 labor market and social protection diagnostic that is feeding into the design of
  a follow-on operation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category "C." The nature and scope of the project were
   not expected to generate adverse environmental impacts. During implementation, the environmental risk
   rating and environmental safeguard performance were defined as low and satisfactory, respectively (ICR, p.
   27).

   The project triggered OP/BP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples (IP). JMyMT beneficiaries included indigenous
   people in 20 of Argentina's 24 provinces. A National Indigenous Peoples Plan (NIPP) was prepared to
   ensure that their rights and interests were adequately protected during project preparation and
   implementation. The NIPP was based on existing analogous plans implemented under previous Bank-
   financed projects. It was disclosed through the MTESS website on November 18, 2014 and on the Bank's
   website on November 13, 2014. During implementation, the social risk was rated low and social
   performance was considered satisfactory (ICR, p. 27). The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework set a
   goal of 6,500 IP youth participating in the project, which was exceeded with actual participation of 7,167 IP
   youth. The project also contributed to the institutionalization of an intercultural approach within the MTESS,
   encompassing a new Gender and Intercultural Guide for EOs and participation of the IP area in the
   preparation of a follow-on project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   A Financial Management (FM) Assessment carried out during appraisal found arrangements to be
   satisfactory to support project implementation. Administrative and financial management matters were
   handled by the Technical Coordination Unit of the MTESS, including collecting required information on

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



   outputs and financial flows, ensuring that necessary audit reports were prepared on time, requesting
   disbursements as necessary, and preparing reports and submitting Statements of Expenses according to
   the procedures established in the Operational Manual. FM was rated as either Satisfactory or Moderately
   Satisfactory and the FM risk rating was moderate throughout the project's lifetime. All financial statement
   audit reports were received on time or with a delay of less than four months, and all expressed clean
   opinions. All interim financial reports were considered acceptable, though some were received with delays.
   Project planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing
   arrangement were adequate (ICR, p. 27).

   A procurement assessment at appraisal identified several factors of concern: the risk of delays in
   processing procurement activities to set up 150 classrooms in a timely manner, and lack of staff at MTESS
   with procurement experience. According to the ICR (pp. 27-28), there were procurement delays, and some
   weaknesses were identified during implementation in relation to the updating of information in the Bank's
   STEP (Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement) system and filing of documentation of
   procurement processes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately              Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 29-30) offered several insightful lessons, some of which are restated here:

Output-based financing for skills development and training programs can be fine-tuned by project
design teams to incentivize not just production of desired outputs, but also their relevance and
quality -- in other words, not just "more" outputs but also "better" ones. In this case, payments to
training providers rewarded not just enrollment but also completion. Following this model, incentives


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)



to employers could reward aspects such as tutoring and mentoring, as well as permanent hiring.
Payments to Employment Offices could go beyond enrollment to focus on beneficiaries' eventual
insertion into the labor market.

Project design teams targeting vulnerable youth for a skills development and training program can
be maximally inclusive by addressing the diversity of sources of vulnerability within the target
population. Vulnerability can stem from gender, indigeneity, socio-economic characteristics, and
geographic location, all of which might require different strategies for outreach, intervention, and
service provision.

In an uncertain macroeconomic environment, the usefulness of outcome indicators related to skills
training and active labor market interventions can be negatively impacted if those indicators depend
on fluctuating overall employment levels. In this case, key outcome indicators initially focused on
changes in employment outcomes without considering the possible influence of macroeconomic
factors outside the project's control.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, concise, and candid, with high-quality evidence presented consistently throughout the
document. It interrogated the evidence well, linking available data to intended outcomes and highlighting
shortcomings in the project's formal results framework. Its lessons were insightful and well grounded in the
project's experience presented in the main narrative. Although the ICR's rationale for performing a split rating
was well reasoned, the efficacy assessment was based on project periods (before and after restructuring)
rather than on achievement across the project's entire lifetime against the original and then revised outcome
targets (per IEG/OPCS harmonized guidelines).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AR - Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)




                                                                               Page 15 of 15
