     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022851

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P146314                                      Improving Climate Resilience

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54170,IDA-57680                          30-May-2019                                        139,019,103.97

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Apr-2014                                  30-Apr-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            110,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             147,522,955.68                                               0.00

 Actual                                         139,019,103.97                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Elisabeth Goller            Kavita Mathur                  Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement and in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) is "to reduce the vulnerability of exposed people and assets to climate risk and to improve
   the Recipient's capacity to respond effectively to disasters."

   In this review, the PDO is assessed in two parts, namely "to reduce the vulnerability of exposed people and
   assets to climate risk" and "to improve the Recipient's capacity to respond effectively to disasters". These two


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



   separate parts of the PDO are referred to as Objectives 1 and 2 in Section 4 below. This is in line with the
   approach used in the ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had the following four components:

   Component 1: Development of basin investment plans (cost at appraisal: US$13.0 million, including
   contingencies; at restructuring: US$21.5 million, including contingencies; actual cost: US$14.4 million), to
   carry out basin investment planning to identify flood and drought mitigation investments in priority river
   basins, informed by future climate risks. It included support to government engineers and experts to carry
   out comprehensive flood and drought modeling, assessment of the underlying causes of floods, and
   drought and technical capacity strengthening of the Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources
   Management, including in particular technology transfer and technical assistance to its Special Projects
   Unit.

   The 2018 restructuring expanded the scope of this component to carry out detailed studies and analytical
   work necessary to prepare the Climate Resilience Multi-Phased Programmatic Approach, a new Bank
   project that is ongoing. These activities included: (i) preliminary design and strategic environmental and
   social assessments, resettlement planning, and environmental assessments for the lower Kelani flood
   mitigation interventions, (ii) Mundeni Aru river flood mitigation feasibility studies and detailed designs, and
   (iii) capacity building for the Department of Meteorology in extreme event forecasting (2018 Project Paper -
   PP, para 6).

   Component 2: Increasing climate resilience of infrastructure (cost at appraisal: US$90.0 million,
   including contingencies; at restructuring: US$120.3 million, including contingencies; actual cost:
   US$119.9 million), to implement urgent climate risk mitigation investments identified and prioritized by the
   government, including (i) flood mitigation, (ii) transport continuity, and (iii) school protection, under the
   following subcomponents:

   Subcomponent 2.1: Flood risk mitigation, including investments to rehabilitate infrastructure damaged by
   floods or particularly at risk to future floods.

   Subcomponent 2.2: Transport Continuity, including investments to mitigate the slope failures/landslides in
   high/moderate landslide risk areas with frequent roadside slope failures/landslides on highways and rural
   roads. The transport continuity investments also included reducing the flood risk of low-lying bridges in
   vulnerable river crossings by raising and lengthening bridges in place of the narrow bridges/causeways.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



  Subcomponent 2.3: School protection, including investments focused on improving slope stability
  and drainage capacity of schools that serve about 29,000 students in areas highly vulnerable to landslides.

  The 2016 additional financing (AF) covered a cost overrun and scaled up this component to include
  the repair and disaster proofing of irrigation, flood control, and road infrastructure (see section 2.e below).

  Component 3: Project implementation (cost at appraisal: US$5.0 million, including contingencies; at
  restructuring: US$7.0 million, including contingencies; actual cost: US$3.1 million), to support the project
  management unit (PMU) and the five implementing agencies (IAs).

  Component 4: Contingent emergency response (cost at appraisal: US$2.0 million, including
  contingencies; at restructuring: US$3.2 million, including contingencies; actual cost: US$3.2), to make
  emergency funds available to help the government respond to disasters. The 2018 restructuring triggered
  this response and reallocated US$1.2 million to this component (2018 Project Paper - PP, para 6).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual total project cost was US$140.6 million, which is 128 percent of the original cost
  estimate of US$110 million and 92 percent of the AF cost estimate of US$152.0 million (ICR, Annex 3). The
  Bank task team mentioned during the discussions with IEG on February 23 and 25, and March 3, 2022 (all
  references to discussions between the Bank task team and IEG in this ICRR refer to these dates) that the
  lower project end cost compared to the AF cost estimate was due to the appreciation of the US dollar
  against the Sri Lankan rupee (LKR).

  Financing: The Bank was expected to fully cover the project costs through an IDA credit. The Bank
  disbursed US$139.0 million according to the ICR datasheet and US$140.6 million according to ICR, annex
  3, which is about 92 percent of the credit amount. The Bank task team pointed out to IEG that the slight
  differences between the ICR datasheet and annex 3 are due to exchange rate fluctuations.

  Recipient Contribution: The project did not envisage a recipient contribution, but the PAD, para 35, points
  out that the government was to make a US$1.8 million for payment of seconded government staff.
  The Bank task team mentioned to IEG that the recipient provided the planned counterpart funding through
  the payment of government staff salaries.

  Dates and Project Restructuring: The project was approved on April 22, 2014, became effective on
  August 5, 2014, and was expected to close on May 30, 2019. The closing date was extended three times
  for a total of 23 months: in October 2018, for 13 months to June 30, 2020, in March 2020 for six months to
  December 31, 2020, and in November 2020, for four months to April 30, 2021. The latter is the actual
  closing date.

        The October 2018 extension was necessary due to delays (i) caused by changes in the
         implementing ministry's leadership, (ii) in obtaining datasets for Component 1 from relevant technical
         agencies, (iii) caused by adverse weather events affecting construction works, (iv) in constructing
         irrigation schemes, and (v) scarcity of construction materials (2018 PP).
        The March 2020 extension was necessary because of (i) significant political changes in the
         country, (ii) difficulty in sourcing construction materials, (iii) adverse weather, and (iv) the Easter
         Sunday terrorist attacks (March 2020 PP, page 3).

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



      The November 2020 extension took place because of the disruptions caused by the COVID-19
       outbreak and insufficient budget provision between January and August 2020, which delayed the
       completion of ongoing contracts (November 2020 PP, page 3).

The project received an additional financing (AF) of US$42.0 million, approved on March 21, 2016, to scale
up the project scope to finance the repair and disaster proofing of infrastructure damaged by extreme
rainfall in December 2014. In addition, financing was required to close a financing gap caused by cost
escalation of civil works under the parent project (AF PP, para 3). The Bank staff team clarified to IEG that
the cost overrun was US$5 million, and the main purpose of the AF was to scale up the project. The AF
included a restructuring to (i) change the results framework to better capture the benefits of the project,
including the ones of the AF, (ii) change the component and subcomponent costs, (iii) add an IA to
implement the landslide rectification and slope stabilization interventions of Uva province roads, and (iv)
trigger OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams because several flood risk mitigation interventions had to rely on the
performance of upstream dams and reservoirs (AF PP, paras 4 and 5).

The results framework changes impacted three PDO indicators as follows: (i) the indicator "decrease in
expected annual flood loss from 5 years return period to 25 years" was changed to "area benefitted
with reduced annual crop losses due to weather related events in the selected schemes" because
of limitation of hydro-meteorological data and the changing rainfall patterns (the Bank task team mentioned
to IEG that this data limitation existed at appraisal and that the project activities were to help overcome it.
The project, however, did not have the data to report regularly on the original indicator during project
implementation, hence they changed the indicator) and its target was increased from 123,000 hectares (ha)
to 149,000 ha (AF PP, annex 2); (ii) the indicator of "reduction in people at risk to climate related transport
interruptions" was changed to "people benefitted from reduced weather related transport interruptions" to
enhance clarity and its target was increased from 721,000 people to 1,220,000 people; and (iii) the
indicator of "number of schools protected against landslides" was changed to "number of school children
protected from reduced landslide risks in selected schools", to capture the beneficiaries instead of the
schools, and its target was changed from 18 schools to 29,000 school children. The changes to the results
framework also included the revision of three intermediate outcome indicators to better reflect project
activities and results.

The project was again restructured on October 5, 2018. In addition to the above-mentioned closing date
extension, this restructuring resulted in (i) reallocating funds among components, especially to component
4: Contingent emergency response, and disbursement categories, (ii) the inclusion of district secretariats of
selected districts as implementation agencies for component 4, and (iii) changes in procurement
arrangements and the implementation schedule. It also included the increase of the end targets of two PDO
indicators ("reduction in people at risk to weather related transport interruptions" from 1,220,000 to
1,800,000 and "development of basin investment plans that are based on integrated understanding of
climate risk" from 9 to 10) and the decrease of the end target of one PDO indicators (“area benefitted with
reduced annual crop losses due to weather related events in the selected schemes” from 149,000 ha to
113,000 ha (2018 PP, annex 3)). These changes were necessary to reflect the reallocation of funds to
component 4 and because of a clearer understanding of the cost of irrigation and flood mitigation works
(2018 PP, page 7).

Split rating:

Despite revisions of PDO indicators and targets, no split rating will be applied, and the project's
achievements will be assessed against the revised targets for the following reasons. First, the main reason

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



   of the 2016 AF was to scale up the repair and disaster proofing of irrigation, flood control, and road
   infrastructure activities and therefore increased the respective targets. Second, the replacement with the
   2016 AF of the indicator "decrease in expected annual flood loss from 5 years return period to 25
   years" with the indicator "area benefitted with reduced annual crop losses due to weather related events in
   the selected schemes" took place to enable results measuring, the target was increased, and so did not
   substantially change the indicator's level of ambition. The Bank task team explained to IEG that the original
   indicator needed data and a modeling capacity that became only available by project end. Therefore, to be
   able to regularly report on progress, the indicators was changed. The new indicator captures similar results,
   but relies less on modelling. The target was increased because of the additional works added with the 2016
   AF. Third, the change of the target for protection against landslides from "18 schools" to "29,000 school
   children" slightly reduced the level of ambition because the PAD, para 32 highlighted that the beneficiaries
   of the 18 schools were 30,000 students. However, the original target of 18 schools was achieved and nearly
   30,000 schools benefitted, so applying a split rating would make no practical difference. Fourth, although
   the 2018 restructuring reduced the target of the indicator "area benefitted with reduced annual crop losses
   due to weather related events in the selected schemes" from 149,000 ha to 113,000 ha, the original and
   revised targets were exceeded, so again to apply a split rating would make no practical difference.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At appraisal in 2014, climate-related hazards were a significant threat to economic
and social development in Sri Lanka, with extreme variability of rainfall defining its climate. Climate
projections at that time showed that risks associated with water-related climate variability were likely to
intensify and worsen. Inter-annual and intra-seasonal variability of monsoons and the number of dry days
and droughts were expected to increase, reducing agriculture production and adversely affecting many
aspects of human lives. However, the country lacked a comprehensive and nationally-owned disaster risk
assessment. Flood management infrastructure was insufficient, and the country had no comprehensive
basin management approach. Upland areas were particularly vulnerable to landslides often triggered by
extreme rainfall events. In addition, recent disasters had caused major economic and social damage, which
drove the government's interest to build resilience to climate-related risks. Sri Lanka had invested
significantly in emergency preparedness and response capacity since the Tsunami in 2004. Despite
this progress, large-scale, systematic investment in risk understanding and mitigation across sectors was
not yet in place at appraisal.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, building resilience and improving the government's
capacity to respond to disasters was high on Sri Lanka's agenda. Similarly, ensuring that key transport
connections were not compromised by landslide events was a government priority. Overall, the project was
aligned with the 2014–2018 Comprehensive Disaster Management Program of Sri Lanka and
its international commitments on climate change and disaster risk management, including Sri Lanka's 2016
National Determined Contribution and the 2015-2030 Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. At
completion, the PDO remained aligned with the 2021 National Policy Framework to proactively manage
disasters, minimize the loss of lives and property and economic damage, and establish a well synchronized
internal system to ease the suffering of people affected by disasters. Similarly, it remained aligned with the



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



               adaptation priorities in the revised 2021 National Determined Contribution and the 2015-2030 Sendai
               Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction national targets, which was still in force.

               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the disaster risk
               management pillar of the Bank’s FY13-FY16 Sri Lanka Country Partnership Strategy, which proposed a
               comprehensive program to reduce the adverse impacts of climate change and adapt the stock of
               infrastructure to extreme climate shocks. The PDO remained fully aligned with the Bank's FY17-21 Country
               Partnership Framework. Its pillar 3 "Seizing Green Growth Opportunities, Improving Environmental
               Management, and Enhancing Adaptation and Mitigation Potential" aims at supporting activities for more
               efficient, resilient, and sustainable green urban development, enhanced resilience to climate-related events,
               and disaster risk management.

               Previous Sector Experience. Between 2005 and 2012, the Bank was the lead development partner
               supporting Sri Lanka to address climate-induced disaster risks. It provided US$467 million to address the
               reconstruction needs from the 2004 Tsunami, maintain dams for water provision, and reduce flooding in
               Colombo. Examples of this engagement are the (a) Sri Lanka Tsunami Emergency Recovery Loan
               (P094205) to support the government to (i) reduce the immediate suffering resulting from the effects of the
               tsunami and restore livelihoods destroyed by the tsunami, (ii) restore basic services to the affected
               population, and (iii) start the recovery and reconstruction process; (b) Sri Lanka Tsunami Damage & Needs
               Assessment (P094204), an economic and sector work, to carry out the preliminary damage and needs
               assessment from Tsunami Disaster in Sir Lanka; and (c) Sri Lanka post-disaster needs assessment
               (P122347), a non-lending technical assistance, to support strategic dialogue and capacity development of
               the counterparts in the government of Sri Lanka in post-disaster needs assessment.

               The PDO to "reduce vulnerability to climate risks and improve capacity to effectively respond to disaster
               risks" addresses Sri Lanka's climate vulnerability. This PDO was and is in full alignment with country and
               Bank strategies. The PDO is outcome-oriented and appropriately pitched for a country like Sri Lanka.
               Compared to previous Bank activities in the sector, the project evolved over time in breadth and the
               objectives became more challenging. Therefore, the relevance of objectives is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce the vulnerability of exposed people and assets to climate risks.

                             The PAD, footnote 11 points out that climate risks under this project are hydro-meteorological risks of flood,
                             drought, and landslides.


                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




Rationale
The theory of change for Objective 1 was that the progressive capacity improvements under objective 2 and
the activities to rehabilitate and strengthen irrigation infrastructure, control floods, and implement drainage
infrastructure would lead as output to more resilient irrigation infrastructure and flood control measures. In
terms of outcomes, this was to lead to reduced vulnerability of irrigation infrastructure to damages by
floods and the decrease of crops loss to floods and droughts. The activities to rehabilitate flood damaged and
vulnerable highways, provide roads with adequate slope protection, and improve bridges and culverts would
lead as output to more resilient roads, bridges, and culverts. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to
reduced transport infrastructure vulnerability to climate risks and less transport interruptions. Finally, the
activities to reduce landslide risks around schools, would lead as output to landslide protection infrastructure
and as outcome to schools and students protected against landslides and hence educational continuity.
Overall, these outcomes were expected to reduce the vulnerability of exposed people and assets to climate
risks, with reduced flood, drought, and landslide vulnerable populations and reduced economic losses in
districts vulnerable to climate and weather related hazards. The main assumptions were that (i) accurate and
up-to-date data to design the vulnerability reduction interventions, (ii) adequate financing for the investments,
(iii) sufficient irrigation and rainfall for expected crop yields to materialize, and (iv) a plan and budget to ensure
the sustainability of the interventions were available.

Outputs:

The project produced the following outputs, captured through indicators in the results framework:

School Protection:

      100 percent of detailed school landslide stabilization designs completed, exactly achieving the
         unrevised target;
      18 schools protected against landslides, exactly achieving the unrevised target (the original indicator
         measured the school area protected, so the target is not comparable);

Transport Infrastructure

      100 percent of detailed road side slope stabilization and bridge designs completed, exactly achieving
         the unrevised target;
        38 bridges raised and causeways replaced, largely exceeding the revised target of 16 and the original
         target of 12;
        640 culverts and small bridges constructed, exceeding the revised target of 460 and the original target
         of 89;
        381 improved farm links, exceeding the unrevised target of 109;
        2,448 kilometers of roads ensuring transport connectivity improved, largely exceeding the revised
         target of 560 kilometers (the original indicator measured the length of roadside slopes stabilized, so
         the target is not comparable);

Flood Protection

      100 percent of detailed flood mitigation designs completed, exactly achieving the unrevised target;
      1,129 km of distribution canals improved, exceeding the revised target of 600 and the original target of
         643;

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




      10,720 structures in distribution canals improved, exceeding the revised target of 6,200 and the
       original target of 4,634;
      104 km of flood drainage canals improved, achieving the revised target of 103, but significantly short
       of the original target of 778;
      47 km of flood bunds rehabilitated, exceeding the revised target of 45, but significantly short of the
       original target of 399; and
      70 km of spill tail canals improved/rehabilitated, exactly achieving the revised target, but short of the
       original target of 173.

The Bank task team pointed out to IEG that the substantial overachievement of some of the irrigation
infrastructure related targets and the underachievement on others was due to the fact that the exact needs on
the ground were not clear at appraisal and hence were not adequately reflected in the indicator targets.

The project also achieved the following output, not captured through an indicator in the results framework:

      154.95 km of provincial roads improved, including the protection of landslide and rockfall locations and
       the improvement of bridges;

Note: Exceeding many revised output targets was possible because of savings incurred due to the
appreciation of dollar against the Sri Lankan rupee (LKR).

Outcomes:

The project's irrigation, flood control, and drainage infrastructure repairs and improvements enhanced
the irrigation infrastructure's robustness to withstand floods and the water conveyance and distribution
efficiency, thus avoiding flood damage to infrastructure and crops and ensuring water supply. The irrigation
rehabilitation benefited 216,933 farming families in 11 districts. By project end, 172,491 ha of land
experienced reduced annual crop losses due to weather-related events in the selected schemes, exceeding
the revised target of 113,000 (the original target was 123,000 ha but, as mentioned in section 2.e,
the indicator measured the decrease in expected annual flood loss from 5 years return period to 25 years, so
was not fully comparable). The Bank task team mentioned to IEG that the reduction in annual crop losses
was measured by comparing the without and with project areas with stable water supply and affected by
floods based on historical flood data, so not expected to experience crop losses because of drought and
floods. The ICR does not mention to which year or years the annual crop losses results refer to.

The ICR, para 37, explains that the irrigation investments increased the cultivable land by 5,593 ha and
12,705 ha for paddy and other field crops and the yield by 1,535 million tons per ha and 2,222 million tons per
ha for paddy and other field crops. For the Hakwatuna Oya irrigation scheme in Kurunegala, it also points out
that the avoided flood and drought crop loss per ha was LKR 62,123 (about US$360). Again, the ICR does
not mention to which year or years the cost of the avoided annual crop losses refer to. The improvements in
this scheme covered 2,575 ha and, hence, the avoided losses for the interventions was about US$800,000
(2,575*62,123=LKR159,966,725). To put this in perspective, the area intervened in the Hakwatuna Oya
scheme represents 0.015 percent of the total intervened project area of 172,491 ha.

The project's road-related investments, reduced the risk of climate related transport interruptions for
1,799,000 people, compared to a revised target of 1,800,000 and an original target of 721,000. These
investments restored and enhanced the accessibility and connectivity on highways and roads damaged or


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



obstructed by floods and landslides and improved their resilience to future flood and landslides. They ensured
connectivity to markets, health care, education, employment opportunities, and other critical basic services,
especially for farmers selling produce and buying agricultural inputs and for the general public and tourists
(ICR, para 38). As an example, the ICR, para 39, mentions that the Udappuwa Bridge, the largest of the
bridges intervened under the project, improved connectivity and travel time for 250 houses/families and 500
school children (no data on travel time reduction is given in the ICR), reduced interruptions to livelihood
activities for around 1,500 families and 20 prawn farms during floods, and ensured access to critical services,
such as hospital, police stations, and schools. The Bank task team explained to IEG that prior to the
construction of this bridge, people were cut off from these services for on average 10 days a year because of
heavy rains.

The ICR, para 38, points out that the project investments improved the corridor’s resilience to landslides
caused by heavy monsoon rains, and that during the November 2021 landslides, the project intervention
areas fared better than other areas. The Bank task team clarified to IEG that in 2021 Sri Lanka experienced
about 700 landslides and that the project's landslide protection measures along roads withstood the strong
rains despite being in highly landslide prone areas whereas in many other areas roads were blocked and
large damages occurred.

In terms of slope stability near schools, before the project, school children and staff of the selected 18
schools in Kandy were at high risk of landslides and schools closed during heavy rainfall periods. This
negatively affected education activities for 2 to 4 weeks annually (ICR, para 40). Because of the slope
stabilization and drainage activities, by project end, 28,801 students and about 500 staff in 18 schools in the
Central Province were less vulnerable to landslides, against a revised target of 29,000 students (the original
indictor measured the number of schools and the target of 18 was achieved). The Bank task team clarified to
IEG that the schools with the landslide protection interventions constructed under the project did not close
during heavy rains, hence avoided interruptions in education.

The Bank task team pointed out that the designs of road, bridge, irrigation, and landslide infrastructure all
reflected future climate risks.

Overall, about 11.5 million people in 22 out of 25 districts in Sri Lanka benefited from project investments.
Seventy percent of project beneficiaries surveyed felt that the project investments reflected their needs, short
of the target introduced with the 2016 AF of 75 percent.

The project reduced crop losses, and it is likely that it made farmers and irrigation infrastructure less
vulnerable to droughts and flooding. The project also restored transport connectivity and likely made transport
infrastructure more resilient to climate risks, hence reducing the people's vulnerability to future weather-
related connectivity interruptions. The project also made selected schools less vulnerable to landslides risks
and permitted to keep these schools open during heavy rains. Therefore, the efficacy of Objective 1 is
rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




Objective
To improve the recipient's capacity to respond effectively to disasters.

Rationale
The theory of change for Objective 2 was that the activities to (i) develop basin investment plans, (ii) train
government staff, (iii) prepare preparatory studies to implement the basin investment plans, and (iv)
provide contingent emergency financing during project implementation would lead to the following outputs
of (a) databases, a model to forecast flood and drought risks, and other tools, (b) a portfolio of flood and
drought risk mitigation investments, (c) feasibility and other preparatory studies for these investments, (d)
rapidly available financial resources to respond to disasters, and (e) capacitated government staff with greater
awareness. This was to lead as intermediate outcomes to (i) staff with greater capacity and tools to
understand and respond to disaster risks and (ii) a faster response to disasters because of available
financing. In the longer run, it was to lead to new investments to mitigate flood and droughts risks. All
this meant that the recipient's capacity to respond effectively to disasters improved, and hence that flood,
drought and landslide vulnerable populations and economic losses in districts vulnerable to climate and
weather-related hazards would be reduced. The main assumptions were that (i) accurate and up-to-date data
for river basin modelling and climate risk analysis were available, (ii) government staff was competent in river
basin modelling, and (iii) the identified investments to mitigate flood and droughts risk were implemented.

Outputs:

The project produced the following outputs captured through indicators in the results framework:

      10 river basin-level flood and drought risk mitigation investment plans, exceeding the original target of
       nine and exactly achieving the revised target. This included, among others:
            o 10 computational framework reports, which provided data sets and tools, e.g. web-based
                global information system information presentation tool, to understand the climate risk in the
                targeted basins;
            o 10 floods and drought risk assessment reports; and
            o 10 integrated flood and drought risk assessment reports, identifying a portfolio of investments
                to mitigate flood and drought risks.
      Seven risk mitigation feasibility studies for investment envisaged in the basin investment plans, not
       achieving the original target of 15 and the revised target of 10; and
      Four strategic environmental assessments and four strategic social assessments for the proposed
       investments of four river basins (the project had an original indicator "strategic environmental
       assessment developed", with a target of one, which was replaced with the indicator "risk mitigation
       feasibility studies developed").

Note: The Bank task team pointed out to IEG, that the investments envisaged in one of the river basin
investment plans will be implemented under the ongoing Climate Resilience Multi-Phase Programmatic
Approach (P160005).

      100 percent of flood and drought risk models developed, exactly in line with the unrevised target;
      100 percent of digital elevation model and hydro-meteorological data for the nine basins collected and
       compiled for analysis, exactly in line with the unrevised target;
      100 percent of local flood risk analyses and modeling to support immediate mitigation carried out,
       exactly in line with the unrevised target; and

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




      72 Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources Management staff trained in modeling climate risks,
         exceeding the original target of 20 and the revised target of 40. The training included monitoring,
         forecasting, and early warning of hydro-meteorological hazards, risk and vulnerability assessments,
         disaster risk reduction, and basin-level flood and drought risk mitigation planning.

The project also produced the following outputs not captured in the results framework:

      15 river basin risk mitigation investment prefeasibility studies (this output had no indicator in the
         results framework but it is mentioned in Annex 1, page 37);
      Various software, including the European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting license, and
         equipment;
        Sri Lanka Weather Information Network design, which, as mentioned by the Bank task team to IEG,
         will be implemented under the ongoing Climate Resilience Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach;
        Bidding documents and the engineer’s cost estimate for weather forecasting center, which, as
         mentioned by the Bank task team to IEG, will be implemented under the ongoing Climate Resilience
         Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach;
        Salinity barrier detailed design (the Bank task team explained to IEG that this structure will be
         implemented under the ongoing Climate Resilience Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach and will help
         reduce floods and supply fresh water);
        Road map and details of the planned activities to enhance forecasting and early warning (the Bank
         task team explained to IEG that activities will be implemented under the ongoing Climate Resilience
         Multi-Phase Programmatic);
        2,400 staff of IAs and other relevant agencies exposed to overseas training and exposure visits; and
        Availability of IDA credit enabling the relocation of resources to quickly respond to a disaster.

Outcomes:

According to the ICR, para 42, the development of the 10 basin investment plans, in line with the revised
PDO indicator target and exceeding the original target of 9, improved the government’s capacity to respond
effectively to disasters through (i) a more strategic approach to medium and long-term climate resilience
challenges, (ii) the identification of the investments to address the longer term challenges to build resilience,
and (iii) information on costs of flood and drought risks generated through the flood and drought risk
assessments and important for the government's investment planning. The government strengthened its
capacity through (i) learning by doing, by assigning young local engineers to work with the international
consulting firm to prepare the river basin plans, (ii) the data sets and tools developed and now available to the
government, and (iii) the capacity strengthening events. The Bank task team pointed out to IEG that the
consulting firm carried out the first basin investment plans and trained the local engineers. Successive plans
were directly carried out by the local counterpart. According to the Bank task team, the government is
now able to update the existing plans or prepare new ones.

The National Building Research Organization, by being in charge for the design and construction supervision
of the slope stabilization works for roads and schools under the project and through additional equipment,
built its capacity to carry out its national mandate for landslide risk modelling, managing, and monitoring. By
project end, this organization delivered continuous support to landslide rectification and slope stabilization of
major highways (ICR, para 49). The Bank task team mentioned to IEG that before the project, the National



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



Building Research Organization was not able to design the type of landslide mitigation works implemented
under the project because this was the first time such large scale works were carried out in Sri Lanka.

The slope protection works also provided local contractors with hand-on experience, which they previously
lacked (ICR, para 50). Similarly, local engineers in road agencies improved their skills through the design and
implementation of flood-damaged and vulnerable transport infrastructure rehabilitation and roadside slopes
control (ICR, para 38). The Bank task team clarified to IEG that also for the road agencies involved in the
project, the type of slope protection works carried out were new.

The European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting's license acquired under the project and the
training provided by the Norwegian Meteorology Department enhanced the capacity of the Meteorology
Department to monitor and forecast extreme weather events and provide warnings. As an example, the ICR,
para 46, mentions that this department issued timely and accurate warnings to prepare for two extreme
weather events, the cyclonic storm ‘Burevi’ in December 2020 and Amphan super cyclonic storm in May
2020, resulting in the timely evacuation of 75,000 people and minimizing death to only eight people despite
the severity of the storm. The Bank task team explained to IEG that the 2016 floods caused by a similarly
severe storm combined with monsoon rains caused 201 deaths. According to them, the forecasting software
and capacity building that the project provided to the Department of Meteorology helped them to adequately
and timely forecast the storms and assisted in warning people to evacuate, hence at least partially
contributed to the reduced number of deaths in more recent storms.

The ICR, para 45 mentions that district secretaries worked with road agencies at different levels and
divisional secretaries to restore and rehabilitate the damaged infrastructure after the 2017 floods. According
to the ICR, para 45, this collaboration enhanced the capacity of the district secretariats to prepare designs,
cost estimates, tendering, and contract supervision and prepared them for future rehabilitation/restoration of
similar infrastructure in a post-disaster situation.

During project implementation, the capacity to respond effectively to disasters was enhanced through the
contingent emergency financing, which the government triggered after the May 2017 floods. However, the
activation of the contingent emergency financing was slow because of delays in finalizing the priority
investment list and designing the implementation arrangements, with the civil works tendered by September
15, 2018 (2018 PP, page 5). The Bank task team mentioned that this project taught them and the government
how to trigger the contingent emergency financing in projects, and they managed to use them very quickly for
Covid19 in 2020. The team also pointed out to IEG that even if the availability of the financing under this
project stopped with its completion, the ongoing Climate Resilience Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach and
all other Bank projects in Sri Lanka include contingent emergency financing.

Finally, the Bank task team pointed out to IEG that the preparation of the basin investment plans and the
other capacity strengthening activities helped the government to switch from a disaster risk management
approach focused on response to one based on prevention, which constitutes a new way of operating in Sri
Lanka.

In summary, it is likely that the project strengthened the government's capacity to effectively respond to
disasters through learning by doing, training activities and exposure to good practices, software and tools,
and the contingent emergency financing. Therefore, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is
rated substantial.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The planned project investments were successfully implemented, and it is likely that the project reduced the
                            vulnerability of exposed people and assets to climate risks and strengthened the recipient's capacity to
                            respond effectively to disasters. Therefore, the project's overall efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis:

   At appraisal, the project carried out cost benefit analyses for the three main subcomponents of component 2,
   amounting to 82 percent of the total project costs. The analyses use a discount rate of 12 percent and a time
   period of operation of 20 years. The project carried out a Monte Carlo simulation analysis to account for the
   uncertainty in determining the return period of floods, droughts, landslide events, and the vulnerability of
   physical structures and crops damage.

   The analyses showed economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) of 30.4 percent, 16.0 percent, 18.9 percent and
   net present values (NPVs) of US$44.6 million, US$10.1 million, and US$2.7 million for the flood and drought risk
   mitigation, transport connectivity, and school protection subcomponents. For the project as a whole, the EIRR
   was estimated to be 22.7 percent and NPV of about US$57 million.

   At the approval of the AF, the project did not repeat the economic analysis for the transport connectivity
   subcomponent. Instead, the AF PP, page 13, mentions that "given that the new investments proposed under this
   AF are very similar to those in the parent project, it is unlikely that the EIRR with the new investments will
   be significantly different from the original project." The project carried out an economic analysis of the flood
   mitigation subcomponent, including the cost overrun of US$5 million. This resulted in an EIRR of 27 percent.

   At completion, the project performed cost benefit analyses for the three main subcomponents under
   component 2, amounting to 85 percent of the total project costs. They followed the method and assumptions of
   the economic analyses done at appraisal but used actual data, for instance on costs and the duration of the
   construction, and discount rates of 12 and 6 percent. Because Covid19-related travel restrictions, the team was

                                                                                                                            Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



not able to collect other types of data and relied on data from government departments and extrapolations. This
does not seem to jeopardize the reliability of the analyses.

The analyses showed EIRRs of 16.9 percent, 22.6 percent, 14.8 percent and NPVs of US$22.9 million,
US$33.3 million, and US$0.8 million for the flood and drought risk mitigation, transport connectivity, and school
protection subcomponents. For the project as a whole, the EIRR was estimated to be 18.8 percent, the NPV in
the range of US$64–206 million, and the benefits costs ratio in the range of 1.7–2.8. The NPV and BCR ranges
are based on the discount rates of 12 percent and 6 percent. According to the ICR, annex 4, the lower EIRR at
completion is due to the use of actual expenditure and benefits data resulting in less uncertainty in the
modeling.

Cost Effectiveness, Administrative and Operational Efficiency:

This project had a 23-month implementation delay for the reasons pointed out in Section 2. The project received
an AF partially to cover a cost overrun related to the flood risk mitigation investments. The AF PP, pages 10 and
14, explains that the initial cost figures for the flood risk mitigation investments were based on the conceptual
designs during project preparation and, after the completion of detailed designs and cost estimates for nearly 80
percent of the planned investments, the government found that the actual costs exceeded the
initial estimates by 8 to 10 percent. However, the project mostly achieved or exceeded its revised output targets,
and the final project cost was 8 percent lower than the AF cost estimate for the reason given in Section 2.

Because of the implementation delays, even if partially beyond the project's control, the cost overrun in the flood
risk mitigation component, and a 17 percent lower estimated project completion EIRR than the EIRR
estimated at appraisal, the efficiency of project implementation is rated modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      82.00
 Appraisal                                                  22.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      85.00
 ICR Estimate                                               18.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




The project's relevance of objectives is rated high, its efficacy is rated substantial, and its efficiency is rated
modest. Consequently, the project's overall outcome is rated moderately satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:

      Financial and capacity risk: The most significant and likely risk to the development outcomes is
       related to insufficient resources and capacity to maintain the flood, drought, and landslide mitigation
       investments. The ICR, para 118, points out that despite O&M-related measures, such as the
       maintenance manual for slope protection, field visits before project closure showed maintenance
       shortcomings due to insufficient budget and lack of local capacity to translate manual's procedures
       into action. This risk is most acute for the slope stabilization measures at schools, handed over to the
       provincial entities after their completion. For the road sector, this risk is somewhat mitigated by setting
       up a dedicated unit in the road agency for slope stabilization of its major highways, which can use the
       agency's annual budget. To ensure the sustainability of the Department of Meteorology's monitoring
       and extreme weather forecasting and warning, the renewal fee for the European Center for Medium
       Range Weather Forecasting license was included in its recurrent annual budget (ICR, para 46).
      Government ownership/commitment: This risk is low and not very likely to occur because the
       government recognized the importance of disaster risk management and the project managed to
       initiate a shift from disaster response to preparedness. The preparatory works to implement some of
       the basin investments prepared under the project are being implemented in the ongoing Climate
       Resilience Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach project. In addition, as explained by the Bank task
       team to IEG, the government has been approaching other donors to implement these investments
       (e.g. ADB). All preparatory work is also available on the ministries websites for investors to make
       proposals. A water supply Bank project is also under preparation, which is likely to finance some of
       the investments. In addition, because the basin investment plans are long term plans and the
       government has the capacity to update them, there is a low risk that they become outdated and
       irrelevant even if in the light of Covid19 and the difficult economic situation, immediate government
       resources to implement the investments might be limited.
      Political risk: The Bank task team explained to IEG that there is a high likelihood that political
       changes will take place in Sri Lanka. However, this is unlikely to influence the project development
       outcomes because the staff trained under the project is unlikely to be affected by political changes.
       However, political changes might have an impact on salary increases and some of the trained staff
       might leave for better jobs.
      Exposure to natural disasters: The Bank task team mentioned to IEG that Sri Lanka is highly
       exposed to natural disasters, but the infrastructure constructed under the project was designed to
       take future rainfall and flood risks into account. Therefore, it is unlikely that these structures would be
       destroyed because of ordinary weather events. However, there is still a risk to development outcomes
       due to severe and rare weather events.


                                                                                                         Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank task team intervened in areas highly relevant for Sri Lanka. The task team benefited from the
  previous Bank engagement to address climate-induced disaster risks in Sri Lanka, on which they built
  and expanded. According to the ICR, para 10, this led to a holistic long-term investment project that
  combined the knowledge to understand the risks and vulnerability of selected river basins with ‘no regret’
  immediate risk mitigation interventions. It also laid the foundation for developing a longer-term investment
  plan to mitigate risks and build resilience against climate change and extreme weather-induced disasters.

  The Bank task team integrated the lessons from similar Bank operations in the region, which included the
  need for an integrated flood and drought management system, coordination and cooperation among
  ministries, easily and readily available data on floods and droughts, and learning by doing and capacity
  building (PAD, paras 39 to 42). The task team included in the project design structural and nonstructural
  elements. Being this a multi-sectoral project, the design was complex by nature, including many activities,
  various IAs and beneficiaries, and a large geographical spread. The implementation arrangements were
  adequate for this type of project.

  The Bank task team paid adequate attention to the social, environmental, and fiduciary aspects during
  preparation.

  The Bank task team rated the overall project risk as moderate and mainly flagged risks related to a
  change from a siloed to a multi-sectoral approach to climate risk management, implementation
  challenges and delays, the multisector nature of the project, and the short implementation period (PAD,
  paras 53 to 56). With the exception of a risk related to the technical complexity of the basin investment
  plans, the risk identification was adequate. The mitigation measures were not fully adequate, and
  especially project delays occurred. The M&E framework had shortcomings (see Section 9).

  The Bank task team largely adequately supported project preparation and appraisal, but the project
  design had minor shortcoming in risk mitigation and M&E. On balance, the project's quality at entry is
  rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank task team brought strong disaster risk management, country, and international experience. The
 team mentioned to IEG that for transport and irrigation investments, they were supported by a roads
 engineer specializing in landslides and an irrigation engineer. The team carried out eight
 formal implementation support missions, which for a project of a duration of six and a half years is on the
 short side, even considering that because of the Covid19 pandemic, since March 2020, the team had to

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



 carry out project monitoring, supervision support, and the closing activities virtually. The team provided
 adequate support to fiduciary and safeguards policy implementation.

 The Bank task team provided strong implementation support to the Ministry of Irrigation, the PMU, and
 other IAs to facilitate timely completion of activities, restructured the project, reallocated resources, and
 ensured communication in the project (ICR, para 111). The Bank task team helped overcome project
 implementation challenges. The team fostered strong government ownership and facilitated
 coordination. The team reviewed the deliverables of component 1 and provided
 recommendations. The team provided technical advice and quality assurance during field visits in the
 design and construction of the investments in component 2. The government appreciated the dedicated
 support of Bank staff to this project (ICR, annex 5).

 During Covid19, the Bank task team adopted innovative tools for remote monitoring and reporting (ICR,
 para 104) and final project evaluation, including the use of photos. This worked largely adequately.

 Areas for improvement for the Bank task team in supervision include a more adequate correction of M&E
 shortcomings and greater attention to sustainability.

 In summary, the Bank task team adequately supported the implementation of this complex project with
 minor shortcomings. Consequently, Bank performance in supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the PAD, para 45, the PMU was to be responsible for project monitoring with the assistance
 from independent monitoring and evaluation consultants.

 The project's PDO and theory of change were clear. The project activities were to logically lead to the
 expected outputs, intermediate outcomes, final outcomes, and impacts. The PAD also explained the
 meaning of climate risk.

 The original and revised PDO indicators were outcome-oriented and adequate to measure the objective 1
 of reducing vulnerability of exposed people and assets to climate risks. The indicator revision took place to
 enhance clarity and facilitate results measurement.

 However, objective 2 of improving the recipient's capacity to respond effectively to disasters was measured
 by a single output-based indicator "development of basin investment plans that are based on an integrated



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



 understanding of climate risk". This was inadequate to capture the objective's achievement, and the Bank
 task team, in the ICR and during the meeting with IEG, provided additional evidence.

 The project had shortcoming in target setting. The Bank task team pointed out to IEG that the substantial
 overachievements on some of the irrigation infrastructure-related targets and the underachievement on
 others was because at appraisal the exact needs on the ground were not clear and hence not adequately
 reflected in the targets. Baseline data for some irrigation investments and bridges were also unavailable at
 appraisal. In addition, some indicators were not clearly defined, and the M&E framework lacked information
 on measurement methodologies. For instance, it was not clear how the indicator of "decrease in expected
 annual flood loss from 5 years return period to 25 years" was to be measured.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR, para 98, points out that the PMU was adequately staffed with a full-time M&E specialist to
  support data collections and progress reporting, and track the progress of 800 subprojects spread over a
  large geographic area. This enabled capturing project performance shortcomings and take corrective
  actions. However, the absence of a dedicated M&E staff in the IAs to collect and compile monitoring data
  was an implementation challenge. Some IAs did not finalize their subproject completion reports. The
  project also had delays in submitting the data and information required for the ICR, which were resolved
  through virtual meetings with the field staff of IAs. Overall reporting on project progress and results,
  however, was adequate.

  The project had a citizen engagement assessment study conducted by an independent consultant (ICR,
  annex 1).

  The results indicators and targets were restructured several times. The restructurings of the results
  framework, however, failed to specify all necessary measuring methodologies and adjust some of the
  output targets.



c. M&E Utilization
  With respect to M&E utilization, the ICR, para 102, mentions that Bank’s implementation supervision
  missions benefited immensely from progress reports to track and address physical and financial
  progress and implementation issues. The aide memoires used the M&E data and the progress reports to
  inform implementation progress, identify issues, suggest remedial actions, and take decisions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



  The project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. The project triggered
  the following safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment OP/BP4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04,
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The Safety of Dams
  OP/BP 4.37 policy was retroactively triggered with the AF because of the risk associated with possible
  failure of upstream dams and potential impacts on infrastructure works.

  Overall, the ICR, para 115, points out that no major negative social or environmental impacts were identified
  during project implementation. More specifically, in terms of environmental safeguards, the project
  provided several training programs for the PMU and the IAs, and environmental staff continuously
  supported these entities. The project was in compliance with the environmental safeguards policy. It
  adhered to its environmental assessment management framework, implemented environmental and social
  management plans, and ensured diligent monitoring. The project reported no major environmental
  safeguards compliance issues. The PMU and the contractors, with the Bank's guidance, rectified minor
  environment management shortcomings. The Bank task team pointed out that examples of such
  shortcomings included inadequately closing off work sites from traffic, not always using personal protective
  equipment even if it was provided, dust, and noise.

  The project complied with the Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 safeguards policy. The ICR does
  not report on the necessity to invoke the Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 and Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37
  safeguards policies and its compliance. The rating for these two policies in the operational portal
  was satisfactory.

  With respect to social safeguards, the project complied with the Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12.
  The project promptly identified and addressed temporary impacts from civil works and ensured that they
  were in line with the social impact mitigation plan, including the abbreviated resettlement action plan
  preparation and compensation of the project-affected people. The ICR does not provide details on the
  nature of resettlement impacts and the number of affected people. The project followed the
  Bank’s occupational health and safety procedures in civil works. In addition, the project established and
  maintained operational a project-specific grievance redressal mechanism throughout implementation. The
  project received and resolved 174 grievances.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  As for procurement, the ICR, para 107, points out that, overall, the PMU satisfactorily complied with the
  procurement rules and procedures. The project had one miss-procurement related to a mesh for
  landslides, which was successfully revolved. Because of the large number of procurement processes
  (881), the PMU would have benefitted from additional procurement specialists.

  The project's financial management performance was satisfactory. The project complied with the financial
  management related loan covenants and submitted the interim financial reports and audited financial
  statements timely and adequately in contents. The project adequately accounted for and documented all
  transactions. The ICR did not specifically mention if the financial audit reports had unqualified opinions.




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                Because of the moderate
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Modest                     shortcomings in M&E design
                                                                                and implementation.
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons have been derived and summarized from the ICR, with minor additions by IEG
after discussions with the Bank task team:

The production of communication and learning materials as integral part of the development
of complex technical modelling tools for disaster risk management may help in the
understanding and uptake of the highly technical modelling outputs. This
project developed complex and often interlinked models necessary to implement the basin
investment plans jointly with comprehensive communication and learning materials. These included,
for instance manuals, specialist training, and guidance on how to use and update databases. These
materials aimed at simplifying the understanding around these complex tools and ensuring that they
are used in decision making by a wider audience who would benefit from the outputs.

Inadequate attention to capacity building of institutions in charge of post-project
management of investments and not involved in project implementation can endanger
the sustainability of project outcomes. In this project, for instance, the school landslide mitigation
measures were carried out by National Building Research Organization and then handed over to the
provincial education departments, which is responsible for school infrastructure. The education
departments were not involved in project implementation and only received a maintenance
manual for slope protection, but no training to provide adequate maintenance. According to what the
Bank task team mentioned to IEG, initially this was because they were not IAs and later also
because Covid19 did not allow to carry out training activities. This resulted in inadequate
maintenance of the new infrastructure.

Insufficient attention to weather events in civil works contract conditions and implementation
might cause project delays and cost increases. The project did not adequately adopt and strictly
enforce climate risk-informed work planning because it did not sufficiently factor in rainfall

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



seasonality and water issuance in civil work implementation. This interrupted the civil works several
times a year, causing implementation delays.

The absence of technical experts to procure and supervise the high-value and technically
complex basin investment plans contracts from the beginning may cause project
implementation delays. This project insufficiently factored in the need for adequate technical
capacity from the outset to procure and manage the high-value and technically complex basin
investment plan contracts. The technical capacity required to prepare terms of reference and bidding
documents, evaluate proposals for such contracts required experienced procurement specialists,
PMU staff, and technical evaluation committee members, which initially did not exist. In addition, the
project initially also did not have sufficient capacity in the PMU to manage this complex work and
ensure quality control. All this caused delays in project implementation.

Having a central PMU with experienced staff to take care of Bank requirements and support
multiple IAs in a multisector project may enhance coordination and facilitate smooth project
implementation. The implementation arrangements of this project included a central PMU with a
project director and fiduciary, safeguards, and M&E staff and different IAs with deputy project
directors. The PMU worked together with the staff in the respective IAs. While coordination among
the different IAs, as in all multisector projects, was challenging, this arrangement helped overcome
the challenges and ensured efficient coordination, ownership, and smooth project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and consistent. It contains a very detailed description of the project
context, implementation, and achievements, especially in terms of project outputs. Although such a complex
multisector project might warrant a somewhat longer ICR than recommended, the ICR includes sections that
could have been shortened, such as the comprehensive summary of the country background or the detailed
presentation of outputs in the efficacy section.

The theory of change was logically presented. Even if the efficacy section contains a lot of information on
outputs, overall, the ICR is results oriented. It adequately reports on the achievement of the targets and
provides additional information on project impacts. This additional evidence, however, was not always precise.
For instance, for the Hakwatuna Oya irrigation scheme in Kurunegala, the ICR, para 37, points out that the
avoided flood and drought crop loss per ha was LKR 62,123, but it does not mention which years were
compared and how it was calculated. It did also not put this example in perspective, i.e. it did not mention what
magnitude this scheme represented with respect to the overall irrigation component. Another example is the
comparison of the impact of more recent storms with past ones to evidence the enhanced capacity. This was
done without providing information on the impact of the past storms. The Bank task team in the discussions
with IEG remedied these shortcomings.



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)



Some additional evidence was not complete and hence not adequate. For instance, to show that the project
had reduced the risk of climate related transport interruptions, the ICR mentions that the Uva road agency
spent LKR 19.75 million per year on average on road blockage clearance before the project and that this
amount was reduced following the project. It does not mention which years the before project cost figure refers
to nor the post project expenditures. The Bank task team in the interviews with IEG did also not know the post
project expenditures, this evidence was not used in this ICRR.

The lessons are important and based on evidence, but they are more formulated as findings or forward looking
recommendations than lessons. The ICR is consistent with the guidelines.

The ICR does not provide details on the nature of resettlement impacts and the number of affected people. The
ICR does not discuss the implementation of OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats and OP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
safeguards policies.

On balance, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 22
