     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022817

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P143382                                     IN: TN Puducherry DRR

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52790                                   31-Jul-2018                                        163,449,394.04

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jun-2013                                 30-Jun-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           236,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            173,255,783.43                                               0.00

 Actual                                        163,449,394.04                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Elisabeth Goller            Vibecke Dixon                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement and in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) is "to increase the resilience of coastal communities in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry to a
   range of hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards along with improving project implementing entities'
   capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency."

   In this review, the PDO is assessed in two parts, namely "to increase the resilience of coastal communities in
   Tamil Nadu and Puducherry to a range of hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards" and "to improve

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



   project implementing entities' capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency".
   These two separate parts of the PDO are referred to as Objectives 1 and 2 in Section 4 below. This is in line
   with the approach used in the ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had the following five components:

   Component 1: Vulnerability Reduction (cost at appraisal: US$224.6 million, including contingencies; at
   project close: US$150.3 million). It included the following three subcomponents:

   Subcomponent 1.1 Resilient Housing, for Tamil Nadu, to complete the construction of about 14,400 multi-
   hazard resilient permanent houses in 11 coastal districts started in the Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction
   Project (ETRP). The component was also to provide relocation benefits during the period of house
   reconstruction and a 10-year house insurance against natural hazards. For Puducherry, it was to complete
   the building of about 1,450 owner-built multi-hazard resilient permanent houses and 300 houses built
   through a contractor under the ETRP and to rebuild about 1,000 new multi-hazard resilient houses to
   replace the thatched/temporary roof houses in vulnerable areas.

   Subcomponent 1.2 Evacuation Shelters, Routes and Early Warning Systems, for Tamil Nadu,
   to construct about 120 multipurpose evacuation shelters, install about 440 early warning systems, and
   lay out evacuation routes with signage. For Puducherry, subcomponent 1.2 Restoration of Government
   Buildings, Bridges and Culverts, was to strengthen and rehabilitate existing public infrastructure, such as
   the Town Hall, other similar public buildings, and old existing bridges, and to rebuild culverts. These works
   were to make the existing infrastructure multi-hazard resilient and help restore the heritage of Puducherry.

   Subcomponent 1.3 Cyclone Resilient Electrical Network, for Tamil Nadu, to lay the underground electrical
   network in Cuddalore (high tension (HT) - 162 km; low tension (LT) - 512 km) and Nagapattinam (HT - 250
   km; LT - 60 km) towns and, for Puducherry, to replace overhead lines with underground cables (900 km) to
   reduce power losses and the time for restore the service.

   Component 2: Sustainable Fisheries (cost at appraisal: US$82.0 million, including contingencies; at project
   close: US$60.2 million). It included the following two subcomponents:

   Subcomponent 2.1 Fishing Infrastructure, for Tamil Nadu, to reconstruct and modernize a fishing harbor
   and create permanent stability for coastal inlets to improve fishing communities’ access to the sea and, for
   Puducherry, to complete the provision of fishers work shelters and modernize fishing harbors and fish
   markets started under the ETRP.

   Subcomponent 2.2 Fisheries Management for Sustainable Livelihood II, for Tamil Nadu, to implement local
   reform processes to support improved performance in the marine fisheries sub-sector aimed at more

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



  sustainable flows of social and economic benefits to coastal fisheries communities and a healthy marine
  environment, provide a wireless communication system for the safety of fishers at sea, and establish
  linkages with the Global Environment Facility's Bank-implemented Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction,
  Bank-led Global Partnership for Oceans Program, and the Food and Agricultural Organization's Technical
  Cooperation Program and coordination and governance mechanisms to provide technical support
  to implement the activities to the Fisheries Department's project implementation unit (PIU). For Puducherry,
  it was to finance activities complementary to and coordinated with Tamil Nadu.

  Component 3: Capacity Building in Disaster Risk Management (DRM) (cost at appraisal: US$12.4 million,
  including contingencies; at project close: US$4.4 million). In Tamil Nadu, it aimed at strengthening the
  capacity of government institutions, civil society, the school education system, and coastal communities
  through the four subcomponents to (i) strengthen the State Disaster Management Authority, (ii) strengthen
  the Community Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) program, (iii) develop the curricula on disaster
  risk reduction for schools and training institutions, (iv) complete the preparation of the Integrated Costal
  Zone Management (ICZM) plan, train stakeholder on coastal zone management, and erect high tide line
  pillars across all 13 coastal districts. For Puducherry, it included (v) expanding and integrating the
  emergency operation center with a decision support system for disaster response planning, (vi)
  strengthening the capacity of the Fire Service with modern equipment and training, and (vii) supporting
  a CBDRM program. In addition, (viii) development of maps demarcating the high tide line was also to be
  undertaken.

  Component 4: Implementation Support (cost at appraisal: US$18.2 million, including contingencies; at
  project close: US$18.7). For Tamil Nadu, it was to finance incremental operating costs, operating costs of
  the Project Management Unit (PMU) and the PIUs in the line departments, and consultancies required for
  the preparation and supervision of specific activities, trainings, exposure visits and knowledge exchange
  programs. For Puducherry, it was to finance the operating cost of the Project Implementation Agency, the
  department-level PIU, and for external consultancies required to prepare and supervise specific activities,
  including training, exposure visits, and knowledge exchange programs.

  Component 5 - Contingent Emergency Financing for both Tamil Nadu and Puducherry (cost at
  appraisal: US$0 million; at project close: US$0 million). This was a zero-cost component to enable
  the government authorities to request to the Bank to re-allocate project funds to respond to an eligible
  emergency situation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost:

  The actual total project cost was US$233.5 million, which is 69 percent of the appraisal cost estimate of
  US$337.2 million (ICR, Annex 3). The significant lower project cost is due to saving mainly under the
  resilient housing construction subcomponent, which according to the Bank task team came from more
  efficient designs and lower bid prices. The Bank task team, in the same discussion on January 5, 2022
  (note: all references to discussions between the Bank task team and IEG in this ICRR refer to this date),
  also mentioned to IEG that the cost saving under the underground electricity cabling subcomponent and the
  fisheries component were due to lower bid prices and a reduced project scope.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



Financing:

The Bank was expected to contribute US$236.0 million to the cost of the project through an IDA credit. The
Bank disbursed US$163.4 million, which is 69 percent of the credit amount.

Borrower Contribution:

The expected borrower contribution at appraisal was US$101.2 million. The actual contribution was
US$70.0 million, which is 69 percent of the appraisal estimate.

Dates and Project Restructuring:

The project was approved on June 20, 2013, became effective on January 29, 2014, and was expected to
close on July 31, 2018. The closing date was extended twice, in July 2018 for 20 months, and in March
2020, for three months. The actual closing date was June 30, 2020. The 2018 extension was necessary to
provide the recipient with more time to implement the project activities, especially the underground cable
installation and the early warning system, which were delayed due to contract award and work
implementation delays (Restructuring Paper (RP), page 3) caused by lack of experience of some project
implementation agencies, delays in finding sites for evaluation shelters, and frequent natural disasters,
which took away the attention of the implementation staff from the project (ICR, paras 74 to 76). The 2020
extension was necessary to enable the recipient to request a project restructuring to use the undisbursed
funds and determine the priorities to support the COVID-19 response (RP, page 4).

On June 30, 2020, the last day of credit effectiveness, the project was restructured to (i) reallocate IDA
funds from Component 1 to the Contingent Emergency Financing Component 5 to support COVID-19
response efforts, (ii) change the IDA financing percentage from 70 percent to 100 percent to retroactively
cover project expenditures from the credit signing date, (iii) include Tamil Nadu Medical Services
Corporation Limited as an additional implementing agency and PIU for COVID-19-related activities to be
financed under Component 5 in Tamil Nadu, (iv) cancel SDR9.52 million of the IDA credit, which were not
expected to be used, and (v) change the results framework to adapt it to the reality on the ground.

The changes to the results framework included a slight revision of the following two intermediate results
indicators: "Number of villages covered in CBDRM program" was changed to "Number of habitations
covered in CBDRM program" and the respective target was increased from 150 to 560, and "Establishment
of a Centre for Disaster Management" was changed to "Establishment of a Centre for Disaster Management
(Tamil Nadu)". They also included (i) adding two new intermediate results indicators, i.e. "Roads
rehabilitated, rural" and "Sub-projects with post-project community engagement or O&M arrangements,
including Sub-projects that are expected to have a mechanism for post-completion operation" and (ii)
adjusting all indicator targets to the closing date of June 30, 2020. Finally, the results framework change
included an increase of the end target of the intermediate results indicator "Number of early warning
systems installed" from 439 to 450 units and reduced the end targets of the two intermediate results
indicators "Evacuation Routes laid" from 44 to 41 km and "Number of resilient houses reconstructed" from
16,000 to 14,649 units. Because two of these changed targets form the numerator for the PDO
indicators "Percentage of coastal population covered by the early warning systems" and "Percentage of
households with Quality certified multi-hazard resilient houses", the results framework change increased the
level of ambition of the indicator "Percentage of coastal population covered by the early warning systems"
by 3 percent and decreased the level of ambition of the "Number of resilient houses reconstructed" by 8
percent.


                                                                                               Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



   The Bank task team explained to IEG that at the June 2020 restructuring, the Bank decided not to extend
   the project closing date and that the government did not complete the restructuring, therefore the project did
   not finance the COVID-19 response (ICR, para 21).

   Split rating: Despite the minor lowering of the level of ambition for one PDO indicator, no split rating is
   applied and the project is assessed based on the original targets because the indicator target revision took
   place on the last day of the credit validity, so an assessment against the revised target would make no
   practical difference.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At appraisal in 2013, India was highly vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly
earthquakes, floods, droughts, cyclones, and landslides. Studies indicated that natural disaster losses
equated up to 2 percent of India's gross domestic product. Tamil Nadu was the seventh most populous
state in India with a total population of 72 million, 50 percent of which lived in costal districts. The various
economic activities along the coast, including fishing, agriculture, tourism, shipping, and industry,
were important drivers of the overall state economy. Similarly to Tamil Nadu, about two-thirds of
the population in the districts of Puducherry and Karaikal, which make up 76 percent of the total population
of the Union Territory of Puducherry, lived in densely packed urban settlements along the coast and
obtained their revenues from fisheries, agriculture, tourism, and the service sectors. The coastal
populations and economic assets of these states were prone to multiple hazards, including high
frequency and intensity of cyclones, storm surges, coastal floods and tsunamis. These events not only
caused human death but also economic damage from loss of livestock, fisheries, crops, and houses. Both
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry had established mechanisms to respond to disasters for immediate relief and
long-term reconstruction but lacked disaster risk mitigation and preparedness to reduce the overall impact
of disasters. With climate change and variability becoming worse, at project close, the proneness to hydro-
meteorological and geophysical hazards continued and likely increased.

Previous Sector Experience. At appraisal, the Bank had been assisting India in effectively responding
to disasters for over a decade (PAD, para 4). In the aftermath of the Indian Ocean Tsunami of December
26, 2004, the Bank approved the India - Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project for Tamil Nadu
and the United Territory of Puducherry. The objective of this project was to revive livelihoods and
promote recovery in Tsunami affected areas. It mainly focused at the reconstruction of houses, and through
a restructuring, the project included a vulnerability reduction of coastal communities component. This was
the first major risk reduction initiative in the region. The Bank had also supported the Fisheries
Management for Sustainable Livelihoods technical assistance project that developed a policy framework,
vision, strategy, and institutional capacity in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry for more effective management of
marine fisheries.



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



               Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with India' commitment to DRM
               and its DRM framework already in place, consisting of the 2005 Disaster Management Act, the National
               Disaster Management Authority, and the State Disaster Management Authorities. The National Disaster
               Management Authority had been active in formulating guidelines and procedures for dealing with specific
               natural disasters and was mandated to issue policies, plans, and guidelines for DRM.

               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the second pillar
               "Ensuring Development is Sustainable" of the Bank’s FY09-FY12 India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS),
               which stated that the "World Bank Group's assistance would help reduce the burden that environmental
               degradation imposes on the population, particularly vulnerable groups" and "increase the resilience of
               people and the economy to nature-related and man-made shocks." It aimed at "supporting India's
               comprehensive efforts to reduce the country's vulnerability to floods, cyclones, earthquakes and other
               natural perils." The PDO was also in line the Bank's FY12-15 CPS for India, which under the "Inclusion
               objective" aimed at assisting in promoting human development and strengthen social programs that support
               more inclusive growth with emphasis on enhanced coastal DRM systems. At completion, the PDO
               remained in line with Bank's FY18-FY22 Country Partnership Framework for India. It directly
               contributes to Objective 1.5 Improve Disaster Risk Management under the focus area of “promoting
               resource-efficient growth and poverty reduction.”

               The PDO, however, did not fully adequately reflect the fisheries-related project activities and outcomes.
               According to the PAD, para 18, these activities aimed at enabling "a local reform process, which was
               to ensure an improved performance in the marine fisheries sector, characterized by a sustainable flow of
               social and economic benefits to coastal fisheries communities and a healthy marine environment".
               Therefore, even if the Bank task team explained to IEG that (i) the fisheries infrastructure under the project
               was built to higher resilience standards adequate for coastal areas, (ii) the communication system for
               fishermen at sea is also used to warn them about natural disasters, and (iii) enhanced livelihood for
               fishermen due to sustainable fishing will enable them to better resist the negative economic consequences
               of a natural disaster, the activities under the fisheries component did not directly aim
               at enhancing resilience to hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards. The PDO statement could have
               been improved by referring to resilience in more generic terms. However, even in such a case, clarity in
               concepts would have been desirable. The PDO was also not clear with respect to the meaning of "capacity
               of project implementation entities" because capacity strengthening activities largely covered communities,
               teachers, students, and various government institutions.

               On balance, the relevance of objectives is rated substantial. This rating reflects the PDO's high
               relevance in the country context and the full alignment with Bank priorities, on the one hand, and a PDO
               statement that does not adequately reflect key project activities and outcomes, on the other hand.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To increase the resilience of coastal communities in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry to a range of hydro-
meteorological and geophysical hazards

For the purpose of this validation, hydro-meteorological hazards are understood as hazards caused by
extreme meteorological and climate events, such as floods, droughts, hurricanes, tornadoes, or landslides,
and geophysical hazards are understood as hazards caused by geological or geomorphological processed,
such as earthquakes, volcano eruptions, tsunamis, or landslides.

Rationale
The theory of change for Objective 1 was that the activities to construct multi-hazard resilient houses
and multi-purpose evacuation shelters and routes, install multi-hazard underground electricity networks and
early disaster warning systems, resiliently reconstruct public buildings, reconstruct culverts and bridges,
provide fishermen with a wireless communication systems, and resiliently construct or upgrade fishery
infrastructure would have as outputs more resilient infrastructure, early warning systems for disasters, and
evacuation routes and shelters. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to greater resilience of coastal
communities in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry to a range of hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards. In
the longer run, it was expected to lead to reduced losses of human lives and economic assets from natural
disasters in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry (PAD, paras 5, 19, and 21 to 37). The main assumptions were
that (i) local contractors had the capacity to design and construct the resilient infrastructure, (ii) the
infrastructure would be regularly maintained, (iii) the early warning system would be functional and operated
properly, and (iv) the project beneficiaries would trust the information systems and act upon the warnings in a
timely manner (ICR, para 5).

Outputs:

The project produced the following outputs captured by indicators in the results framework:

      15,534 multi-hazard resilient houses constructed in 11 coastal districts (Tamil Nadu: 14,347,
       Puducherry: 1,187), nearly achieving the target 16,000;
      2,022 km of underground electricity network installed, exceeding the target of 1,850 km. The project
       not only installed the underground cabling but also connected 91 percent of the planned 39,204
       households and establishments to it (this was not an indicator in the results framework). The ICR,
       footnote 48, points out that once COVID-19 lockdown restrictions are removed rapid progress is
       expected to be achieved, and all service connections will be charged.
      121 multi-purpose evacuation shelters constructed in vulnerable coastal communities, exactly in line
       with the target. This provided access to shelters for 357 vulnerable coastal areas (this was not an
       indicator in the results framework). The government of Tamil Nadu issued operational guidelines to
       manage and maintain the multi-purpose evacuation shelters, shelter management committees
       were constituted for all shelters, and funds were made available for basic repairs and maintenance;
      41 km of evacuation routes for vulnerable communities to access the evacuation shelters constructed,
       slightly short of the target of 44 km. The Bank task team explained to IEG that 44 km was an estimate
       and that connectivity for evacuations is adequately ensured;
      450 early warning systems installed, exceeding the target of 439;


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)




      Two heritage public buildings affected by and vulnerable to natural disasters and of cultural
         and economic value reconstructed/rehabilitated (one of these buildings was 55 percent complete by
         project end and 90 percent complete in August 2021), not achieving the target of 3;
        Two culverts that provide access to evacuation shelters during an emergency for coastal habitation in
         Puducherry reconstructed and augmented, exactly achieving the target;
        18,555 fishers provided with VHF wireless communication system ensuring safety at sea of
         18,555 fishing boats, significantly exceeding the target of 5,000;
        Seven fisheries information and service centers established that provide weather advisory
         communications to registered fishers every 12 hours, including warnings to fishermen not to venture
         into the sea during cyclones, caution/alerts for them to return to shore, daily communications of
         potential fishing zones to increase fish catch, and serve as electronic service centers for the
         Department of Fisheries; and
        39 fisheries-related infrastructures, such as fish markets, constructed or upgraded, significantly
         exceeding the target of 19. This provided access to improved infrastructure for 49 fishing villages,
         instead of 45 as originally planned (the latter was not an indicator in the results framework). The ICR
         does not refer to the resilience of this infrastructure, but the Bank team pointed out to IEG that it was
         constructed to higher resilience standards adequate for coastal areas. The ICR, para 37, points out
         that new modern facilities, such as the fish market in Puducherry, remain underutilized due to fishing
         communities’ low awareness and/or comfort levels, while the four upgraded existing fish markets are
         extensively utilized and were completed at a fraction of the cost and time.

Other outputs not directly captured in the PDO:

      Four regional fisheries co-management platforms formed and involved in fisheries management plans,
       exactly in line with the target. In addition, co-management committees were also established at the
       state (1), district (13), and village levels (566) in the two project states to foster cooperative and
       equitable management of marine resources;
      35 fishing harbor/landing center management committees established in Tamil Nadu;
      A fisheries resources data set established for knowledge management and decision support in
       fisheries resource management, along with upgrades to the Tamil Nadu Central Fisheries Library and
       a fisheries knowledge center, library, and meta data center in Puducherry; and
      Activities to enhance fisheries-related livelihoods, such as the piloting of 12 fish vending kiosks,
       providing 30 fully subsidized seaweed rafts, demonstrating bivalve farming, distributing 50 percent-
       subsidized outboard engines for small-scale fishermen to go into deeper waters, 25 fully subsidized
       transport vehicles, and 100 50 percent subsidized two wheelers with ice boxes, training fishermen in
       value addition processes, global positioning system mapping, and solar fish drying.

The project did not carry out the following activity, thus did not reach the respective output target:

      Bridges rehabilitated and reconstructed, not reaching the target of 3. The Bank task team clarified with
         e-mail of January 31, 2022 to IEG that this has no negative impact on resilience because the bridges
         continue to operate and if they are assessed as unsafe, the government will carry out the
         rehabilitation.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



The project enhanced the resilience of coastal communities in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry by providing 97
percent of households with quality-certified multi-hazard resilient houses, slightly below the target of 100
percent. In terms of impacts, the ICR, para 31, reports that during Cyclone Gaja in 2018 about 250,000
houses were damaged whereas during Cyclone Thane in 2011 about 450,000 houses were
damaged (both categorized as very severe cyclonic storms, but their wind speeds varied slightly:
Cyclone Thane - 103 mph, Cyclone Gaja - 87 mph). Although no storm is identical and the reduced damage
cannot be unequivocally ascribed to enhanced resilience, it is plausible that the project contributed to it. The
Bank task team also explained to IEG that several cyclones stroke the area after the completion of the
housing subcomponent, and while the Bank-financed houses withstood them without major damage, the
existing houses were mostly destroyed.

The multi-purpose evacuation shelters and the necessary evacuation routes near vulnerable communities
ensure that 100 percent of habitations have access to community managed evacuation shelters, fully
achieving the target. According to the ICR, para 32, the shelter designs deliberately considered the needs of
women and disabled populations while incorporating resilient design features for all with kitchens, gender-
segregated and handicap-accessible toilets and living spaces, overhead water tanks and raised plinths or stilt
floors to address flooding risks, and space for livestock. The total design capacity of the shelters built is
estimated at 115,500 people (ICR, para 32). The shelters in Tamil Nadu were used to evacuate during the
December 2015 floods, the 2017 Ockhi Cyclone, and the 2018 Gaja Cyclone. The ICR, para 33, reports that
this considerably reducing human casualties but did not include any numbers. The Bank task team also
explained to IEG that the death number in more recent cyclones was relatively low compared to the past ones
(again without providing numbers) and that the evacuation process worked very well. Before the project, only
a few evacuation shelters existed, there was no effective functional warning system, and people did often not
evacuate. The evacuation shelters were also used when a village of Kanyakumari experienced an episode of
sea erosion. In nonemergency times, the shelters were regularly used as schools, public health centers, and
venues for community functions like weddings, meetings, and trainings to varying degrees.

The project covered 450 coastal populations with the early warning systems compared to a target of 439,
slightly exceeding the target of 100 percent coverage of the planned costal populations. According to the ICR,
para 34, the system uses resilient design features, such as solar panels with 48-hour battery backup, towers
built to resist wind speeds of up to 250 km/hour, and message transmission capabilities via mobile phone
tower networks in case of ethernet network failures. The system was used by several district collectors, such
as the Collector of Vedaranyam, to alert communities of Cyclone Vardah in December 2016. The Bank task
team pointed out to IEG that the system had been put in use in phases during in the last four year and was
systematically used in all disasters.

The project equipped 18,555 fishers with wireless communication facilities, exceeding the target of 100
percent of the 5,000 planned fishers with such facilities by 237 percent. In terms of impacts, the ICR, para 35,
points out that warnings broadcasted to fishers during Cyclone Gaja in 2018 using this system ensured that
there was no loss of life at sea compared to Cyclone Ockhi, when over 350 fishers died in Tamil Nadu
and Kerala. In addition, para 35 also points out that a beneficiary feedback survey by the Department of
Fisheries indicated that that many fishers’ lives have been saved due to the presence of VHF sets onboard.

Finally, the project provided 2,022 km of underground cabling, covering 109 percent of the planned 1,850 km
of coastal areas with electrical underground cabling and exceeding the target of 100 percent. This cabling is
significantly more resilient to hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards than the electricity lines on the
ground. The Bank task team explained to IEG that with the underground cabling, electricity can be very


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



quickly restored. The team also highlighted that because of the positive experience under the project,
underground cabling has become the national standard in disaster-prone areas.

The project provided households, habitations, coastal populations, and fishers with infrastructure designed for
greater resilience and access to evacuation shelters and early disaster warning systems, fully achieving or
exceeding most of the targets. The evacuation process significantly improved compared to the past. For
resilience enhancement interventions like this, it is almost impossible to provide quantitative data on avoided
damages and loss of life by project end. Nevertheless, the successful achievement of most of the targets and
the comparative data on the impact of disasters before and after the project interventions, make it plausible
that the project led to greater resilience to hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards and fully achieved
this objective. In addition, as pointed out by the Bank task team in the meeting with IEG, more resilient
infrastructure means that people can go back to their normal life more quickly after a disaster because there
is no need to reconstruct houses or other facilities. Based on the above, the efficacy of Objective 1 is
rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve project implementing entities' capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or
Emergency

The PAD, para 14, points out that the project was to (i) focus on capacity building of various government
institutions and vulnerable coastal communities, (ii) the PDO indicators for this objective refer to increased
institutional capacity for risk mitigation and response at the state level, and (iii) component 3 aimed at
capacity strengthening of government institutions, civil society, the school education system and coastal
communities. Therefore, for the purpose of this review, "implementation entities' capacity" is interpreted in
the broader sense of "government institution's, school system's, and vulnerable coastal communities'
capacity".

Rationale
The theory of change for Objective 2 was that the activities to (i) strengthen the State Disaster Management
Authority in Tamil Nadu, (ii) strengthen the CBDRM program, (iii) expand and integrate the emergency
operation centers in Puducherry, (iv) develop the curricula on disaster risk reduction for schools and training
institutions, (v) complete the preparation of the ICZM plan for Tamil Nadu, (vi) erect high tide line pillars and
maps, (vii) train stakeholder on coastal zone management, (viii) provide the Fire Service Department with
equipment and training, and (ix) provide for Contingent Emergency Financing during project implementation
would lead to the outputs of (i) strengthened DRM institutions, (ii) implemented CBDRM programs and
disaster risk reduction curricula in schools and training institutions, (iii) a completed ICZM plan, (iv) high tide
line pillars and maps, (v) trained stakeholders in coastal zone management, (vi) an equipped and trained Fire
Service Department, and (vii) the availability of resources to quickly respond to an eligible crisis or emergency
during project implementation. These outputs were expected to lead to outcomes such as improved
government institution's, school system's, civil society's, and vulnerable coastal communities' capacity to
respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. In the longer run, this was expected to

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



lead to reduced losses of human lives and economic assets from natural disasters in Tamil Nadu and
Puducherry (PAD, paras 5, 19, and 21 to 37). The main assumptions were that (i) project activities were
implemented, (ii) the equipment and tools were used, and (iii) the participants in training activities enhanced
their capacity.

Outputs:

The project produced the following outputs captured by indicators in the results framework:

      CBDRM program completed in 561 coastal villages in Tamil Nadu, exceeding the target of 150
       villages by 374 percent. The CBDRM program included (i) forming Village Disaster Management
       Committees, (ii) conducting risk and vulnerability assessments and preparing village DRM plans, (iii)
       undertaking community mobilization and capacity building activities, such as mock drills and training
       activities, (iv) forming and training Village Disaster Management Teams in early warning, evacuation,
       search and rescue, shelter management, and first aid. Over 400,000 people participated in the
       trainings. The Bank task team mentioned to IEG that this program was incorporated into a state
       program after 2018 and takes place on a yearly basis; and
      5,725 high tide line pillars installed in 11 coastal districts in Tamil Nadu, fully achieving the target. The
       Bank task team explained to IEG that in addition to physically installing the pillars, the tide line is also
       mapped in a GIS system.

The project also produced the following outputs not captured by indicators in the results framework:

      Puducherry Fire Services Department equipped with improved tools, such as aerial ladders and
         rescue kits, and training;
        Comprehensive GIS platform and decision support system "TN-SMART" established. The system
         incorporates dynamic hazard forecasts from the India Meteorological Department, which are used to
         disseminate forecast-based alerts and estimates of potential disaster impacts;
        "TN-SMART" mobile application launched to provide warnings on disaster risks and preparedness
         measures launched. This mobile application did not have the expected uptake because it was not
         user-friendly. By project end, the government was improving it with their own resources to attract more
         users;
        Disaster risk reduction (DRR) curriculum developed for the Tamil Nadu and included in the school
         curricula for all children in grades 6–12 in the state board, reaching about 15 million students in over
         40,000 schools;
        Integrated teacher trainings on DRR developed and integrated into the curricula of the District Institute
         of Education and Training, 403 government-aided teacher training institutes, and the Diploma in
         Education program for Tamil Nadu. Over 3,500 master trainers were trained, who in turn trained
         educators in all government and government-aided schools in Tamil Nadu;
        Availability of IDA credit enabling the relocation of resources to quickly respond to an eligible crisis or
         emergency during project implementation; and
        Based on the discussion of the Bank task team with IEG, completion of the ICZM plan for Tamil Nadu
         and training of stakeholders in coastal zone management.

The project did not carry out following activities as planned, thus did not reach the respective outputs:



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)




      Establishment of a Centre for Disaster Management in Tamil Nadu in line with the target because of
       delays by the recipient in preparing a proposal for this activity and difficulties to find a project site. This
       center was meant to be a critical to operationalize the Tamil Nadu State Disaster Management
       Authority to become the focal agency for DRM activities at the state level. It was to carry out
       knowledge management and communication; research and development with an emphasis on
       decision support systems and early warning; training and capacity-building; and operational support to
       state, district, and local level institutions for disaster response and recovery (ICR, para 44). The Bank
       task team explained to IEG that the activities to be carried out by this Center were adequately taking
       over by the State Disaster Management Authority and there is no need to establish this Center
       anymore; and
      Integration of multiple Emergency Operation Centers in line with the target because of delays by the
       recipient in finalizing a proposal for this activity. These Emergency Operation Centers were meant to
       be strengthened and integrated into one centralized system to facilitate effective coordination and
       communication in emergencies (ICR, para 44). The Bank task team pointed out to IEG that even if this
       activity was not carried out (i) the Emergency Operation Centers are communicating with each
       other, (ii) the comprehensive GIS platform and decision support system "TN-SMART" can already be
       used to access data of the different Centers, and (iii) this system has the potential to ensure the
       planned integration over time.

Outcomes:

The project better prepared a significantly larger amount of coastal villages to respond promptly and
effectively to an emergency through the CBDRM training, exceeding the target by 274 percent. The ICR, para
41, points out that the CBDRM program enabled the coastal communities to increase awareness of and
engagement with the project’s multi-purpose evacuation shelters and emergency warning system and instilled
a sense of ownership of the evacuation shelters through the program’s shelter management
committee activities. For example, a Village Disaster Management Committee in Cuddalore mobilized funding
to install water filters and maintain electricity generators’ batteries for their emergency shelters. The ICR also
argues that because of the project, communities are more knowledgeable about different DRM agencies and
the officials’ roles and responsibilities. This led to the creation of WhatsApp groups for communities to directly
report issues to responsible officers in certain districts. Such groups have also been used as direct lines of
communication in emergency situations. In addition, after the CBDRM program, communities were more
responsive to the early warnings issued by the government compared to past events.

The project also provided the Puducherry Fire Department with improved rescue equipment in line with the
target. According to the ICR, para 42, the specialized equipment and training enabled the Fire Services
Department to respond better in disaster situations since 2016, such as during Cyclone Gaja in 2018,
particularly with the increase in multistory buildings in recent times.

The project had no additional indicators to measure the achievement of objective 2, but the ICR and the Bank
task team provided evidence of the use and impact of several of the project outputs. For instance, the state
and district authorities used the "TN-SMART" system and application during Cyclone Gaja to monitor dynamic
weather forecasts from various sources, identify vulnerable regions, and disseminate warnings to nearly
13,000 registered users in the identified regions. They also used the application to communicate drought,
flooding, and rainfall forecasts in less extreme situations (ICR, para 43). The ICR points out that this
experience inspired the development of similar platforms at both national and state levels.



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



                            The ICR, para 45, mentions that the integration of DRR in the school and training curricula significantly
                            increased awareness about disasters and DRR. The 2020 Review of Results for this project assigned a very
                            high impact-to-cost ratio to creating a culture of better DRM. The Bank task team pointed out to IEG that the
                            inclusion of DRR into the school and training curricula is a sustainable way to ensure awareness and
                            preparedness in youth.

                            The Bank task team also explained to IEG that the high tide line pillars and maps are used by the government
                            authorities for risk-informed development planning.

                            During project implementation, the capacity to respond was enhanced through zero-cost component. Even if
                            the availability of this financing stopped with the completion of the project, according to what the Bank task
                            team mentioned to IEG, the project area has access to the national and state disaster response funds.

                            The project was successful in creating awareness on DRR in a large number of students and vulnerable
                            coastal communities in a sustainable manner. The project also provided community and government
                            institutions with useful tools to respond to an emergency or crisis, and these systems, tools, and applications
                            were being used and further development by projects end. Only two capacity strengthening activities were not
                            carried out as planned but the impact of this omission on improving the response capacity overall can be
                            considered minor. Therefore, it is plausible that this project improved the capacity to respond promptly
                            and effectively to disasters with minor shortcomings, and the efficacy of Objective 2 is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Most project investments were successfully implemented and the project increased the resilience of coastal
                            communities to hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards and strengthened the capacity to quickly
                            respond to an emergency or crisis with minor shortcomings. Therefore, the project's overall
                            efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the project did not carry out detailed cost-benefit analyses for project components and
   subcomponents, but used existing literature to provide benchmark cost-benefit ratios (CBR), except for the


                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



underground electricity network. For the latter, the project carried out a cost-benefit analysis based on avoided
damages. Discount rates and time timeframes used in the analyses are reasonable.

For the multi-hazard-resistant permanent house construction, it was estimated that every US$ spent on concrete
multi-hazard resilient permanent housing yielded US$0.60 in benefits.

For early warning systems, the benefits were estimated to be between 3.7 and 7.3 for every dollar spent. The
average benefit from evacuation routes was estimated to be 4.5 for one US$ spent. The evacuation shelters
were expected to yield US$80 per death averted.

For the sustainable fisheries component, the estimated CBR was estimated to range from 2.2 to 3.5 for every
US$ spent, and the planned US$24 million in community livelihood investments were expected to generate a
financial internal rate of return (IRR) of 10.7 percent and an economic IRR of 20.5 percent.

For the CBDRM program and capacity building, one dollar spent on hazard mitigation, including
public awareness raising and education, were expected to generates US$4 on average in future benefits.

For the ICZM, the project estimated that with a mean estimate of about US$0.4 million/km of coastline, Tamil
Nadu alone was to accrue $430.4 million in benefits every year.

For the underground electricity network, considering a life of 60 years and a discount rate of 10 percent, the
estimated net present value (NPV) was about US$16.85 per pole.

At completion, the project carried out detailed economic analyses for the multi-hazard-resistant permanent
house construction, the evacuation and early warning infrastructure, and the resilient underground electricity
network, and an aggregated analysis for the sustainable fisheries component for the ex-ante and ex-post
situation. This covered 91 percent of the project cost. For these analyses, the methodology was linked to the
methodology used at appraisal by recalculating the economic IRRs and NPVs based on the minimum CBR
benchmarks in the PAD and assuming a five-year project implementation period.

For the resilient underground electricity network, the PAD did not include a CBR. Therefore, the economic
analysis was based on the actual loss of the power company from Cyclone Thane.

For the multi-hazard-resistant permanent house construction, the recalculated appraisal IRR was estimated to
be 4.4 percent, the NPV was estimated to be −US$22.2 million, and the CBR was estimated to be 1:0.6. At
project close, the IRR was estimated to be 10.6 percent, the NPV was estimated to be between US$1.9 and
27.7 million, and the CBR was estimated to be between 1.1 and 1.6 based on 10 percent and 5 percent discount
rates.

For the early warning infrastructure, the recalculated appraisal IRR was estimated to be 30.1 percent, the NPV
was estimated to be US$190.5 million, and the CBR was estimated to be 3.7. At project close, the IRR
was estimated to be 48.3 percent, the NPV was estimated to be between US$238.8 and 463.1 million, and
the BCR was estimated to be between 5.6 and 8.6, using 10 percent and 5 percent discount rates.

For the resilient underground electricity network, the recalculated appraisal IRR was estimated to be
12.1 percent, the NPV was estimated to be US$13.7 million, and the CBR was estimated to be 1.2. At project
close, the IRR was estimated to be 12.6 percent, the NPV was estimated to be between US$4.9–27.6 million,
and the CBR was estimated to be between 1.2 and 1.8, using 10 percent and 5 percent discount rates.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



For the sustainable fisheries component, the recalculated expected appraisal IRR was 20.9 percent, the NPV
was US$88.0 million, and the CBR was 2.2. At project close, the IRR was estimated to be 31.9 percent, the NPV
was estimated to be between US$122.8–256.9 million, and the CBR was estimated to be between 3.7 and 5.8,
using 10 percent and 5 percent discount rates.

In aggregated terms, the recalculated estimated appraisal IRR of the overall project was 17.5 percent, the NPV
was US$71.8 million, and CBR was 2.0. At project close, the estimated IRR of the overall project was 28.5
percent. The NPV was between US$108.8–224.9 million, and the CBR was between 3.2 and 5.0, using 10
percent and 5 percent discount rates. The higher economic efficiency at project completion compared to
the appraisal estimate is due to cost savings.

Cost Effectiveness, Administrative and Operational Efficiency:

This project had a 23-month delay in implementation for the reasons pointed out in Section 2, but the total actual
project cost was significantly below the cost estimated at appraisal. The project achieved 90 percent of the
number of multi-hazard-resistant houses at 67 percent of the costs at appraisal. For the evacuation shelters,
early warning system, and evacuation routes all output targets were achieved at 80 percent of the budgeted
costs at appraisal.

Despite the implementation delays, some of which beyond the project's control, the project's investments were
carried out cost efficiently as shown in the project's significantly higher ex-post IRR than the appraisal estimate.
Therefore, the efficiency of project implementation is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       91.00
 Appraisal                                                   17.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       90.00
 ICR Estimate                                                28.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's relevance of objectives, efficacy, and efficiency are rated substantial. Consequently, the project's
overall outcome is rated satisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:

      Government ownership and commitment. This risk is low. The ICR, para 100, points out that the
       project included several mechanisms to ensure sustainability, including capacity development of
       line departments and relevant state and district agencies for long-term planning and maintenance,
       community ownership and participation schemes, multi-hazard insurance for houses built by the
       project, and financial resources for the governments of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry to budget for
       long-term maintenance through increased fishery revenues. According to a study of the Indian
       Institute of Human Settlements in 2020, these mechanisms increased the sense of
       ownership, delineated clear roles and responsibilities, and allowed for timely maintenance and
       repairs. The ICR also mentions that officials and agencies involved in the project are now scaling up
       similar projects in other areas, such as the underground electricity cabling and the CBDRM activities.
       In addition, the ICR, para 102, mentions that the evacuation shelter maintenance committees play an
       important role in ensuring the maintenance of these shelter. For the restoration of the Mairie Building
       in Puducherry and the underground cabling in Tamil Nadu, the state governments have completed
       the activities using state funds after project closing, which shows ownership. The Bank task team
       mentioned to IEG that although the current maintenance arrangements have shortcomings, the
       project made a significant progress in this respect. Nevertheless, the COVID-19 pandemic might pose
       a risk of diverting state governments’ policy attention towards recovery activities related to the
       pandemic and away from the project activities and its maintenance. The team also clarified that the
       lack of use of certain infrastructure, such as a new fish market or certain evacuation shelters, was a
       problem immediately after the completion of these facilities, but it has been largely overcome later
       through strong outreach and awareness raising.
      Exposure to natural disasters. The development outcomes are at risk from natural disasters. The
       ICR, para, 101, highlights that the project infrastructure was built according to Indian Road Congress
       and Bureau of Indian Standards guidelines and the specifications for multi-hazard resilience based on
       the historical intensity and frequency of natural disasters to date. However, due to climate change,
       the increased frequency and intensity of hydro-meteorological hazards are likely to
       pose unprecedented risks to the structural integrity of physical infrastructure.
      Technical risk. The project financed several systems and a mobile application. These systems, such
       as the early warning system, are functioning correctly, but there is a risk that they get outdated.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank task team intervened in areas highly relevant for Puducherry and Tamil Nadu. The task team
  benefited from experience in the previous Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project, on which they

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



  built. Team leaders and consultants who designed and implemented the predecessor project were
  heavily involved in ensuring that the project continued and augmented unfinished works from the
  previous project (ICR, para 91). According to the PAD (para 4), the project design integrated the lessons
  from the previous project and from disaster events faced by the Puducherry and Tamil Nadu coast, which
  emphasized the need for capacity building of government institutions and vulnerable coastal
  communities.

  The Bank team included in the project design structural and nonstructural elements, both important
  to enhancing the resilience of target populations to natural disasters. They also build in mechanisms to
  ensure the sustainability of investments, such as village maintenance committees for the physical
  infrastructure and revenue co-management systems for fisheries in the region to fund O&M. Being this a
  multi-sectoral project, the design was complex by nature, including a large amount of activities, various
  PIUs and beneficiaries, and a large geographical spread.

  The Bank task team paid adequate attention to the social, environmental, and fiduciary aspects during
  preparation.

  The Bank task team rated the overall project risk as moderate and mainly flagged risks related to
  coordination and weak capacity (PAD, annex 4). The mitigation measures were not fully adequate, and
  the team underestimated the challenges and time required for the new implementing agencies of the
  underground electricity cabling to carry out procurement and implement these activities. The team did
  also not identify the risk that some institutional and capacity strengthening activities would not take place
  as planned.

  The M&E framework had shortcomings (see Section 9), especially because of weak and insufficient PDO
  indicators. In addition, most fisheries-related activities, which amounted to about a fourth of the project
  cost, where not logically linked to the PDO in the results chain and only partially contributed to the
  achievement of the PDO (see section 3). The Bank project team did also not define what they meant by
  "implementing entities' capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency".

  The Bank task team adequately supported project preparation and appraisal, but the project design had
  moderate shortcomings, i.e., in risk identification, M&E and the results chain design. Therefore, the
  project's quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank task team was adequately staffed and included adequate technical and country experience. The
 team carried out the normal regular supervisions at six-month intervals, including field visits. According to
 the ICR, para 96, the team provided hands-on technical advice, for instance, to strengthen the oversight of
 the construction quality of the evacuation shelters.




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



 The Bank task team candidly and thoroughly reported on project problems, such as the resettlement and
 financial reporting issues mentioned in section 10.

 However, the Bank task team did not restructure the project to correct the shortcomings in the results
 framework. In addition, the team only formally revised the results framework on the last day of project
 implementation to incorporate various changes already reflected in ISRs in 2014 and 2018. The team did
 also not adjust the PDO to reflect the fisheries-related activities. Finally, the team failed to reflect in the
 restructuring several activities that had been informally dropped, such as the restoration of a public building
 or institutional strengthening activities.

 The Bank task team informed IEG that they did not travel to the project site to carry out the ICR preparation
 mission because of Covid-19. Instead, the task team relied on the reports from the Indian Institute of
 Human Settlements, who had gone to the field and conducted interviews. The Bank task team last visited
 the project site in late 2019.

 In summary, the Bank task team adequately supported the implementation of this complex project, also
 reflected in the satisfactory efficacy and efficiency ratings. Although the Bank team did not restructure the
 project to correct the design shortcomings related to the M&E and the results chain and adjust the project
 activities, they provided adequate information to evaluate its achievements. Consequently, Bank
 performance in supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PMU was to be responsible for project implementation, monitoring, safeguard and fiduciary compliance
 and financial management (PAD, annex 3). According to the PAD, annex 1, the project implementation
 departments for individual components were responsible for physical progress monitoring, regular quality
 supervision, and certification. The implementation agencies were to carry out monthly surveys in their
 respective domains (districts) to record and report on progress of works. In coordination with the respective
 beneficiaries and contractors, the project implementation agencies were to identify any constraints and
 delaying factors. In addition, a third party was to be deployed for quality monitoring of works and
 compliance on social and environmental aspects and a three-stage benefit monitoring and evaluation study
 was to be carried out by the PMU and the project implementation agencies.

 As seen in section 3, the theory of change had shortcoming in showing how some of the fisheries-
 related activities and outputs would contribute to the achievement of the PDO. Although the results
 framework included indicators to capture these activities, the PDO was not sufficiently clearly specified to
 fully encompass their outcomes. For instance, increasing the "percentage of local fisheries co-


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



 management platforms formed and involved in fisheries management plans" does not directly contribute to
 the objective of increasing the resilience of coastal communities to hydro-meteorological and geophysical
 hazards. The PDO was also not clear with respect to the meaning of "capacity of project implementation
 entities" because capacity strengthening activities largely covered communities, teachers, students, and
 various government institutions.

 Although with the support of additional evidence, the PDO indicators were largely adequate to assess the
 project's achievements, the PDO indicators had shortcomings. The key PDO indicators to measure
 improved resilience captured the percentage of households, habitations, or communities with more resilient
 infrastructure, emergency evacuation structures, and early warning systems to measure
 improved resilience to hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards. These indicators are closer to
 measuring outputs than outcomes because they only measure that resilience-related infrastructure was
 provided and not that this infrastructure actually withstood shocks, which would be difficult because such
 shocks do not necessarily occur by project close. Although this type of indicators is normally used to
 measure resilience in DRM projects, ideally, the project could have modelled the ability to resist and/or
 recover from damage from hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards by simulating the expected
 losses with and without the project.

 The objective of improving the capacity of project implementation entities to respond to disasters was
 measured by a single output-based indicator "percentage of fire departments with improved rescue
 equipment", which captured only a small dimension of the capacity building activities (the PAD listed the
 PDO indicator “percentage of costal villages better prepared through CBDRM training” as indicator to
 capture improved resilience). Key capacity strengthening outcomes, such as the ones achieved through the
 inclusion of DRM in schools and teacher trainings curricula or the availability of the TN-SMART" system
 and application, were not captured. Although capacity strengthening is more difficult to measure, the
 project could have captured some expected changes in behavior, such as a more timely response the
 evacuation alerts or the number of people reached with and without TN-SMART. In addition, it should be
 possible to assess the DRR knowledge enhancement in students through the inclusion of the topic in the
 curricula.

 Furthermore, the baselines values of all PDO indicators were in percentage terms and had a value of zero.
 This does not provide any indication about the "without project" situation of the counterfactual. For
 instance, knowing the number of households with quality-certified multi-hazard houses at appraisal and
 using this information as baseline would have provided a better understanding of the overall contribution of
 the project to enhance resilience in the project area. In addition, using percentages and not explicitly
 showing the denominator and numerator on which basis the targets will be calculated makes this
 calculation less transparent.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR, para 80, points out that the client collected the information for the indicators in the results
  framework and submitted regular progress reports to the Bank. They provided quarterly and annual
  progress reports allowing the Bank task team to systematically track gaps in the project implementation
  progress and assess the need to modify the project design to evolving circumstances.

  The planned final impact evaluation of the CBDRM program was not carried out due to COVID-19
  constraints on fieldwork. Similarly, the project did not carry out the beneficiary surveys of the resilient

                                                                                                       Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



  housing, evacuation shelters and evacuation routes, fishery facilities, and CBDRM program activities to
  gauge actual impacts on target populations before, during, and after each of these interventions, which
  would have enabled a more thorough evaluation of project outcomes (ICR, para 81).

  The project was not timely and adequately restructured to correct the design shortcomings in the results
  framework and the logical results chain.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to ICR, para 83, the project used the M&E data to inform the preparation of ISRs and report
  back to Bank management. They also used it for project management and decision-making and to
  implement corrective measures to address delays. For instance, regularly tracked targets showed slow
  implementation progress, particularly in the multi-hazard-resilient electrical networks, bridges and public
  building restoration, and the establishment of DRM and emergency operation centers, playing a crucial
  role in the decisions to extend the project’s closing date in the project’s first two restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. The following safeguards
   policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment OP/BP4.01, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11,
   and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP4.12. The main environmental and social risks were related to
   insufficient attention to and/or delays in effective implementation of environmental and social management
   plans and potential noncompliance with Bank environment safeguard policies due to lack of capacity.
   Regular monitoring and reporting of compliance by line departments were predicted to pose challenges
   during project implementation (ICR, par 85).

   The recipient revised the environment and social management framework of the previous Emergency
   Tsunami Reconstruction project, incorporating the additional safeguard requirements for the new
   components and the completion of pending safeguard due diligence, such as disclosure of safeguard
   documents locally and at the Bank InfoShop for the retroactively financed subprojects. The revision also
   incorporated the learning from earlier environmental and social management frameworks and the findings of
   the "Quick Review of Safeguard Issues" carried out for the sub-projects proposed to be
   financed retroactively by the project. It included an environment management plan, ecological and
   biodiversity study, archeological survey, a resettlement action plan, a resettlement framework, and social
   assessment (PAD, para 87).

   In terms of environmental performance, the Bank task team mentioned to IEG that the project
   experienced no major environmental problems, the physical cultural resource safeguards policy was




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



  satisfactorily applied in the restoration of two historical buildings, and there was compliance with these
  safeguards policies.

  With respect to social safeguards, the project did not comply with the resettlement safeguards policy in
  2015, and the safeguard rating was changed from moderately satisfactory to unsatisfactory. This was due to
  a violation of the ESMF at the Mallipatnam site of the fishing harbor, where 129 families were forcefully
  evicted. The project prepared a resettlement remedial action plan and successfully implemented it
  during two years, with all but two project-affected people compensated by project end. The Bank task team
  explained to IEG that the latter did not present the necessary documentation to be compensated.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  As for procurement, the ICR, para 88, points out that the project largely complied with World Bank
  procurement guidelines and procedures and that overall, the procurement processes were carried out
  without major issues. In Tamil Nadu, the only noteworthy problem was the delay in awarding the contract
  for the underground electricity lines. In Puducherry, frequent staff turnover and weak contract management
  capacity resulted in complaints to the World Bank about substantial delays in making contract payments.

  In terms of financial management, the ICR, para 89, for Tamil Nadu points out the project had
  shortcomings in terms of timeliness and quality of financial reporting and lists a number of issues mainly
  due to inadequate staffing at district and lower levels. These included (i) poor maintenance of financial
  records and delays in bank reconciliation processes, (ii) differences in account balances between state and
  district offices, (iii) delays in submitting utilization certificates or settlement of advances, and (iv) contract
  management issues such as improper maintenance of bank guarantees and inadequate insurance
  policies. The project did also not regularly conduct internal audits due to delays in the appointment of the
  auditor, and some of the audit reports had accounting and internal control issues. The training programs
  organized for the project staff resulted in improvements in financial management practices. The Bank task
  team pointed out to IEG that for Tamil Nadu, a number of financial audit reports had qualified opinions and
  that the team is still waiting for the answers of the project to the latest report received. The last financial
  audit report is delayed and expected to be received by the Bank in late January 2022. The annual budgets
  for project activities were adequate, and no delays were observed in providing funds to
  implementing agencies.

  Puducherry did not experience capacity issues because they used the support of a consulting firm. There
  were no delays in fund flows and financial reports and annual audit reports were submitted on time.
  According to the Bank task team, the reports were always unqualified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR, para 31, reports that the houses built by the project included, among others, toilets and that this
  led to an upward trend in the usage of toilets among women and girls.




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately                                        Incorrect calculation of outcome
Outcome                                                Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory                                      rating in ICR
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   Shortcomings in M&E design not
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Modest
                                                                                   corrected during implementation
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons have been derived and summarized from the ICR, with minor additions by IEG
after discussions with the Bank task team:

It may be more effective to upgrade existing fisheries facilities than to construct new ones.
This project showed that existing and already used facilities by local communities have an
advantage over new facilities because communities are familiar with them and feel
comfortable. Under the project’s fisheries component, new modern facilities, such as the fish market
in Puducherry, remained underutilized due to fishing communities’ low awareness a reluctance to
change whereas the four upgraded existing fish markets were extensively utilized and were
completed at a fraction of the cost and time. When possible, existing infrastructure should be
upgraded and/or retrofitted instead of starting new greenfield projects.

Designing evacuation shelters as multifunctional shelters can enhance their likelihood of use
and maintenance. The project showed that shelters that also functioned as schools or health
centers and are located near households that care for them, are more likely to be used and
maintenance than shelters that served only evacuation purposes.

Coupling the implementation of new infrastructure and systems with strong community
capacity building programs to increase awareness on their existence and use can maximize
their utilization and the benefits to target populations. This project’s evacuation shelters and the
early warning system saw varying degrees of use, and community awareness was one of the
biggest factors in determining community use and maintenance. For instance, shelters initially poorly
maintained and lacking ownership, saw improved use and maintenance after the formation of
evacuation shelter maintenance committees and the CBDRM training programs. Similarly, villages
varied in their awareness of these systems after completion and their knowledge on how to prepare
and/or evacuate. While community capacity building components tend to be treated as an
afterthought, the project showed significant multiplier effects from the successful implementation of
the CBDRM program and the incorporation of DRR principles into the school curricula. Therefore,
more resources should be devoted to design, implement, monitor, and evaluate these interventions
to increase and track their benefits and spillover effects. In addition, trainings, mock drills, and other

                                                                                                      Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



experiential capacity building programs should be incorporated from the beginning to enable timely
emergency responses.

The development of a digital engagement mechanism does not guarantee communities’
engagement with and enhanced awareness of local disaster risk information. While the
potential of the TN-SMART mobile application to reach target populations in Tamil Nadu efficiently
has been widely recognized, to date, it has not been successful in reaching various publics, with a
little over 200,000 downloads by citizens in a state that has the second highest number of rural
smartphone users. The app should increase its user friendliness and provide relevant local
information at a more granular level. Future interventions should explore the integration of mobile
apps and the CBDRM programs to increase both the reach of the app and the accessibility of the
trainings to remote communities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is very well written and candid, especially in reporting on issues in Bank performance, including
shortcomings in M&E design and project restructuring. It is also transparent as it includes a large amount of
footnotes to explain how evidence was obtained. The ICR contains a very detailed presentation, in particular of
the project achievements both in the efficacy section and the results framework annex. Although a detailed
coverage of the achievements is important and a complex multisector project like this warrants a longer
presentation, the ICR include unnecessary repetitions, especially in the efficacy section and annex 1, which
greatly increased the ICR's length. Except for the latter and the incorrect calculation of the overall outcome
rating, the ICR complies with Bank guidelines.

The ICR is results-orientated. Although the quality of evidence suffered because of the impossibility to carry out
project end surveys due to COVID-19, the ICR contained adequate data to report on project indicators and
used additional data to triangulate the evidence, for instance, regarding the use of evacuation shelters and the
reduced level of house destruction during extreme weather events. The ICR also refers to evidence in reports
prepared by the Indian Institute of Human Settlements.

In the quality of M&E section, the ICR points out that the project used the word "resilience" as an umbrella
concept for a range of desirable attributes in the PDO and that this made it difficult to attribute and measure
specific benefits to the project beneficiaries. However, the ICR does not explicitly discuss this in the efficacy
section and simply uses "resilience" in broad terms to include enhanced livelihood for the fishing community
in the theory of change and when assessing the project's achievements.

The ICR also reports on other project impacts, such as the increase in female toilet use. The lessons are based
on evidence and well formulated. The ICR includes a thorough recalculation of the IRRs, NPVs, CBRs at
appraisal to compare it with the ex-post results. There are minor discrepancies between some figures in the
main text and in annex 5.


                                                                                                      Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Puducherry DRR (P143382)



The ICR does did not mention how COVID-19 impacted the due diligence in project supervision and provides
limited information on the ICR mission/data collection to assess the performance of the project.

On balance, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                              Page 24 of 24
