     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022763

1. Program Information



 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                        Approved Operations
 0                                         0

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P158463                                   CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-59360                                30-Jun-2019                                        72,332,575.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2016                              30-Jun-2019
                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           75,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            75,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                        72,332,575.00                                            0.00




P163284_TBL
 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P163284                                  Cote d'Ivoire - Second Fiscal Management ( P163284 )




                                                                                               Page 1 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-59360,IDA-61550                      30-Jun-2020                                             126942330.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Dec-2017                              30-Jun-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          125,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           125,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                       126,942,330.00                                                0.00



 P166388_TBL
 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P166388                                  CIV DPO3 ( P166388 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61550,IDA-63510                      30-Jun-2020                                              99066240.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Dec-2018                              30-Jun-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        99,066,240.00                                                0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



a. Objectives

The program development objectives of the Cote d'Ivoire First (DPF1), Second (DPF2), and Third (DPF3) Fiscal
Management, Education, Energy and Cocoa Reforms Development Policy Financing (DPF) were to enhance tax
revenue collection and public procurement; strengthen efficiency and equity in the education sector; improve the
performance of the electricity sector by enabling private participation and diversification; and
consolidate transparency in the management of the cocoa sector.

For this ICR Review, the objectives of the programmatic DPF are parsed into:

Objective 1 - To enhance tax revenue collection;
Objective 2 - To enhance public procurement;
Objective 3 - To strengthen efficiency and equity in the education sector;
Objective 4 - To improve the performance of the electricity sector, including by enabling private sector
participation and diversification (the term "including" is inserted as private participation and energy diversification
were not the only measures selected to improve the performance of the sector); and
Objective 5 - To consolidate transparency in the management of the cocoa sector.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
Enhancement of Tax Revenue Collection supported expansion of the tax base, reduction of revenue
losses, and increase in tax collections by including potential taxpayers in the informal sector in Abidjan; offering
tax amnesty to individuals and firms; introducing an electronic platform for filing and paying taxes; eliminating
certain exemptions to the value-added tax (VAT); introducing a single identification number for firms; and
adopting VAT payment deferrals in lieu of VAT exemptions for capital goods imports.

Enhancement of Public Procurement supported improving government procurement by establishing
procurement units in key agencies; establishing a coordinating unit in the Ministry of Finance to monitor
government contracts; renewing the membership in the board of the Autorité Nationale de Régulation des
Marchés Publics (ANRMP), the regulatory body for public contracts; and introducing an electronic procurement
(e-procurement) system with an associated legal framework

Strengthening Efficiency and Equity in the Education Sector supported improving efficiency and equity in
primary and secondary schooling by consolidating grade levels into sub-cycles based on "blocs of
competencies" in primary schools; conducting and publishing annual standardized assessments of learning
outcomes at sub-cycles; revising the system for assigning students to secondary schools based on household
income, place of residence, and distance between home and school; improving the teacher-to-student ratio in
underserved regions of the country; raising the amount of schooling time to international norms; hiring only
bivalent teachers (teachers certified to teach two different but related subjects, e.g. mathematics and natural
sciences) in secondary schools; and rationalizing the criteria for granting public subsidies to private schools.

Improving the Performance of the Electricity Sector, Including by Enabling Private Sector Participation
and Diversification supported improving the operational and financial performance of electricity services by
adopting a methodology for setting tariff rates; promoting private sector participation in energy generation and
distribution; promoting the development of renewable energy sources; setting procedures for the selection of
independent power producers (IPPs); finalizing and implementing agreements for the settlement by the central
government, the District of Abidjan, and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) of unpaid electricity bills to the state-

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



owned electricity distribution concessionaire, Côte d'Ivoire Énergies (CI-ENERGIES), and for the timely payment
of electricity bills moving forward; and concluding a performance-based contract between the government and
CI-ENERGIES.

Consolidating Transparency in the Management of the Cocoa Sector supported improving transparency in
the cocoa industry by conducting, regularizing, and publishing the results of wide-ranging, independent, and
systematic institutional, technical, and financial audits of the forward-sale and producer-price-setting
system Programme de Ventes Anticipees i la Moyenne (PVAM), the Reserve Fund, held at the Banque Centrale
des États de l’Afrique de l’Ouest (BCEAO), which protected against price fluctuations and supported the
government-guaranteed farmgate price, and the three funds managed by the Conseil Café Cacao (CCC) to
support agricultural and rural development – the Fonds d’Investissement en Milieu Rural (FIMR), the Fonds
d’Investissement Agricole (FIA), and the Fonds Sacherie.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost: DPF1 was estimated to cost SDR68.5 million (US$75 million equivalent) at appraisal; DPF2,
SDR10.59 million (US$125 million equivalent); and DPF3, SDR86.4 million (US$100 million equivalent). The
three operations were financed by IDA development policy credits of the amounts estimated at appraisal. The
credits were fully disbursed, with the US$ equivalents -- US$72.3 million for DPF1, US$126.9 million for DPF2,
and US$99.1 million for DPF3 -- differing from those at appraisal because of changes in the SDR:US$
exchange rate over 2016 to 2020.

Dates: DPF1 was approved on December 15, 2016, became effective on December 22, 2016, and closed as
scheduled on June 30, 2019. DPF2 was approved on December 5, 2017, became effective on December 19,
2017, and closed as scheduled on June 30, 2020. Originally planned as a two-operation sequence, this
programmatic series was expanded to add a third operation and cover a new policy area, reforms in the
management of the cocoa industry. DPF3 was approved on December 11, 2018, became effective on
December 20, 2018, and closed as scheduled on June 30, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to Country Development Constraints. This programmatic series aimed to address constraints
 to economic growth and development in five key areas. According to the Cote d'Ivoire Country Systematic
 Diagnostic 2015: From Crisis to Sustained Growth - Priorities for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared
 Prosperity:

       Problems with public procurement raised questions about the efficiency and integrity of public
        spending. These problems also elicited concerns from the private sector, which found the
        government's procurement processes and practices difficult for business.
       Limited access to, and low quality of, education was a key constraint to human capital development
        and poverty reduction (more than half the population in households with an uneducated head was

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



       poor). There were wide disparities in access to primary schooling (years 1-6) and, crucially, secondary
       schooling (years 7-12) across regions, income groups, and gender. For rural residents, the poor, and
       girls, access to secondary education was most dismal. Improving access would require resource
       reallocations and interventions on both the supply side – constructing schools at a reasonable
       distance to homes – and on the demand side – promoting affordable schooling for all, particularly
       girls. Overall, the greatest impact would be by improving girls' access to education. The quality of
       education was also of primary concern, with exceedingly low levels of achievement in mathematics
       and the French language in primary schools, a mismatch between skills acquired in secondary and
       tertiary schools and the demands of the labor market, and poor correlation between resources and
       personnel devoted to education and education results, reflecting ineffectiveness and inefficiency.
      Electricity supply was a top constraint to the development of industry, manufacturing, and agro-
       business. While Cote d'Ivoire was a regional power exporter (exporting electricity to neighboring
       Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali, and Togo), and supply was reliable in the main industrial and
       urban centers, it was inadequate and unreliable outside the capital Abidjan (70 percent access in
       urban areas versus 30 percent in rural areas), with adverse implications for the broad-based
       development of small and medium enterprises across the country. A plan to double power production
       capacity to 4,000 megawatts was essential but difficult. There were no natural gas discoveries in
       recent years (the bulk of power generation capacity was in gas-fueled thermal plants); hydro
       resources were unexploited, and the construction of a new hydro power plant would take at least 6-7
       years; and renewable energy, including solar and biomass, could not be developed on a scale large
       enough to close the supply gap in the near term. Apart from generation, transmission and
       distribution also needed upgrading considering the lack of investment in rural electrification over the
       past 15 years. A plan to connect 500 villages annually over five years to the grid under a ten-year
       subsidized connection scheme appeared ambitious. Other problems included financial shortfalls at
       generators and distributors because of the underpricing of power, and a lack of private sector
       participation in the industry.
      As the world's top cocoa bean producer and exporter (accounting for 40 percent of global supply),
       Côte d’Ivoire was highly reliant on cocoa; cocoa was the main source of income and employment for
       20 percent of the population, accounted for 30 percent of exports, and contributed 12 percent of fiscal
       revenues. The government taxed cocoa at 22 percent of cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) value,
       corresponding to 40 percent of the farmgate price and an even larger proportion of net profits. The
       fiscal revenue from cocoa was vital to the economic development program, funding the construction of
       the nation's physical infrastructure. But cocoa was also critical to the rural population. While the net
       revenue from a hectare planted to cocoa was CFA franc (CFAF) 250,000 in 2012-13, it could increase
       22 percent to CFAF 305,000 per hectare if the export tax were reduced 10 percent, improving the
       living conditions of about four million people. Clearly, a balance between the tax out-take and the flow-
       through of the international price to producers was wanting. Associated problems included low
       productivity in cocoa farming, volatility in international prices (sharp price drops being a primary
       determinant of poverty rates, and poor governance of the sector.

Relevance to Country Priorities. The development objectives of the programmatic series were aligned with
the government's medium-term priorities. The Plan National de Developpement 2016-2020 (PND)
advanced a development strategy organized around "five pillars": enhancing the quality of governance and
institutions; accelerating the development of human capital and social welfare; accelerating the structural
transformation of the economy through industrialization; developing infrastructure while protecting the
environment; and strengthening regional integration and international cooperation. The objective of this
programmatic series (a) to enhance tax revenue collection was aligned with the first PND pillar; (b)
to enhance public procurement, with the first PND pillar; (c) to strengthen efficiency and equity in the

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



education sector, with the second PND pillar; (d) to improve the performance of the electricity sector, with the
fourth PND pillar; and (e) to consolidate transparency in the management of the cocoa sector, with the third
PND pillar.

Relevance to World Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were consistent with the World Bank
Group strategy in Cote d'Ivoire. The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire for the
Period FY16-FY19 (CPF) committed Bank Group support to the government in "three focus areas":
accelerating sustainable private sector-led growth, building human capital for economic development and
social cohesion, and strengthening public financial management and accountability. The objective of this
programmatic series (a) to enhance tax revenue collection was aligned with the CPF objective "to increase
domestic revenues and maintain debt sustainability" (under the third focus area); (b) to enhance public
procurement, with the CPF objective "to improve allocative efficiency and quality of expenditures" (third focus
area); (c) to strengthen efficiency and equity in the education sector, with the CPF objective "to improve
education service delivery and youth employability" (second focus area); (d) to improve the performance of
the electricity sector including by enabling private sector participation and diversification, with the CPF
objective "to strengthen the economic infrastructure" (first focus area); and (e) to consolidate transparency in
the management of the cocoa sector, with the CPF objective "to improve productivity in agriculture and
agribusiness value chains" (first focus area).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The five pillars contained 25 prior actions (PAs), six under DPF1, ten under DPF2, and nine under DPF3. Six
of the PAs supported the first objective, three PAs supported the second objective, seven PAs supported the
third objective, five PAs supported the fourth objective, and four PAs supported the fifth objective.

 DPF1                              DPF2                                        DPF3
 Objective 1 - Enhance Tax Revenue Collection
 PA1 - With the objective of       PA3 - The Recipient's Ministry in charge PA5 - To strengthen tax
 broadening the tax base, the      of Budget has implemented a new             administration, the Recipient has
 Tax Administration has            electronic platform facilitating the filing implemented an electronic single
 incorporated in its tax database and payment of taxes.                        taxpayer identification system for
 the results of its 2016 survey of                                             enterprises.
 potential taxpayers in the two
 sizeable municipalities of
 Abidjan (Yopougon and
 Cocody).
 PA2 - The Ministry in Charge of PA4 - In line with the West African           PA6 - The Recipient has
 Budget has launched a tax         Economic and Monetary Union                 adopted a new Investment Code
 amnesty program for all firms (WAEMU) Regulation                              on August 1, 2018 by
 and individuals who voluntarily n.2/2009/CM/UEMOA, the Recipient              replacing VAT exemptions on
 register to the Tax               has submitted to Parliament for             imports of equipment goods and
 Administration before 30 April adoption the draft 2018 Budget Law             materials with a VAT deferred
 2016 pursuant to Loi N. 2015- that eliminates VAT exemptions on: (a) payment system as detailed in
                                   equipment and materials necessary for

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



840 dated December 18, 2015 investments and spare material for             Arrete N. 1091 dated October
for the state budget of 2016.     agro-industrial companies, (b) seeds     30, 2018.
                                  and grains, (c) investments
                                  made by sports associations, and (d)
                                  fish freezing operations.
Objective 2 - Enhance Public Procurement
PA7 - The Government has          PA8 - In application of the WAEMU        PA9 - To strengthen the public
operationalized: (i) public       Directive N. 04/2005/CM/UEMOA on         procurement system, the
procurement units in four high- procedures, execution, and regulation Recipient has: (i) renewed
spending sectoral ministries      of procurement and public service        the members of the board of the
pursuant to Arrete N. 325 dated delegation contracts, the Recipient has ANRMP; (ii) adopted an
May 23, 2014 and Arrete N.        released a communication by its          Arrete that gives legal force to
275 dated April 22, 2015; and Council of Ministers and a detailed roll- the contracts awarded by the
(ii) the coordinating unit within out report that implements an electronic electronic system; and (iii)
the Ministry of Finance to        procurement system that has been         extended the
monitor public procurement        piloted in five ministries.              electronic system to at least ten
contracts pursuant to Arrete N.                                            (10) ministries.
465 dated June 23, 2015 from
the Ministry of Finance.
Objective 3 - Strengthen Efficiency and Equity in the Education Sector
PA10 - The Ministry of National PA 11 - The Recipient's Ministry of
Education has introduced          National Education has set up an
transitional measures through annual national standardized evaluation
Circulaire N. 3387 dated          of learning outcomes at the end of each
August 12, 2016 to reduce         sub-cycle of primary education and
repetition in primary education published the first set of national
by: (i) creating sub-cycles in    standardized evaluations.
primary education; and (ii)
defining conditions of transition
between the sub-cycles.
                                  PA12 - To improve equity in primary
                                  education remediation activities, the
                                  Recipient's Minister of National
                                  Education has adopted a ministerial
                                  order that incorporates Wednesday
                                  morning in the official calendar of
                                  primary schools and reorganizes the
                                  remediation activities provided during
                                  the week.
                                  PA13 - To improve teacher-to-student
                                  ratios in underserved regions, the
                                  Recipient's Ministry of National
                                  Education has established new criteria
                                  for the assignment and redeployment of
                                  teachers through Arrete N.
                                  0074/MENET-FP-DRH dated
                                  September 28, 2017.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



PA14 - The Ministry of National                                            PA15 - To increase efficiency
Education has established                                                  and equity of the education
criteria through Arrete N. 143                                             system, the Recipient's
dated October 11, 2016 for                                                 Ministry of National Education
school assignment of students                                              has passed an Arrete requiring
in the secondary lower cycle                                               that all new teachers recruited
that takes into consideration: (i)                                         in lower secondary schools must
socio-economic conditions of                                               be bivalent teachers.
the household, including
income; (ii) distance to school;
and (iii) location of residence
(urban/rural).
                                                                             PA16 - To improve the
                                                                             performance of private
                                                                             secondary schools and fiscal
                                                                             transparency in secondary
                                                                             education, the Recipient has
                                                                             adopted and implemented a
                                                                             ministerial
                                                                             decree that: (i) establishes the
                                                                             criteria, including success rates
                                                                             in national examinations,
                                                                             repetition rates, and dropout
                                                                             rates, used by the Ministry of
                                                                             National Education to identify
                                                                             secondary schools eligible for
                                                                             government subsidies; and (ii)
                                                                             establishes the annual
                                                                             publication of the performance of
                                                                             each college as
                                                                             measured by their success rate
                                                                             in national examinations and the
                                                                             repetition and dropout rates.
Objective 4 - Improve the Performance of the Electricity Sector, Including by Enabling Private
Sector Participation and Diversification
PA17 - The Government has PA18 - The Recipient's Ministry of Oil, PA20 - The Recipient: (i) has
issued a set of decrees which: Energy and Development of Renewable paid in full the unpaid validated
(i) adopts a methodology for      Energy, Ministry of Economy and            electricity bills accumulated by
the determination of tariff rates Finance, and Ministry in charge of         the central administration as of
that enables recovery of costs Budget have adopted an inter-                 December 2017 and paid on
of efficient service provision    ministerial Arrete N.                      time all the current
through Decret N. 2016-783        476/MPEDER/MEF/SEPMBPE dated validated electricity bills of the
dated October 12, 2016; and October 10, 2017 defining modalities             central administration: (ii) has
(ii) promotes private sector      and procedures for the selection of IPPs paid in full through securitization
participation and the use of      and determining the price of electricity the unpaid validated electricity
renewable sources of energy produced by IPPs, including through a bills accumulated by the District
through Decret N. 2016-786        competitive selection process, for         of Abidjan covering the period
dated October 12, 2016.           projects with installed capacities greater until December 2017 and paid

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 32
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



                           than 1 MW and renewable energy              on time all its electricity bills
                           projects.                                   related to public lighting; and (iii)
                                                                       has reduced the level of SOE
                                                                       arrears.
                           PA19 - In accordance with (a) the           PA21 - The Recipient and CI-
                           protocol for the clearance of the arrears ENERGIES have signed a
                           in electricity between CI-ENERGIES,         performance-based contract
                           Cote d'Ivoire Energy (CIE),                 with the objective to improve the
                           Radiodiffusion-Television Ivoirienne        financial and commercial
                           (RTI), Centre National de Recherche         performance as well as
                           Agronomique (CNRA), and the District the transparency of the sector.
                           of Abidjan dated October 9, 2017, (b)
                           the communication by the Council of
                           Ministers dated October 10, 2017, (c)
                           the engagement letter to the
                           Association by the Minister of Oil,
                           Energy and Development of Renewable
                           Energy, the Minister of Economy and
                           Finance and the State Secretary in
                           charge of the Budget dated October 14,
                           2017, and (d) the Memorandum
                           between CI-ENERGIES, CIE, and the
                           State Secretary in charge of the Budget
                           dated October 24, 2017, the Recipient
                           has taken the following actions aimed at
                           reducing the amount of unpaid
                           electricity bills: (i) committed to
                           eliminate all unpaid electricity bills
                           accumulated by the central
                           administration up to December 2016 by
                           the end of April 2018; (ii) paid all the
                           validated electricity bills of the central
                           administration from January to June
                           2017 and committed to pay all its future
                           validated bills in full and on time from
                           July 2017 onwards; (iii) agreed (a) with
                           the District of Abidjan, for its unpaid
                           electricity bills covering the period until
                           December 2017, to clear the arrears
                           through securitization and committed to
                           the payment of all its electricity bills
                           related to public lighting from 2018
                           onwards; (b) with CNRA for its
                           respective unpaid electricity bills
                           covering the period until December
                           2016, to clear the arrears through
                           securitization; and (c) with RTI to pay
                           920,893,208 CFAF regarding its arrears

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



                              up to December 2016 through
                              securitization; and (iv) ensured that
                              Societe des Palaces de Cocody
                              (SPDC), RTI and the Abidjan Transport
                              Company (SOTRA) sign respective
                              agreements with CIE in which
                              these SOEs commit to pay their unpaid
                              electricity bills accumulated up to June
                              2017 and commit to the payment of
                              their future bills in full and on time.
Objective 5 - Consolidate Transparency in the Management of the Cocoa Sector
                              PA22 - In conformity with Decret N.      PA24 - The Recipient has
                              2012-765 of August 1, 2012, related to implemented all main
                              the Reserve Fund for the Coffee-Cacao recommendations from the
                              sub-sector, the Recipient has launched independent 2017 audit of the
                              an independent institutional, technical, PVAM and of the Reserve Fund.
                              and financial audit of the PVAM and of
                              the Reserve Fund.
                              PA23 - The Recipient's Ministry of       PA25 - The Recipient has
                              Agriculture, Ministry of Economy and     published the commercially non-
                              Finance, and Ministry in charge of       sensitive results of the
                              Budget have adopted an inter-            independent 2017
                              ministerial Arrete N.                    audit of the PVAM and of the
                              475/MEF/MINADER/SEPMBPE dated Reserve Fund and
                              October 9, 2017 to institute a           launched a new series of audits
                              systematic independent audit, six        covering marketing. stabilization
                              months after the end of the harvest      accounts, technical reserve fund
                              season, in September. The auditor will held at BCEAO, and other funds
                              be chosen by the Minister of Finance, managed by CCC, in line with
                              following an independent and             Arrete
                              competitive tender for three years,      N.
                              renewable once. The audits will focus 475/MEF/MINADER/SEPMBPE.
                              on: (a) marketing; (b) stabilization
                              accounts, which harmonize the
                              guaranteed export prices; (c) the
                              technical reserve fund held at the
                              BCEAO; and (d) other funds in the
                              coffee-cocoa sector managed by CCC.
                              The PVAM and the Reserve Fund will
                              be subject to an annual audit. The
                              other elements will be audited at least
                              twice over the three-year period, with
                              the first audit carried out in 2018.


Objective 1 - Enhance Tax Revenue Collection



                                                                                               Page 10 of 32
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



 PA1 through PA6 aimed to enhance tax revenues, which had remained historically low. Tax
    revenues averaged 15.1 percent of GDP over the fifteen-year period from 2000 to 2015, and tax
    performance tracked below the target 20 percent of GDP set by the eight member states of
    the WAEMU as a “second-order convergence criterion” under the Regional Macroeconomic
    Surveillance Framework, which guided member states’ drive for regional economic integration.
   PA1 aimed to enhance tax revenue collection by including the list of potential taxpayers in the
    municipalities of Yopougon and Cocody in Abidjan in the national tax database, thereby expanding
    the tax base. The tax base had been narrow because of, among other causes, large informality. This
    prior action would enhance tax revenue collection: (a) two recent surveys of the informal sector in the
    two highly-populated municipalities of Abidjan identified many potential taxpayers; and (b) since the
    two municipalities accounted for 25 percent of revenue in the capital, the inclusion of these potential
    taxpayers in the informal sector would expand the tax base. The relevance of PA1 is rated
    moderately satisfactory. This prior action lacked a concurrent measure to encourage formalization,
    without which informal enterprises would remain outside the tax net.
   PA2 aimed to enhance tax revenue collection by granting a tax amnesty to individuals and firms that
    registered with the Tax Administration by April 2016. This prior action would provide an incentive for
    firms to register and pay taxes: (a) while tax amnesties elsewhere globally had not always led to
    higher revenues, their results were often enhanced when combined with other measures to improve
    tax administration; (b) hence, when linked with the creation of the tax offices in Abidjan of the Mid-
    Size Enterprise Center, the reorganization of the tax office of the Directorate of Large Enterprise, the
    strengthening of tax audits under the Directorate of Tax Monitoring, and the linkage of the Directorate
    General of Taxes and the Directorate General of Customs, this prior action was expected to
    encourage tax compliance; (c) however, while a tax amnesty may yield additional revenue in the short
    term, its ability to strengthen tax compliance and increase the tax base and tax revenue in the
    medium term depended on the root causes of weak tax compliance other than weak administration: a
    weak legal system (enforcement of the law) and inadequate tax policy for example, would undermine
    the impact of improvements in administration. The relevance of PA2 is rated moderately
    satisfactory.
   PA3 aimed to enhance revenue collection by establishing a new electronic platform for the filing and
    payment of taxes: (a) the transaction cost for paying taxes was high; and (b) the available tax filing
    and payment methods did not take advantage of the internet or mobile platforms and devices. This
    prior action would contribute to the objective to enhance revenue collection: (a) the electronic platform
    would facilitate tax filing and payments; (b) it would reduce the transaction costs of taxpayers; and (c)
    it would encourage greater tax compliance over time. The relevance of PA3 is rated
    moderately satisfactory. While electronic filing and payment would begin to modernize the tax
    payment system, it was not made clear how much this prior action would contribute to raising tax
    revenues.
   PA4 aimed to eliminate certain exemptions to the VAT: (a) collection of the VAT, which accounted for
    a third of domestic revenue, was especially weak – 2.5 percent of GDP in 2015, compared to 5.5
    percent in Togo, 5.6 percent in Burkina Faso, and 5.9 percent in Senegal, among the WAEMU
    countries, according to IMF data; and (b) tax exemptions were a significant source of VAT revenue
    losses. This prior action would contribute to the objective to enhance revenue collection: if several
    exemptions to the VAT were eliminated following WAEMU Regulation N.2/2009, an additional VAT
    revenue of CFAF18 billion would be collected for 2018, an increase of 0.5 percent of total tax
    revenue. This prior action, together with five other measures – new excise taxes on cosmetic products
    and luxury vehicles, higher excise taxes on beverages and tobacco, tax and customs administration
    improvements, recovery of overdue tax payments, and other measures – comprised the "new fiscal


                                                                                                Page 11 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



      revenue measures" amounting to 0.45 percent of GDP to help raise total fiscal revenues by 9
      percent in real terms in 2018, according to the Second Review of the arrangement under the IMF
      Extended Credit Facility and the extended arrangement under the IMF Extended Fund Facility dated
      December 2017. The relevance of PA4 is rated satisfactory.
     PA5 aimed to implement a single, electronic-type taxpayer identification system for firms: (a) one of
      the administrative problems enabling tax evasion was the existence of duplicate taxpayer
      identification data across different public agencies; and (b) in some cases, the data was collected but
      left unusable at some agencies. This prior action would contribute to: (a) a unique taxpayer
      identification system for firms would replace five different registration numbers obtained by firms from
      the Commercial Register, the Tax Administration, the Social Security, and the Register of Foreign
      Trade Operators; (b) for firms, this single taxpayer identification system, together with the electronic
      filing and payment of taxes (PA3), would reduce the transaction costs for paying taxes and discourage
      tax evasion; and (c) for the government, this single taxpayer identification system, together with the
      planned electronic filing of financial statements, would improve tax administration and strengthen tax
      audits. The relevance of PA5 is rated satisfactory.
     PA6 aimed to enhance tax revenue collection by adopting a new Investment Code replacing VAT
      exemptions on capital imports with VAT deferred payments; tax exemptions were a major source of
      VAT revenue losses. This prior action would contribute to the objective to enhance tax revenue
      collection: (a) the taxation of capital imports would take these items onto the VAT value chain and
      hence broaden the tax base; (b) the deferred payment system would remain supportive of private
      investment; and (c) the deferred tax payment system would be readily tracked by tax and customs
      authorities. The relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - Enhance Public Procurement

     PA7 through PA9 aimed to enhance public procurement, which had been hampered by efficiency
      problems and weighed by questions about integrity. Although some reforms had been implemented in
      recent years to improve the efficiency and transparency of public procurement, challenges remained
      at the end of 2014: 59 percent of public contracts were awarded with several irregularities, and 15
      percent were approved without the requisite documentation. Institutional, organizational, and
      administrative weaknesses hobbled the effective implementation of the new Public Procurement Code
      adopted with Decret N. 2014-306.
     PA7 aimed to make operational public procurement units in four ministries and the coordinating unit at
      the Ministry of Finance to monitor public procurement contracts. This prior action would enhance
      public procurement: (a) the organization and operationalization of public procurement units in four key
      ministries would help strengthen procurement functions at the central levels; (b) the decentralized
      ministerial units, each with operating budgets of CFAF 20 million, would oversee the execution of
      contracts and agreements, oversee quality control of the works and services procured, maintain a
      database of all contracts, and relate to the National Public Procurement Regulatory Authority that
      audited awards and contracts; and (c) the organization and operationalization of a monitoring and
      evaluation unit at the Ministry of Economy and Finance would provide another layer of supervision at
      a central level to guard against irregularities. The relevance of PA7 is rated satisfactory.
     PA8 aimed to pilot an e-procurement system in five ministries: (a) although the average delay in
      completing a public procurement had been reduced from 159 days in 2014 to 129 days by June 2016,
      there remained room to further improve the operational efficiency of the procurement process; and (b)
      an e-procurement system would offer efficiency gains. This prior action would enhance procurement:
      (a) a pilot in five ministries would test the viability of an electronic system for public procurement; and
      (b) if implemented well, an e-procurement system could introduce efficiencies with the aid of

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



      automated process controls and monitors and hence further reduce delays in the procurement
      process. The relevance of PA8 is rated satisfactory.
     PA9 aimed to extend the e-procurement system to ten ministries. Drawing from lessons learned in the
      pilot effort (PA8), this prior action would enhance procurement: (a) the e-procurement system would
      be extended to the ten ministries that made up the majority of public purchases of goods and
      services; (b) contracts awarded and processed electronically would be given legal cover; and (c) the
      appointment of the members of the Board of the National Procurement Regulatory Authority would be
      renewed. The relevance of PA9 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 3 - Strengthen Efficiency and Equity in the Education Sector

     PA10 through PA13 aimed to address efficiency and equity issues in primary education, where
        schooling time was shorter than the international norm, grade repetition rates were high, school
        completion rates were low (69 percent versus 73 percent for the region), and teachers were lacking in
        poor and rural areas. PA14 through PA16 focused on secondary education, where learning
        outcomes were poor, school completion rates were equally low (42 percent versus 49 percent for the
        region), and equity problems were magnified by the failure of the student assignment, teacher
        recruitment, and private school subsidy systems to consider the needs of poorer students and
        disadvantaged areas.
       PA10 aimed to address the problem of high repetition rates in primary schools. Repetition failed to
        improve the performance of students (who repeated a grade), and high repetition rates were closely
        associated with high dropout rates. This prior action would help reduce the repetition rates: (a) the
        government would reorganize primary schooling into three "sub‐cycles" of two years each (Grades 1
        and 2, Grades 3 and 4, and Grades 5 and 6); (b) the government would also introduce "blocs of
        competencies" to improve instruction; and (c) students would be evaluated for their proficiency on
        these blocs of competencies at the end of each sub-cycle, rather than at the end of each grade, to
        determine their promotion to the next sub-cycle. The relevance of PA10 is rated satisfactory.
       PA11 aimed to complement the creation of sub-cycles in primary schools (PA10) to ensure that the
        sub-cycles were not an administrative contrivance but an effective means to reduce high repetition
        rates. Annual standardized student learning assessments, developed by the Ministry of Education and
        tested in 2017, would strengthen efficiency in primary schooling: (a) the assessments would
        evaluate the extent to which students acquired competencies before they graduated to the next
        sub‐cycle; (b) the assessments would identify problems faced by students and help
        design appropriate remediation measures; and (c) the results of the assessments would be
        disseminated through workshops to help enrich teacher training (journées pédagogiques). The
        relevance of PA12 is rated satisfactory.
       PA12 would raise the amount of schooling time in primary schools to international norms: (a)
        mandatory schooling time in primary schools was 792 hours per year, lower than the global standard
        of 900-1000 hours per year; and (b) studies indicated that learning outcomes were correlated with
        teaching time, implying that the shortfall had affected education results. By including Wednesday
        mornings in the new schedule: (a) the government would add 123 hours per year to the mandatory
        schooling time; (b) the new hours could be spent for in-school remediation activities, benefiting poor
        families who were unable to hire private tutors; and (c) the extension would allow teachers to better
        organize their teaching time. The relevance of PA14 is rated satisfactory.
       PA13 aimed to address regional disparities in the distribution of educational resources: (a) because
        teachers' pay depended on years of experience, the rural and remote areas, which could only attract
        less experienced staff, received a lower budget allocation; and (b) with salary accounting for the


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



      largest share of spending, allocations for capital items were even more meager for these areas. A
      revision of the criteria for teacher assignments would mean that: (a) teachers could be redeployed
      to underserved regions; (b) the redeployment would not alter the overall wage bill; and (c) the
      redeployment would be complemented by other Bank projects that aimed to raise enrollment rates in
      poor areas. Discussions with Bank staff indicate that teachers were consulted about these
      measures. The relevance of PA13 is rated satisfactory
     PA14 was directed at equity issues associated with the assignment of students to lower secondary
      schools: (a) assignment to public and private schools focused on scores and did not consider the
      socioeconomic status of students; and (b) the per‐student subsidy for enrollment in private schools
      did not cover the total cost of schooling, placing a burden on poor families and discouraging
      enrollment by poor students. This prior action would help improve equity in the school system: (a)
      assignments in secondary education would be based on family revenue, area of residence, and
      distance to school; and (b) the new system would increase the chances of poor students being
      assigned to less costly public schools. The relevance of PA14 is rated satisfactory.
     PA15 aimed to raise efficiency in secondary schools by requiring the hiring of bivalent teachers: (a)
      smaller schools, particularly in rural areas, were unable to hire the full complement of
      monovalent teachers (teachers certified in only one subject); and (b) where the complement was
      full, monovalent teachers did not have sufficient workload because of the smaller student
      population. The prior action would: (a) reduce the deficit of teachers in underserved areas; (b) lead to
      a more versatile teaching staff, with the bivalent teachers hired after a 2-3 year training period; (c)
      foster equity in collèges de proximité, which were located closer to students' homes and served rural
      and poor families; and (d) have positive gender effects – collèges de proximité were attended by girls
      whose parents would not otherwise send their daughters to regular schools in more distant locations
      because of security risks. The relevance of PA15 is rated satisfactory.
     PA16 aimed to rationalize the allocation of subsidies to private schools: (a) because of limited space
      in public lower secondary schools, the government sent students to private schools; (b) to enable
      students from poor families to attend private schools, the government provided subsidies to the
      private schools; (c) however, the system lacked accountability and transparency; and (d) in particular,
      private schools were subsidized on the basis of headcount, regardless of student performance. The
      prior action would: (a) introduce eligibility criteria for the subsidies – the school's repetition rate,
      dropout rate, and importantly, success rate in national examinations; (b) have the Ministry of National
      Education publish the school records annually; (c) allow parents and students to make informed
      choices when selecting a private school; and (d) encourage the private schools to upgrade their
      quality of education. The relevance of PA16 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 4 - Improve the Performance of the Electricity Sector, Including by Enabling Private Sector
Participation and Diversification

     PA17 through PA21 aimed to improve the performance of the electricity sector, focusing on critical
      issues: tariffs did not cover operating costs, private investment was crucial to increase electricity
      supply, energy diversification remained uncertain (raising the contribution from renewable energy from
      1 percent of the mix in 2015 to 16 percent by 2030 lacked a clear roadmap), arrears to IPPs and gas
      suppliers were high (reaching US$326 million in mid-2018 or 0.6 percent of GDP), and systems
      losses exacerbated financial difficulties (CI-ENERGIES financial deficits reached CFAF 40 billion in
      2015, funded by transfers from the central government).
     The first part of PA17 – a decree on tariff rate methodologies – would guide the adjustment of
      electricity tariffs closer to operating costs: (a) a recent plan to raise tariffs over 18 months starting in
      July 2016 was rejected by customers; (b) the rebuff forced the government to cap tariff rate increases

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 32
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



    at 10 percent for 2016, and instead target an average tariff of CFAF 74 per kilowatt-hour by 2020.
    This prior action would improve the performance of the electricity sector: (a) CFAF 74 per kilowatt-
    hour would cover operating costs at IPPs and asset renewals in the grid (costing CFAF 1.6 trillion
    over 2016-20); (b) the plan would be feasible with the replacement of the Vridi and Aggreko turbines
    with the AZITO-4 and CIPREL-5 combined-cycles to reduce production costs; (c) the tariff structure
    would be revised annually by decree to reach the target rate by 2020; (d) however, with the tariff issue
    being politically charged, the plan would only be acceptable to consumers if the quality of electricity
    services also improved, putting emphasis on the reform plan in the Electricity Bill of 2014. The
    relevance of the first part of PA17 is rated satisfactory.
   The second part of PA17 – a decree promoting private participation and use of renewable energy –
    would draw the private sector into electricity production and encourage the diversification of energy
    sources focusing on renewable energy. This prior action would contribute to the objective to improve
    the performance of the electricity sector: (a) the decree would provide fair rules for private
    participation in electricity generation; and (b) the use of power purchase agreements (PPAs), or long-
    term contracts under which a business agreed to purchase electricity directly from an energy
    generator, would remove stumbling blocks to building new facilities. The relevance of PA17 is rated
    satisfactory.
   Together with the second part of PA17, PA18 – defining the rules for the selection of IPPs and the
    determination of IPP electricity prices – would strengthen private participation in electricity generation:
    (a) the adoption of rules and regulations for IPPs would clarify the role of the private sector in the
    electricity market; (b) as they were private non-utility entities (not owned by the national electricity
    company), IPPs needed rules governing their ownership and operation of facilities that generated
    electric power for sale to utilities and end-users in the unbundled electricity market; (c) the IPPs also
    needed rules governing the pricing of electricity sales; (d) considering that there were 94 IPP projects
    in the pipeline in 2015 (which implied contingent liabilities of US$25 million or 75 percent of GDP), it
    was necessary to ensure the competitive selection of IPPs. The relevance of PA18 is rated
    satisfactory.
   The combination of PA19 and PA 20 would address the long-running problem of the public sector's
    arrears on its electricity bills: (a) the public sector's arrears on its electricity bills had topped CFAF 80
    billion (US$129 million) by end-2016, with CFAF 23.4 billion owed by the central government, CFAF
    17.1 billion by SOEs, and CFAF 39.5 billion by the Abidjan District; (b) the arrears reflected poor
    collection efforts by CI-ENERGIES (the collection rate slid to 85 percent in 2017 from 90 percent in
    2015); (c) moreover, CI-ENERGIES had not collected CFAF 40 billion (US$69 million) on electricity
    exports to Ghana and Mali; and (d) CI-ENERGIES in turn owed IPPs and gas suppliers US$326
    million by mid-2018. PA19 called for the issuance of securities by the debtors CNRA and RTI,
    and letters of commitment (to pay the unpaid bills) by SPDC and SOTRA. PA20 involved the payment
    by the central government and the Abidjan District of all arrears accumulated until end-2017, and of
    current electricity bills, and the reduction of arrears by the SOEs. The relevance of PA19 is rated
    satisfactory since it presented a credible plan for the clearance of arrears. The relevance of PA20
    is rated moderately satisfactory as the plan was less specific.
   PA21 aimed to address inefficiencies in the operational performance of CI-ENERGIES: (a) technical
    and commercial losses amounted to 22 percent in 2015; (b) a program was underway to upgrade the
    utility's transmission and generation networks, financed by US$1.5 billion in loans; (c) over the long
    term, the goal was to reduce power losses to 14 percent by 2030; and (d) in addition, a masterplan
    would shift to lower-cost generation options, like combined-cycle gas-fired power plants, to replace
    the more expensive thermal generation from liquid fossil fuels. This prior action would support
    continuous operational and financial improvements in the electricity sector: (a) performance-based
    contracts between the government and CI-ENERGIES would set firm targets for technical loss

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



        reductions, commercial loss reductions, and efficiency improvements; (b) the results would be
        measured using key performance indicators; and (c) the results would be published quarterly. The
        relevance of PA21 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 5 - Consolidate Transparency in the Management of the Cocoa Sector

     PA22 through PA25 were a sequence of four inter-related actions directed at transparency issues in
        the management of the cocoa industry. After creating the CCC to regulate the industry in 2011, the
        government introduced the PVAM for the competitive forward sale of cocoa export rights and the
        market determination of producer prices, set the minimum farmgate price at 60 percent of the CIF
        price, created the Reserve Fund to compensate farmers for revenue losses, and set the cocoa tax
        system to cap taxes at a maximum 22 percent of the CIF price. These arrangements were tested
        when international cocoa prices dropped 40 percent in 2016, forcing the government to cut the
        farmgate price from CFAF 1,100 per to CFAF 700 per kilo, reduce the single export duty, and
        suspend the export registration fee (at a cost to the government of CFAF 45 billion in foregone
        revenue or 0.5 percent of GDP). The price shock exposed other problems: the PVAM was marked by
        irregularities with forward sales not matched by fixed-price counterpart purchase contracts
        with international buyers, while the management funds of collected by the CCC amounting to CFAF
        30 billion (US$50 million) annually remained opaque. Transparency with the management of these
        institutional arrangements would be indispensable to restoring their viability.
       PA22, involving the audit of the PVAM and the Reserve Fund (with a balance of CFAF 170 billion
        in 2017, held at the BCEAO), would contribute to the transparency objective: (a) the audit would
        consist of an institutional, technical, and financial audit; (b) it would identify weaknesses in the
        framework of the PVAM and the Reserve Fund, clarify the existing marketing and pricing systems,
        and shed light on the management of the FIMR, the FIA, and the Fonds Sacherie; (c) it was expected
        that the implementation of the audit recommendations – with the execution of PA23 and PA24 –
        would improve efficiency, reduce risks, and optimize the pass-through of international prices to local
        producers. The relevance of PA22 is rated satisfactory
       PA23 would institutionalize the first audit (PA22) with a system of regular (annual or bi-annual),
        systematic, and independent audits that would: (a) examine the implementation of marketing and
        pricing arrangements; (b) assess the management of funds collected by the CCC to implement
        activities of the FIMR, FIA, and the Fonds Sacherie; (c) strengthen controls to reduce the number of
        defaulted contracts between exporters and buyers; and (d) assure the market that the regulator would
        severely penalize speculators. The relevance of PA23 is rated satisfactory.
       PA24 would implement the recommendations of the 2017 audit of the PVAM and the Reserve Fund
        (PA22). This prior action would contribute to the transparency objective: (a) the award of export
        licenses by the CCC would be made more transparent; (b) the monitoring of the finances of exporters
        would be strengthened with the use of financial soundness indicators; and (c) accountability
        mechanisms for international buyers would be made more stringent, with buyers required to submit
        financial information to the CCC before their contracts were validated and barred from trading with the
        country for ten years should they fail to fulfill their obligations. The relevance of PA24 is rated
        satisfactory.
       PA25 would publish the commercially non-sensitive findings of the 2017 audit of the PVAM and the
        Reserve Fund (PA22) and finally launch the planned regular audits (PA23). This prior action would
        further advance the transparency objective to cover: (a) the cocoa export marketing system; (b) the
        industry stabilization accounts; (c) the Reserve Fund held at the BCEAO; and (d) the other funds
        managed by the CCC. The relevance of PA25 is rated satisfactory.


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)




Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Results Indicator Associated Relevance     Baseline   Target        Actual      Actual      Achievement
                  Prior Action Rating                               Value       Change in Rating
                                                                                RI Relative
                                                                                to Targeted
                                                                                Change
Objective 1 - Enhance Tax Revenue Collection
RI1 - Percentage PA5       Moderately     0 percent 90 percent      100         111        Modest
of new firms               Unsatisfactory (2015)      (2019)        percent     percent of
provided with a                                                     (2019)      targeted
unique                                                                          change
electronic identifi
cation number.
RI2 - Percentage PA3       Moderately     0 percent 75 percent      72.8        97 percent Modest
of enterprises             Unsatisfactory (2015)      (2019)        percent     of targeted
(with turnover                                                      (2019)      change
greater than
CFAF
200 million)
using the
electronic platfor
m to declare and
pay their taxes
RI3 - Decline in PA4       Highly         1.6 percent 1.4 percent   1.5 percent 50 percent Negligible
revenue             PA6    Satisfactory of GDP        of GDP        of GDP      of targeted
losses associate                          (2015)      (2019)        (2019)      change
d with
exemptions
Objective 2 - Enhance Public Procurement
RI4 - Number of PA7        Moderately     159 (2015) Less than      95.4 (2019) 100        Modest
days on average PA8        Unsatisfactory             100 (2019)    94.7 (2020) percent of
to complete a       PA9                                                         targeted
public                                                                          change
procurement fro
m the
preparation of
tenders to
approval

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



Objective 3 - Strengthen Efficiency and Equity in the Education Sector
RI5 - Reduction PA10        Satisfactory 15.6         Less than 9.5 percent 100             Modest
in the repetition PA12                   percent      10.5         (2020)       percent of
rate in primary PA14                     (2015)       percent                   targeted
school                                                (2019)                    change,
                                                                                but
                                                                                publication
                                                                                of
                                                                                outcomes
                                                                                took place
                                                                                for only
                                                                                one year
RI6 - Number of PA13        Moderately   N.A. (2015)5,000          9,898        198         Substantial
new                         Satisfactory              (2019)       (2019)       percent of
teachers recruite                                                               targeted
d in primary                                                                    change
schools
with ratio of
students/teacher
above the
national average
RI7 - Completion PA11       Satisfactory Boys - 47 Boys -          Boys - 63.6 Boys - 100 Substantial
rate in lower      PA15                  percent      More than percent         percent of
secondary          PA16                  (2015)       60 percent (2019-2020 targeted
education                                Girls - 35.2 (2019)       Girls - 57.2 change
                                         percent      Girls - More percent      Girls - 100
                                         (2015)       than 49.5 (2019-          percent of
                                                      percent      2020)        targeted
                                                      (2019)                    change
Objective 4 - Improve the Performance of the Electricity Sector, Including by Enabling Private
Sector Participation and Diversification
RI8 - Reduced PA21          Highly       22 percent Less than 16.92             100         High
commercial                  Satisfactory (2015)       20 percent percent        percent of
and technical                                         (2019)       (2019)       targeted
losses on an                                                                    change
annual basis
RI9 -              PA19     Satisfactory 85 percent 95 percent 97 percent 120               High
 Improvement in PA20                     (2015)       (2019)       (2019)       percent of
the                                                                             targeted
collection rate of                                                              change
electricity bills
paid by domestic
customers
RI10 - Reduction PA19       Satisfactory CFAF 80 CFAF 20 CFAF 9.9 117                       High
of all             PA20                  billion      billion or   billion      percent of
arrears accumul                          (2016)       less (2019) (2019)        targeted
ated by the                                                                     change

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



public sector on
its electricity bills
Objective 5 - Consolidate Transparency in the Management of the Cocoa Sector
RI11 - Reduction PA22       Moderately     15 percent Less than 5 0 percent 100        Modest
in the proportion PA23      Unsatisfactory (2017)     percent     (2019)    percent of
of defaulted          PA24                            (2019)                targeted
contracts             PA25                                                  change
by buyers/export
ers in
total production.


Objective 1 - Enhance Tax Revenue Collection

     RI1 only partly measured the impact of the new single electronic-type identification system for firms on
      achieving the objective to enhance revenue collection. The ability of this indicator to reflect improvements
      in tax revenue collection involves strong assumptions, including that the new identification system leads
      to greater tax compliance by firms and greater and more effective tax enforcement by the
      authorities. The percentage of firms provided with the new single electronic-type identification system
      that filed tax returns would have made for a stronger results indicator. The relevance of RI1 is rated
      moderately unsatisfactory.
     RI2 only partly measured the impact of the new electronic tax filing and payment platform on achieving
      the objective to enhance revenue collection. As with RI1, the ability of this indicator to reflect
      improvements in tax revenue collection involves strong assumptions, including that the new electronic
      system resulted in greater tax compliance by large firms and greater and more effective tax enforcement
      by the authorities. The essential question of whether proportionately more firms filed their tax returns
      following the introduction of the new electronic system compared to when only the old
      nonautomated system was available is not answered by this indicator. The relevance of RI2 is rated
      moderately unsatisfactory.
     RI3 was fully adequate to measure the impact of the elimination of four VAT exemptions and the
      adoption of a VAT deferred payment scheme for capital goods imports (to replace the exemptions) on
      achieving the objective to enhance revenue collection. The reduction in the revenue losses associated
      with the exemptions would adequately measure the degree of enhancement of tax revenue collection as
      a result of the reform. The relevance of RI3 is rated highly satisfactory.

Objective 2 - Enhance Public Procurement

     RI4 only partly measured the impact of organizational, operational, and oversight changes to the public
      procurement process and only partly reflected the degree to which public procurement would have been
      enhanced as a result. A reduction in the number of days to complete a government procurement would
      indicate the extent to which procurement process had become more efficient. However, an overriding
      problem to public procurement was the large proportion of contracts awarded with irregularities and
      without proper documentation. A second indicator and target measuring the reduction in the incidence
      and gravity of procurement irregularities would have been of primary relevance to the objective to
      enhance the integrity, and not just the efficiency, of public procurement. The relevance of RI4 is rated
      moderately unsatisfactory.



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



Objective 3 - Strengthen Efficiency and Equity in the Education Sector

     RI5 was adequate to measure the impact of the creation of sub-cycles, the adoption of national
      standardized evaluation of learning outcomes at the end of each sub-cycle, the increase in schooling
      time, and the reorganization of remediation activities on achieving the objective to strengthen efficiency
      in primary education. A reduction in the repetition rate in primary schools would indicate the extent to
      which the problem of repetition rates would have been addressed with the new sub-cycle system,
      enhancing efficiency in primary education. The relevance of RI5 is rated satisfactory.
     RI6 was mostly adequate to measure the impact of changes to the criteria governing the assignment and
      redeployment of teachers on achieving the objective to strengthen efficiency in primary education. The
      number of new teachers recruited in those primary schools with a higher-than-average student-teacher
      ratio would indicate the degree to which the problem of high student-teacher ratios in predominantly poor
      regions would have been addressed with the new recruitment drive, strengthening equity in primary
      education. The relevance of RI6 is rated moderately satisfactory. The indicator does not show whether,
      and to what extent, the high student-teacher ratios in these schools in poor regions were reduced,
      namely, whether student-teacher ratios in poor areas were finally at par with the national average.
     RI7 was adequate to measure the impact of the reassignment of students to secondary schools, the
      requirement for bivalent teachers, and the linkage of subsidies to the performance of private secondary
      schools on achieving the objective of strengthening efficiency and equity of secondary education. An
      increase in the completion rate in secondary schools would indicate the extent to which the problem of
      low completion rates would have been addressed with the reforms, strengthening efficiency in secondary
      education. The targets are disaggregated by gender, giving due importance to girls' education. The
      relevance of RI7 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 4 - Improve the Performance of the Electricity Sector, Including by Enabling Private Sector
Participation and Diversification

     RI8 was fully adequate to measure the improvement in the operational performance of the electricity
      sector. Technical losses are losses from energy dissipated in the components of an electricity
      system: the losses that occur within the distribution network due to the overhead lines, transformers and
      other substation equipment, and cables used to transfer electricity. Technical losses depend directly on
      both network characteristics (installation of distribution transformers away from load centers, inadequate
      size of conductors, lengthy distribution lines) and the mode of operation. Meanwhile, commercial (non-
      technical) losses are caused by actions external to the power system and consist primarily of electricity
      theft, meter tampering, collusion with utility staff, and errors in accounting and record-keeping. To
      minimize technical losses, the system must be well designed, constructed, and maintained. To minimize
      commercial losses, the system must be well run. The relevance of RI8 is rated highly satisfactory.
     RI9 was adequate to measure improvement in the financial performance of the electricity sector. Poor
      collection by CI-ENERGIES of both domestic and foreign customer accounts had led to the accumulation
      of private and public sector arrears at the CI-ENERGIES and, in turn, rising debt by CI-
      ENERGIES to IPPs and gas suppliers. This RI would reflect the impact of measures to improve the
      collection of electricity bills and, hence, improve the finances of the public utility and of energy suppliers
      and stave off arrears accumulation in the sector moving forward. The relevance of RI9 is rated
      satisfactory.
     RI10 was adequate to measure improvement in the financial performance of the electricity sector. In
      addition to heading off future arrears, the central government, the Abidjan District, and a group of SOEs
      needed to clear their accumulated arrears with CI-ENERGIES to help improve the finances of the public


                                                                                                     Page 20 of 32
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



                   utility. This programmatic series offered a credible plan to clear the arrears, and this RI would reflect the
                   outcome of the plan and serve to measure the degree of improvement in the financial standing of the
                   sector. The relevance of RI10 is rated satisfactory.

  Objective 5 - Consolidate Transparency in the Management of the Cocoa Sector

                  RI11 only partly measured the impact of the wide-ranging institutional, technical, and financial audits of
                   the PVAM system, the Reserve Fund, and the CCC-managed funds. Greater transparency in the
                   management of the cocoa industry, achieved through the conduct, regularization, implementation, and
                   publication of the audits, would improve the integrity of the marketing and pricing systems and the quality
                   of market participants such that defaulted contracts would be minimized. However, a decline in defaulted
                   contracts would be only one of many impacts of the audits. The others could include the enhanced
                   viability of the PVAM system, adequacy of the Reserve Fund, and integrity of the CCC-managed
                   funds. These are not measured by RI11. The relevance of RI11 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To enhance revenue tax collection.

               Rationale
                     RI1: The percentage of new firms provided with a unique electronic identification number rose from 0
                      percent in 2015 to 100 percent in 2020 (all 16,786 new firms), exceeding the target of 90
                      percent. Because of the weakness in the indicator, the achievement is rated modest.
                     RI2: The percentage of enterprises (with turnover greater than CFAF 200 million) using the
                      electronic platform to declare and pay their taxes rose from 0 percent in 2015 to 72.8 percent in 2020,
                      achieving at least two-thirds of the target of 75 percent. The ICR (page 21) added the following data:
                      (a) 78.5 percent of all large firms (59,853 of 76,213) (with turnover greater than CFAF 200 million)
                      used the electronic platform to pay their taxes; and (b) 81.8 percent of all medium-sized firms
                      (116,006 of 141,809) (with turnover greater than CFAF 200 million) used the electronic platform to pay
                      their taxes. Because of the weakness in the indicator, the achievement is rated modest.
                     RI3: The decline in revenue losses associated with tax exemptions was 1 percentage point of GDP, or
                      revenue losses of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2019, compared to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2015, failing to
                      achieve the target for a larger decline by 2 percentage points of GDP. According to the ICR (pages 21
                      and 29), the elimination of exemptions to the VAT (PA2) was reversed, ostensibly on strong
                      opposition from the private sector. The reversal of the VAT reform formed part of the rescission of the
                      "new fiscal revenue measures" initially adopted with the 2018 budget. The "higher quality tax policy
                      package" was rescinded, according to the IMF, which conducted the Third Review of the arrangement

                                                                                                                  Page 21 of 32
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



       for Cote d'Ivoire under the IMF Extended Credit Facility and the extended arrangement under the IMF
       Extended Fund Facility in June 2018, "to accommodate private sector concerns and preserve social
       cohesion." The original commitments were replaced by a different package consisting of a new export
       tax on cashew nuts, optimization of tax and customs procedures, and some VAT and excise rate
       hikes, amounting to a lower 0.3 percent of GDP. The achievement is rated negligible. Discussions
       with Bank staff indicate that consultations on the original revenue measures were conducted with
       stakeholders through an ad-hoc committee of government and private sector representatives,
       the Comite de Concertation du Secteur Prive, but that politics remained highly factional and social
       cohesion fragile in Cote d'Ivoire, which had been in the Bank's list of countries affected by fragility,
       conflict and violence (FCV) until 2019.

With the achievement of two of the three RIs rated modest, and the third negligible, the efficacy of this pillar is
rated moderately unsatisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance public procurement.

Rationale
      RI4: The number of days on average to complete a public procurement, from the preparation of
       tenders to approval, was reduced from 159 days in 2015 to 95.4 days in 2019, exceeding the target of
       a reduction to 100 days. More recent data show a further reduction to 94.7 days in 2020. According to
       the ICR (page 22), the electronic procurement system was implemented in 25 ministries by end-2019
       and extended to all ministries in 2020, after being piloted in five ministries in DPF2 (PA8) and
       extended to ten ministries in DPF3 (PA9). The final target of 100 days was also made more ambitious
       than the original target of 120 days. However, the operation is lacking an indicator to
       measure progress toward the objective of enhancing the integrity of public procurement, relative to the
       gravity of the problems documented before the reform: 59 percent of public contracts were awarded
       with several irregularities and 15 percent were approved without the requisite documentation. By itself,
       the reduction of the number of days to complete a public procurement provides no evidence that
       irregularities in the award and approval of public contracts were eliminated or diminished. The
       achievement is therefore rated modest.

With the achievement of the sole RI rated modest, the efficacy of this pillar is rated moderately
unsatisfactory.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 32
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)




Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen efficiency and equity in the education sector.

Rationale
      RI5: The repetition rate in primary schools was reduced from 15.6 percent in 2015 to 9.5 percent in
       2020, meeting the target for a reduction to less than 10.5 percent. The creation of sub-cycles in
       primary schooling, which aimed to reduce the repetition rate by focusing on "blocs of competencies"
       as the criterion for judging student performance and promotion to the next sub-cycle, was supposed to
       be matched by efforts to improve the measurement of education outcomes at the end of each sub-
       cycle. However, according to the ICR (page 23), the program to measure and publish education
       outcomes was discontinued after being implemented for only one year, reportedly because of "lack
       of resources," raising questions of attribution and sustainability. The achievement is therefore rated
       modest rather than substantial or high.
      RI6: The number of new teachers recruited in primary schools with a student-teacher ratio above the
       national average (of 50 students to 1 teacher) was 9,898 by 2019, exceeding the target of
       5,000. However, the number of teacher recruits gives no indication of whether the higher-than-
       average student-teacher ratio in these primary school classrooms, located predominantly in
       underserved regions of the country, was reduced to the national average (or to under the
       average). The achievement of RI6 is therefore rated substantial rather than high.
      RI7: The completion rate in lower secondary education increased from 47 percent in 2015 to 63.6
       percent in 2019-20 for boys, meeting the target of an increase of more than 60 percent, and from 35.2
       percent in 2015 to 57.2 percent in 2019-20 for girls, meeting the target of an increase of more than
       49.5 percent. According to the ICR (page 24), however, this result was weakened by the failure of the
       government to launch a program (either a pilot or a regular program) to deliver vouchers to poor
       families that would have covered the costs of secondary education of poor students. The original
       indicator – the completion rate in lower secondary education of students from the poorest families –
       was revised by deleting the reference to "poorest families" because of the lack of reliable data. Yet,
       this would have been a results indicator of equity in education, an objective of this pillar in addition to
       efficiency. The achievement is rated substantial rather than high.

With the achievement of two of the three RIs rated substantial and one rated modest, the efficacy of this pillar
is rated satisfactory.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4

                                                                                                   Page 23 of 32
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)




Objective
To improve the performance of the electricity sector by enabling private sector participation and
diversification.

Rationale
      RI8: Commercial and technical losses (annualized basis) were reduced from 22 percent in 2015 to
       16.92 percent in 2019, meeting the target for a reduction to less than 20 percent. This reflected
       improved operational performance for the sector. The achievement of is rated high.
      RI9: The collection rate on the electricity bills of domestic customers rose from 85 percent in 2016 to
       97 percent in 2019, exceeding the target for improvement to 95 percent. This reflected improved
       financial performance for the sector. The achievement is rated high.
      RI10: The arrears accumulated by the public sector on its electricity bills were reduced from CFAF 80
       billion in 2016 to CFAF 9.9 billion in 2019, meeting the target for a reduction to CFAF 20 billion or
       less. The achievement is rated high.

With the achievement of the three RIs rated high, the efficacy of this pillar is rated highly satisfactory.



Rating
Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
To consolidate transparency in the management of the cocoa sector.

Rationale
      RI11: The proportion of defaulted contracts by buyers and exporters was reduced from 15 percent of
       total production in 2015 to 0 percent of total production in 2019 (i.e., there were no contracts under
       default in 2019), meeting the target for a reduction to under 5 percent of total production. The
       number of defaulted contracts was considered a strong indicator of the quality of exporters and the
       integrity of the export process, and would reflect the result of prior actions to instill greater
       transparency in the management and operations of the cocoa industry. According to the ICR (pages
       25-26), greater transparency yielded other positive results: (a) exporters that failed to meet more
       stringent financial standards were weeded out, cutting the number of eligible exporters by a third from
       66 to 22; and (b) officials who had committed irregularities in the management of the industry were
       dismissed, including the Managing Director of the CCC. In the same vein, the ICR warns that the
       stoppage of the audits risks the sustainability of this outcome. Because the transparency objective
       feeds on audits, the achievement is rated modest.

With the achievement of the sole RI rated modest, the efficacy of this pillar is rated moderately unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 32
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)




                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With the efficacy of the first, second, and fifth objectives rated moderately unsatisfactory, the third objective
satisfactory, and the fourth objective highly satisfactory, the overall efficacy of the programmatic series is rated
moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Relevance is rated satisfactory, as the prior actions could be reasonably expected to produce intended
outcomes. Efficacy is rated moderately satisfactory: (a) there was high achievement of the objective to improve
electricity sector performance; (b) there was evidence of improved efficiency in the education sector, but less
evidence of improved equity; (c) there was achievement but subsequent backsliding in transparent management
of the cocoa sector; and (d) the operation's results indicators were inadequate to demonstrate changes in
revenue tax collection or enhancement of public procurement. The outcome of the programmatic series is rated
moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The persistence of factionalism in politics, the relative fragility of social cohesion, and the country's slow
emergence from FCV status pose substantial risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this
programmatic series. The reversal of some reforms supported by this series, many before the closing of the third



                                                                                                        Page 25 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



operation, reflects the severity of the challenges to the sustainability of the program's outcomes across a wide
range of risk categories.

Political Risk. The elimination of exemptions to the VAT, in addition to five other new tax revenue
measures, was rescinded soon after the approval of the 2018 budget. The fragility of the national political
consensus around difficult fiscal adjustment measures, including VAT reform, risks derailing Cote D'Ivoire's
convergence to the WAEMU's fiscal deficit norm of 3 percent of GDP. The government needs to engage the
private sector more intensively on fiscal reform considering that the tax package faced stiff private sector
resistance even after consultations with stakeholders. The government might also consider offering offsetting
social measures to address concerns about the adverse social impacts of adjustment measures, as it did with
the new tax package that replaced the original plan.

Technical Risks. The pilot to implement the e-procurement, e-learning, and decision support modules for public
procurement faced technical challenges that were overcome only with extensive information and training
sessions, according to the ICR. It would appear from this experience that more technical assistance is needed to
mitigate the risks arising from the introduction of technology-focused innovations to public procurement. The
effort to build a new database on prices to help benchmark contracts would be such an application facing
technical risks and, hence, requiring mitigation measures.

Institutional Capacity Risk. The inability of the primary school system to measure and publish education
outcomes at the end of each new sub-cycle in primary schooling risks diminishing reforms that created "blocs of
competencies" as a basis of promotion of student to the next sub-cycle. After implementing the student
assessments for one year, the authorities have failed to continue the annual assessment. The lack of an
assessment of education outcomes would render the new sub-cycle system ineffectual in improving the quality
of primary schooling. Related to institutional capacity risks are deficiencies in the economic and social data
collected by the government that would allow for a better assessment of program outcomes.

Macroeconomic Risk. Cote d'Ivoire's economy is expected to grow an annual average 6.4 percent in 2021-23
after slowing down to 2 percent growth in 2020 (from an annual average 6.6 percent in 2018-19) following the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. The fiscal and external balances are projected to remain in deficit,
however, over the near term. The pandemic continues to pose a downside to the recovery, exerting pressure on
government finances. The economic slowdown in 2020, for instance, resulted in a new uptick in arrears on
electricity bills during the year.

Political Economy Risk. The discontinuation of audits of the PVAM and its associated marketing and pricing
system, the Reserve Fund, the FIMR, the FIA, and the Fonds Sacherie reflects political economy risks that
threaten the sustainability of reforms to the management of the cocoa sector. While the program achieved the
target of reducing the proportion of defaulted contracts between exporters and buyers, the management of the
cocoa sector has yet to change significantly, according to the ICR. Improvements to the governance system
remain necessary, and reforms can only be informed by regular audits. Studies that underpinned the cocoa
sector reforms supported by this series (see Section 8a) suggest more comprehensive approaches in the long
term that may also address political economy risks: creating other mechanisms, including social protection
schemes, to support cocoa farmers in cases where the stabilization funds turn out to be inadequate relative to
deep international commodity price swings, and embedding the cocoa industry reform plan within a larger rural
and agricultural productivity program.




                                                                                                    Page 26 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytic foundations. The design of the programmatic series was informed by analytic work produced by the
Bank as well as by the IMF and the government:

      Pillar 1 – “Evaluation Report on Tax and Administration Reforms under the IMF Technical Assistance
         Funded by the Tax Policy and Administration Topical Trust Fund" (IMF, 2016); "Côte d’Ivoire: Relever le
         Défi de la Mobilisation Fiscale" (World Bank, 2019).
        Pillar 2 – “Diagnostic Study of Governance in Côte d’Ivoire” (2013); “Côte d’Ivoire: Public Expenditure
         Management and Financial Accountability Review” (World Bank, 2008 and 2013).
        Pillar 3 – “Côte d’Ivoire: Public Expenditure Review in the Education Sector” (World Bank, 2016); ‘’A
         Hybrid Approach to Estimating the Efficiency of Public Spending on Education in Emerging and
         Developing Economies” (IMF, 2014); "World Development Report - Making Service Work for Poor
         People’’ (World Bank, 2004).
        Pillar 4 – “Cote d'Ivoire Country Systematic Diagnostic 2015: From Crisis to Sustained Growth - Priorities
         for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity” (World Bank, 2014).
        Pillar 5 – “Welfare and Poverty Impacts of Cocoa Price Policy Reform in Côte d’Ivoire” (World Bank,
         2016); “Document de Stratégie: Réformes de la Filière Café-Cacao" (Government of Cote d'Ivoire, 2011).

Linked operations. The program development objectives and the prior actions supported by this programmatic
series were related to the development objectives and project activities of other World Bank operations in Cote
d'Ivoire.

      Pillar 1 – The Governance and Institutional Development Project (P107355) aimed to
         enhance transparency and efficiency in the management of public finances and to improve governance
         and efficiency in the cocoa sector.
        Pillar 2 – The Enhancing Government Effectiveness for Improved Public Services (P164302) aimed to
         strengthen government capacity in program-based budgeting and procurement, delivery of selected
         education services, management of roads contracts, and facilitating access to financial services.
        Pillar 3 – The Emergency Basic Education Support Project (P119328) aimed to restore and
         increase access to basic education, rehabilitate and improve the conditions for teaching and learning,
         and restore and strengthen the institutional capacity to deliver quality basic education.
        Pillar 4 – The CI-ENERGIES Guarantee Project (P164145) aimed to improve the electricity sector's
         financial performance by refinancing the short-term liabilities of CI-ENERGIES. The Electricity
         Transmission and Access Project (P157055) aimed to to contribute to the improvement of the efficiency
         and reliability of electricity supply and increased access to electricity.
        Pillar 5 – The Governance and Institutional Development Project (P107355) aimed to
         enhance transparency and efficiency in the management of public finances and to improved governance
         and efficiency in the cocoa sector.

Stakeholder consultation. According to the Program Documents, stakeholder consultations were undertaken
within the context of the PND preparation (the reforms supported by this series were informed by, and aligned

                                                                                                    Page 27 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



with, the PND priorities). However, these discussions with stakeholders would appear to have been insufficient,
considering the private sector opposition to the VAT exemption elimination.

Donor coordination. The Bank collaborated closely with other development partners in the policy areas
supported by this programmatic series. The Bank collaborated with the IMF through a Joint Management Action
Plan. The IMF prepared an Extended Credit Facility program focused on domestic resource mobilization and the
management of fiscal risk stemming from the electricity sector and PPP projects. The Bank, the European
Union, and the African Development Bank assisted the government to develop a new strategic framework for
public financial management and an action plan to implement reforms at both national and subnational levels,
with the African Development Bank providing technical assistance, and the European Union, budget support and
technical assistance. Meanwhile, the Agence Française de Développement partly aligned its operations in Cote
d'Ivoire to be supportive of the policy areas of this programmatic series.

Design shortcomings. There were deficiencies with several of the results indicators chosen by the Bank to
measure the efficacy of the program. While these indicators generally reflected the results of the prior actions,
they lacked the ability to measure the achievement of the program objectives (see Section 4).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring. The Bank monitored the programs closely. Bank missions reviewed progress with the overall
reform program and assessed the macroeconomic policy framework to ensure that it remained adequate for the
program. The Bank obtained quarterly progress reports from the government. Each Program Document reported
the results achieved by the prior operation: the progress as of mid-2017 for DPF1, and the progress as of end-
2017 or mid-2018 for DPF2.

Adaptation. The Bank revised the triggers (indicative prior actions for the next operation in the series) to adjust
to the evolving context of the reform program.

      Of the eight triggers for DPF2: (a) three were delayed, becoming triggers instead for DPF3; (b) two were
       revised; (c) one was dropped following its inclusion in the IMF program (the two centers to monitor tax
       payments by medium-sized enterprises) and replaced with a new trigger (a new electronic platform for
       filing and paying taxes); and (d) two were retained without changes.
      Of the ten triggers for DPF3: (a) six were revised; (b) two were dropped (the manual to implement
       Decree 2010-200, and the pilot voucher program for poor families); and (c) two were retained without
       changes.

The Bank also made changes to the results indicators over the course of the programmatic series. The
indicators were replaced with measures that were either better linked to their associated prior actions or had



                                                                                                     Page 28 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



more readily available data. Nonetheless, some indicators lacked the ability to measure progress toward the
pillar objectives.

      Three results indicators for Pillar 1 were dropped: the number of tax-paying firms and individuals in the
       government's taxpayer database (after DPF1); the percentage of medium and large-sized enterprises
       filing and paying taxes online (after DPF2); and the increase in VAT revenues collected by the
       Directorate General of Taxes, as a percentage of GDP (after DPF1).
      One results indicator for Pillar 3 was dropped -- the increase in the completion rate in lower secondary
       education of children from the poorest families (after DPF2) -- for lack of reliable data.
      Three results indicators for Pillar 4 were dropped: the improved financial performance by CI-ENERGIES
       as evidenced by an increase in the firm's net income (after DPF1); the reduction in losses at CI-
       ENERGIES (after DPF1); and the signing by the government of at least two PPAs with IPPs, including
       one PPA for renewable energy (after DPF2).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With the performance at design and during implementation rated moderately satisfactory, the overall
performance of the Bank is rated moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

According to the Program Documents, the programmatic series would help reduce poverty and improve equity in
Cote d'Ivoire: (a) reforms aimed at broadening the tax base would raise public revenues that could be used to
fund socially beneficial programs; (b) however, changes to the VAT, a tax on consumption, could affect poor
households, in response to which the government could explore social safety net measures to help mitigate any
adverse effects on the disposable income and consumption of the poor; (c) reforms to improve public
procurement would result in efficiency gains that would free fiscal resources for social programs; (d) many
education reforms would improve opportunities for the poor – the revision of student assignment criteria to
ensure that students from poor households were retained in public schools closer to their homes; the reduction
of high repetition rates, including through remedial classes, and the redeployment of teachers to improve the



                                                                                                   Page 29 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



teacher/student ratio in poor regions; and (e) enhancing the performance of the electricity sector would
improve the access to electricity for poor households and for firms, which can expand employment opportunities.

According to the ICR: (a) the government and the Bank were conducting an analysis of the distributional impact
of the tax system and public spending (using the commitment to equity approach); (b) measures supported by
this program that promoted access to, and improved the quality of, primary and secondary education benefitted
students from poor households; (c) actions to enhance the operational and financial performance of the
electricity sector improved access to electricity, including for poor households (only 47 percent of the population
had access to electricity in 2015); and (d) efforts to improve the management of the cocoa sector would have
benefitted cocoa producers directly, half of whom were poor or near-poor, and indirectly through government tax
revenues from the industry, which could be spent on social services for the poor. Importantly, the ICR did not
offer any evidence for these claims, ex-post.



b. Environmental

The Program Documents determined that the programmatic series was "not likely to have significant
negative effects on the country’s environment, forests, or other natural resources" and that any adverse
environmental effects, which were "expected to be minor," would be manageable through the existing country
and Bank framework.

The ICR concluded that the operation "did not have significant negative effects on the country’s environment,
forests, or other natural resources." However, the document acknowledged that Cote d'Ivoire's cocoa sector
faced significant issues with deforestation, but that these issues would be subsequently addressed through a
planned successor operation.



c. Gender

The Program Documents stated that the programmatic series was "expected to have a positive impact on
gender equality." Reforms under Pillar 2 would help enhance gender parity in primary and secondary schools.

The ICR reported that the completion rate in lower secondary education increased from 35.2 percent in 2015 to
57.2 percent in 2019-20 for girls, meeting the target of an increase of more than 49.5 percent, part of the results
of this series (see Section 5). Discussions with Bank staff indicate that measures to improve access to
and quality of education in collèges de proximité, including by hiring bivalent teachers that would keep these
schools open, benefited girls who attended these schools rather than regular schools in more distant locations.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 30 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)




Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR was prepared consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development
financing operations and includes sections on the relevance of prior actions and the relevance of results
indicators.

Conciseness. The account of the project's performance is well informed and concisely presented. The
programmatic series covered five distinct policy and structural reform areas – taxation, public procurement,
education, electricity services, the all-important cocoa industry – and involved 25 prior actions, some consisting
of multiple parts, and 11 results indicators. The discussions were comprehensive but focused.

Results Orientation. The assessment of efficacy was outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement
of the results targets.

Quality of Evidence. The ICR backed its assessment of efficacy with additional information on decisions made
by the government to either strengthen some of the prior actions or moderate the pace of reform implementation
of the three-operation programmatic series because of changed circumstances, including political sensitivities
and implementation difficulties. The additional information is important for understanding the evolution of triggers
and prior actions in the series.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program was candid. While the program fulfilled all the
prior actions and achieved many outcome targets, several policy reforms were reversed, setting off questions
about the sustainability of program outcomes.

Lessons. The lessons are well-founded and potentially valuable to future reform operations that are complex,
politically sensitive, and difficult to implement in an FCV or post-FCV setting.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.


                                                                                                     Page 31 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-DPO on Fiscal managment, Educ. & Ener (P158463)



Enhancing transparency is a vital first step in designing and advancing structural reform programs. In
this series, the institutional, technical, and financial audits of the PVAM, the Reserve Fund, and the CCC-
managed development funds were vital to understanding structural and operational problems in the governance
and management of the cocoa industry. Regular and systematic conduct of independent audits would continue
to be necessary moving forward to help design reforms that would address issues and questions raised by the
collapse in international cocoa prices in 2017: the viability of the government-set farmgate prices, the adequacy
of the Reserve Fund to protect producers from price drops, the utility of the development funds to support
productivity initiatives, and the overall governance of the industry marketing, pricing, and support systems.

Electricity tariffs remain a nagging issue in electricity service reform. In this series, the range of measures
to improve the operational and financial performance of the electricity sector included improving collections of
electricity bills, reducing and settling arrears and restructuring debt with utility companies, and reducing technical
and non-technical losses in transmission and distribution. A decree was issued adopting a methodology to set
electricity tariff rates closer to operating costs, but the series never required implementation of the
adjustment. A plan preceding this series to raise tariffs in 2016 was rejected by customers, and a new plan to
raise tariffs to cover operating costs at IPPs remains politically charged. However, the authorities must ultimately
confront the issue if the scheme to attract private participation in energy projects is to succeed.

Assembling a package of complementary support instruments can help strengthen the impact of a
development policy operation. In this series, the effort to improve the operational and financial performance of
the electricity sector was supported by related interventions including an International Finance Corporation
investment to expand the AZITO and CIPREL power plants, an IDA guarantee operation for the refinancing of
short-term liabilities of CI-ENERGIES, and a separate IDA investment project financing
to reinforce the transmission system, rehabilitate and extend the distribution system, continue with rural
electrification, and strengthen institutional capacity of the electricity sector. According to the ICR, these
combined operations provided a "critical mass of leverage" to implement difficult reforms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 32 of 32
