     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022715

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P144497                                      TZ-Expanding Rice Production

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18462                                     30-Apr-2020                                         22,224,814.76

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Mar-2015                                  31-Jan-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             22,900,000.00                                    22,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              22,900,000.00                                    22,224,814.76

 Actual                                          22,897,585.39                                    22,224,814.76




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete              J. W. van Holst                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were: “to increase the productivity and production of rice among
   smallholders in targeted areas of Morogoro and Zanzibar”. (Grant Agreement, page 6). The PDOs in the
   PAD were the same as those in the Loan Agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   1. Sustainable Seed Systems (Appraisal Estimate: US$3.38 million, Actual: US$1.64 million). The
   component aimed to enhance the adoption and sustained use of improved rice varieties that have been
   released by the research system. This aimed to support on-farm demonstrations to introduce the new
   varieties to farmers, the multiplication and distribution of preferred varieties by smallholder farmers, and
   improvements in quality assurance for rice seed. Tanzania had thirteen improved rice varieties released for
   multiplication however, these were grown on less than 15 percent of the total area cropped to rice. The
   project aimed to: (i) strengthen the capacity of the Kilombero Agricultural Research and Training Institute
   (KATRIN) and the Zanzibar Agricultural Research Institute (ZARI) to produce the requisite quality and
   quantity of pre-basic seed; (ii) support the Agricultural Seed Agency (ASA) and the Seed Unit in the Ministry
   of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MANR) in Zanzibar to produce adequate quantities of basic seed;
   and (iii) encourage private seed companies to engage in production of certified seed. On quality control,
   support would be provided for the rehabilitation and operation of seed laboratory infrastructure at the ASA
   on the Mainland and Kizimbani in Zanzibar, and for the purification of contaminated varieties by national
   crop breeders (where contamination occurs). Support would also be provided to the Tanzania Official Seed
   Certification Institute (TOSCI) to strengthen the inspection and testing of pre-basic and basic seed, and the
   certification of rice seed that is multiplied by ASA, MANR and private seed companies

   2. Improving Crop Productivity through Better Irrigation and Crop Management (Appraisal Estimate:
   US$18.48 million, Actual: US$11.79 million). The component sought to support expansion and/or
   rehabilitation of five smallholder irrigation schemes on the Mainland (250 ha of irrigated area), and eight
   smallholder irrigation schemes in Zanzibar (44 ha). The project supported the design of the irrigation
   infrastructure, the construction of the infrastructure, and the strengthening of Irrigator Organizations (IO) to
   assure sustainable operation and maintenance of the irrigation works. In addition, the project aimed to
   speed the adoption of improved technologies needed to raise rice productivity and production by
   smallholder farmers distributed across 40 irrigation schemes on the Mainland (including the five where
   irrigation infrastructure was to be rehabilitated or expanded) and 24 irrigation schemes in Zanzibar
   (including the 8 to be rehabilitated or expanded) by supporting: (i) farmer-led, on-farm demonstrations of
   two methods of the SRI - one with manual weeding, and one with chemical weed control, (ii) training of
   extension staff, irrigation technicians and lead farmers, and (iii) a temporary, market-friendly subsidy
   scheme promoting the uptake of technologies.

   3. Innovative Marketing Strategies (Appraisal Estimate: US$2.37 million, Actual: US$2.61
   million). The component aimed to increase the quantity of rice marketed by strengthening access to
   markets and improving price incentives at the farm-gate. Activities under this component were targeted at
   only the Morogoro Region of Tanzania Mainland, due to the absence of marketable surpluses. The project
   aimed to improve market efficiency through two major activities: (i) provision of marketing infrastructure
   (feeder roads and warehouses) and (ii) strengthening of market linkages (fund studies to help farmers better

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



  understand rice markets; support the testing of multiple marketing strategies such as contract delivery with
  nearby processors, the auctioning of grain to groups of traders, warehouse receipts, and the strengthening
  of market information systems).

  4. Project Management and Coordination (Appraisal Estimate: US$3.11 million, Actual: US$ 4,36
  million). The aim of this component was to facilitate efficient implementation of project activities and
  tracking of results. Project implementation used the existing structures in Ministry of Agriculture Food
  Security and Cooperatives (MAFC) for Tanzania Mainland and MANR in Zanzibar. Each of these Ministries
  would assign a dedicated implementation team of key staff to ensure that there is adequate capacity to
  coordinate, implement and monitor the project effectively. Under this component, support would be provided
  for operational costs, project monitoring and evaluation and impact assessments.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost: Project cost planned at appraisal was US$27.34 million, and actual cost at closing was US$ 20.4
  million (75 percent of the planned amount). The project team stated that: "Additional expenditures were
  incurred before Project closing but documented subsequently during the grace period, so that the final total
  disbursed amount is approximately $22.2 million". This would make final cost 81 percent of planned
  amount. The reason for the decrease in costs is not clear from the ICR; the project team consequently
  reported that this is due to not being able to report on beneficiary contribution.

  Financing: The project was financed by a Global Agriculture and Food Security Program grant that planned
  to provide US$22,9 million and US$4.4 million by beneficiary contribution at appraisal. At closing, US$20.4
  million was provided by the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (final provision was US$22.2
  million as mentioned above) and beneficiary contribution was not reported by the ICR. The Bank project
  team subsequently explained that the beneficiary contribution of US$4.4 million was Tanzania’s contribution
  to the subsidy program which amounted to 50% of the estimated cost of seed and fertilizer incurred by
  smallholders. . When the subsidy program was reduced by the government to a total of just $0.6 million the
  “beneficiary contribution” was reduced . However, the Bank team also clarified that project beneficiaries
  (farmers) also provided in-kind contributions in terms of labor and land (e.g. land for the warehouses), which
  was difficult to estimate. Nevertheless, the total contribution by beneficiaries was larger than reported in the
  ICR.

  Borrower Contribution: There was no borrower contribution.

  Dates: The project was approved by the Board on 12 March 2015 and became effective about two months
  later on 18 May 2015. Original closing date of 30 April 2020 was extended for nine months to 31 January
  2021, to complete the unfinished works.

  Restructuring: The project went through two restructurings. While the PDO did not change the original
  outcome, targets changed. First restructuring occurred in November 2019 and it increased the end target of
  the PDO indicator on “average yields of targeted farmers growing paddy in the Mainland” from 3.5 to 5.0
  tons/ha, which aligned to the actual baseline yields achieved at that time. The restructuring also removed
  US$3,797,342 from disbursement category 2 (subsidies) to component 1 (goods, works, non-consulting,
  training and operational costs), in order to align to the Government’s directive to move away from traditional
  input subsidies. The April 2020 restructuring modified two PDO indicator targets as follows: (i) additional
  quantities of rice produced in Zanzibar from 9,660 tons to 6,000 tons, and (ii) direct beneficiaries, from

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



   33,069 smallholder farmers to 30,000 smallholder farmers. The reason for the second adjustment was
   that, at appraisal external financing from Exim Bank was planned to support irrigation schemes in Zanzibar
   to cover approximately 1,524 ha under another program; support to seeds and farmers training was to be
   provided by this project; however, during implementation, this financing did not materialize; hence there was
   no need for training and seed provision and reductions to the targets was needed in Zanzibar. Similar to the
   ICR, a split assessment is not going to be conducted; as the first restructuring increased the PDO indicator
   targets and the second restructuring was necessary because the irrigation investment to be funded by the
   Exim Bank did not materialize, which led to adjusting the smallholder beneficiaries and rice production
   levels downwards but only in Zanzibar. This adjustment ensured that the revised targets reflected the level
   of available financing. In addition, the second restructuring extended project closing date by 9 months, from
   April 30, 2020 to January 31, 2021, to allow for completion of the project activities, particularly irrigation
   works.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project development objectives were and remained highly relevant to country and World Bank
strategies.

Country and Sector Context. At the time of appraisal and currently the agriculture sector has been key to
Tanzania’s economic growth, food security and poverty reduction. The sector contributed to 75 percent of
employment, 25 percent of GDP and 35 percent of export earnings recently (ICR page 5). Tanzania has 7.1
million hectares (ha) of high and medium potential land suitable for irrigation. Of the 2.3 million ha classified
as high potential, only 461,326 ha had improved irrigation infrastructure in 2015. The growth of the
agricultural sector had been hampered by low productivity of land and labor due to poor production
techniques; underdeveloped markets, market infrastructure and farm-level value addition; poor rural
infrastructure; and insufficient agricultural finance, including public expenditure. During the time of project
appraisal, smallholder crop yields stagnated at only 20 to 30 percent of their potential. Only 16 percent of
farmers in Tanzania used improved seed varieties, 17 percent used organic fertilizer and less than 1
percent farmers were exposed to improved agricultural technologies, with limited irrigation infrastructure
across the country. The use of productivity enhancing agricultural inputs was among the lowest in the Sub-
Saharan Africa region (ICR page 5).

As the ICR notes (paragraph 4), the rice subsector was and remains a strategic priority for agricultural
development in Tanzania. Rice was grown by over 1 million farmers in the Mainland and 72,000 farmers in
Zanzibar. On the Mainland, rice was the second most important cereal after maize, recognized as a
valuable food and cash crop and preferred staple in the urban markets. In Zanzibar, rice was the most
important cereal grain. However, similar to the overall agriculture sector, yields were low, with average rice
yields around 1.2 to 2 tons/ha against a demonstrated on-farm potential of 6 to 8 tons/ha. This was due to
limited improved seed availability and extremely limited improved technologies including System of Rice
Intensification (SRI); and farmers only growing one cropping season due to poor irrigation infrastructure and
water management. Most of the rice was grown by smallholders under rain-fed conditions, with women
playing a critical role in the labor force.



                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



               Relevance to Government Strategies. The Expanding Rice Production Project reflected the Tanzania’s
               priorities, which identified rice as a strategic crop for improving food security. The National Rice
               Development Strategy (2009) aimed to double rice production to meet domestic demand and expand rice
               exports. The PDO was also aligned with National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty, the Long-
               Term Perspective Plan 2011/12-2025/26, and the Tanzania Five Year Development Plan 2011/12-2015/16.
               Each of these commitments highlight agriculture’s importance to the Tanzanian economy and emphasize
               the need to commercialize the agricultural sector through productivity growth and expanding trade.

               Relevance to World Bank Strategies. The project development objective was realistically pitched in terms of
               its ambition and fully aligned with the World Bank’s Tanzania Country Assistance Strategy (2012-2015).
               This was reflected under Objective 1 (promoting inclusive, sustainable private sector-led growth through
               increasing productivity and income), and Outcome 1.2 (increasing productivity and commercialization of
               agriculture). It continued to align with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2018-2022), under Focus
               Area 1 (enhancing productivity and accelerating equitable and sustainable development), which included
               promoting agricultural diversification and commercialization. The project was also in line with the World
               Bank’s Strategy for Africa, contributing to the theme on competitiveness and employment.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the productivity and production of rice among smallholders in targeted areas of Morogoro and
                             Zanzibar.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): The TOC of the project was retrospectively constructed in the ICR (page 8), and it
                             was overall logical with activities, outputs, outcomes and impacts linked with each other with mostly
                             reasonable assumptions. Accordingly, the activities aimed at achieving a sustainable seed production and
                             marketing systems were expected to lead to increased availability of improved varieties of certified seeds;
                             efforts on promotion of improved varieties were expected to lead to increased adoption of improved cultural
                             practices and technology uptake; rehabilitation and expansion of irrigation structures and capacity building for
                             irrigation system management and maintenance were expected to lead to increased irrigated area under
                             irrigation; activities under the marketing component to construct market infrastructure and facilitate market
                             linkages would lead to increased volume of rice traded. All of these outputs were expected to lead jointly to
                             the increase in yields and production of rice; the long-term outcome would be increased food security and
                             farm incomes. Assumptions were in general logical, i.e. farmers were highly interested in adopting the
                             technologies, market friendly subsidies to boost technology adoption (though they were later terminated),
                             qualified service providers to support irrigation /roads /warehouse works as supported by the project.
                             However, the private sector interest in production of rice certified seeds was limited and most support for rice

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



seed delivery system in the TOC remained public centric (ICR, paragraph 44). In an exchange with IEG
during the preparation of this review the Bank project team explained that because rice is self-pollinating
farmers can reproduce their own seed from an initial purchase of improved seed. This technical aspect
reduces marketing opportunities for seed companies and dampens their interest in the rice seed market. In
addition, the TOC did not discuss specifically smallholders, despite the fact that the PDO was about the
smallholders.

Outputs:

Irrigation Infrastructure:

      The project provided 271.2 ha of supplemental (or new) and improved irrigation (or rehabilitation) of
       1,501.7 ha – all providing increased area under irrigation and drainage. Irrigation development has
       served as a climate change mitigation measure as droughts had become a common phenomenon in
       Tanzania. A total of 9 schemes were supported in Zanzibar, and 5 in Morogoro (Mainland), bringing a
       total hectarage of 1,772 ha under irrigation (1,579 ha in Morogoro (Mainland) and 194 ha in Zanzibar),
       surpassing the project target of 1,640 ha. The project mostly switched to irrigation rehabilitation rather
       than new irrigation schemes and respective targets were adjusted accordingly.
      The ICR argued that the increased water availability led farmers to cultivate paddy twice a year, as
       opposed to only one cropping season, before the project (ICR, page 16). .
      However, infrastructure works were delayed as most of the irrigation schemes were not completed
       until the final year of the project, limiting full impacts to be realized in the short term. The delays
       emanated from inadequate capacity of Government institutions in terms of procurement, design, and
       supervision of works. With inadequate capacity, efforts to decentralize design and supervision of
       irrigation works (in line with decentralization policy) led to errors which had to be corrected by
       engaging private sector entities after the MTR.
      The project supported the creation of 56 Irrigator Organizations (IOs) which were strengthened to
       support operations, maintenance, and general use of the irrigation schemes. A total of 2,867 water
       users were provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services. On the latter, the
       achievement was lower than the target of 4,403 because some big schemes like Mbogo Komtonga
       were dropped due to lack of complementary investments by other sources of funding.

Adoption of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and System of Rice Intensification (SRI). GAPs and SRI were
promoted through trainings, exchange visits and demonstrations. SRI is a multi-practice package of
technologies for increasing productivity of irrigated rice by changing the management of plants, soil, water,
and nutrients. An estimated 17,776 farmers in Morogoro and 2,253 farmers in Zanzibar adopted SRI against
the target of 3,300 and 1,385 farmers respectively (ICR, page15).

Adoption of new rice varieties promoted by the project: Adoption increased among project beneficiaries from
51 percent to 74 percent, with a modest spillover effect among non-beneficiaries as well (from 25 percent to
44 percent). Use of local varieties dropped among beneficiaries as compared to nonbeneficiaries. Most of the
farmers sourced improved rice seeds through agro-dealers and were greatly satisfied with the quality. Overall,
the project contributed to 27,079 farmers adopting new rice seed varieties in Morogoro (Mainland) (against a
target of 20,000 farmers), and 4,991 farmers in Zanzibar (against a target of 6,000 farmers) (ICR, page 17).




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



Institutional strengthening of rice seed delivery system: The project strengthened the capacity of Government
institutions for effective basic rice seed production, seed certification and quality control. A seed laboratory at
Agriculture Seed Agency (ASA) in Morogoro as well as in Zanzibar was updated.

Additional quantity of rice marketed in targeted areas: A total of 68,361 tons of additional rice was marketed
by the end of the project, above the target of 45,200 tons. Marketing activities were implemented only in
Morogoro (Mainland), which was assumed to have market surplus. The project constructed 6,700 tons
capacity public (warehouses and associated roads which were finalized towards the end of the project. There
was significant price difference with value addition (from paddy to polished rice). The unit price for paddy in
Morogoro among beneficiaries was approximately 532 TZS, while that of polished rice was 1,209 TZS.
Farmers preferred storage facilities that also provided milling services, hence were able to keep rice in
storage and defer sales until prices increased.

Capacity building and farmer mobilization: The project trained 210 farmers, 75 extension staff from 40
irrigation schemes on rice pre- and post-harvest management, as well as 140 farmers and 20 extension
officers on warehouse management and operations. Farmers were organized in groups in the respective
irrigation schemes to manage the warehouses. Consequently, farmers were able to pull their produce
together in warehouses, although the extent of participation was still limited. By the end of the project, limited
linkages with buyers were observed, as well as lack of involvement of farmers in using warehouse receipt
systems to access finance based on rice stored in the warehouses as collateral (ICR,page 19)).

The project improved the capacity of the Government to oversee irrigation works at national and operational
levels. In Morogoro(, Engineers from the MoA, National Irrigation Commission and Local Government
Authorities were trained to oversee technical supervision on rehabilitation and construction works at targeted
irrigation schemes.

At operational level, the project created and strengthened 56 water user associations (irrigators
organizations), above the target of 13. These played a leading role to support irrigation operations and
maintenance.

Outcomes:

The project substantially achieved its objective. The basis for this conclusion is that the project exceeded its
targets for rice yields and production in Morogoro, with substantial achievements in Zanzibar, compared to
baselines and to a random control group of non-beneficiary farmers. This was achieved via project’s
contribution to high rates of adoption of good agricultural practices, and access to water for irrigation. The ICR
noted that as finalization of most irrigation infrastructure works took place towards the end of the project,
there is an expectation that there will be more benefits in terms of yield and production, in the medium- to
long-term upon full utilization of the irrigation schemes.

The following specific achievements were recorded in the ICR for the PDO indicators

      PDO Indicator 1: Average yields of targeted smallholder farmers growing paddy – with a target of 3.5
       tons/ha in Morogoro (revised to 5 tons/ha), and 5.5 tons/ha in Zanzibar. This was achieved. In
       Morogoro rice yields increased by approximately three times, from baseline of 1.8 tons/ha (in 2015/16)
       to 5.7 tons/ha (in 2019/20) exceeding the project target of 5 tons/ha. In Zanzibar, the rice yield
       achieved more than doubled from a baseline of 1.8 tons/ha in 2015/16 to 4.9 tons/ha, representing a
       substantial achievement of 89 percent, as compared to the Project target of 5.5 tons/ha. A comparison

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



                                   between project beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries indicated substantial yield increase by farmers
                                   supported by the project (ICR, Table 4). During the dry season, beneficiaries in Morogoro realized rice
                                   yield of 1.4 tons/ha more than non-beneficiary farmers. In Zanzibar, they realized almost 9 times more
                                   than non-beneficiaries. Similar trends applied during the wet season. The effectiveness of irrigation
                                   improvement was observable during the dry season when irrigation was the only source of supply for
                                   crop water requirement. Based on the overall yield, it can be concluded that project beneficiaries had
                                   their yields at least twice more than nonbeneficiaries. Interventions that promoted input uptake, GAPs,
                                   including SRI were perceived by farmers as great drivers towards increased rice production and yield.
                                  PDO Indicator 2: Additional quantity of rice produced in targeted areas – with a target of 56,500 tons
                                   in Morogoro, and 9,660 tons in Zanzibar (revised to 6,000 tons for Zanzibar). In Morogoro (Mainland),
                                   there was substantive progression on additional rice produced from 36,055 tons in 2016/17 to 61,074
                                   tons in 2018/19 and further to 88,637 tons in 2019/20. The final achieved rice production exceeded
                                   the project target of 56,500 tons. In the first two years, there was no additional rice production
                                   achieved as the Project was being set up, with more focus on establishment of demonstration plots
                                   and associated farmer trainings. Farmers were able to harvest two crops per year as opposed to one,
                                   with additional hectarage utilized due to irrigation rehabilitation and development, leading to rice
                                   production increases. As most irrigation schemes were finalized towards the end of the project, there
                                   was scope for increased future production at higher levels than achieved in the final year. Similar
                                   achievements were observed for Zanzibar, where irrigation development had already been completed
                                   and rice production increased in all the targeted districts, approximately three fold over the baseline
                                   values. A comparison between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries (refer to Table 4) further indicated
                                   that beneficiaries produced more rice (average 2,105 kg/household) than non-beneficiaries (1,302
                                   kg/households). In Zanzibar, beneficiaries produced approximately three times more than non-
                                   beneficiaries, with the same trend in Morogoro). The ICR mentioned (page 16) that availability of
                                   improved inputs and technology provided greater scope for increased adoption, and the introduction of
                                   the input subsidy in the earlier years of the project provided incentives for technology adoption as the
                                   inputs (like seeds and fertilizers). However, the impact of the input subsidy is not clear in the ICR, as
                                   the government discontinued input subsidies after 2015. . ).
                                  PDO Indicator 3: Additional quantity of rice marketed in the targeted areas in Morogoro was 68,361
                                   tons compared to the target of 45,200 tons over the project period. Marketing activities were
                                   conducted only in Morogoro as this was a surplus production area whereas Zanzibar was not.
                                  PDO Indicator 4: Number of direct beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender) – with a target 33,069 (of
                                   which 50 percent female), (revised to 30,000 people, 50 percent female). The project reached 41,485
                                   direct beneficiaries out of the revised target of 30,000 representing achievement rate of 138 percent.
                                   Total beneficiaries for Morogoro were 36,421 and 5,064 for Zanzibar.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



  Overall, the project’s efficacy is rated as Substantial. This is based on the fact that the project exceeded its
  targets for rice yields and production in Morogoro, with considerable achievements in Zanzibar, compared to
  baselines and non-beneficiary farmers. This result was achieved via the project’s support to farmers to
  implement good agricultural practices, and access to water for irrigation. While there are some concerns
  regarding institutional and financial sustainability regarding irrigation structures in terms of their operation and
  maintenance, the ICR also noted that (page 20) as finalization of most irrigation infrastructure works took
  place towards the end of the project, there is an expectation that there will be more benefits in terms of yield
  and production upon full development and utilization of the irrigation schemes associated with this project.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Financial and Economic Efficiency: The PAD prepared an ex-ante financial analysis that evaluated
productivity gains associated with the adoption of improved irrigation systems and the adoption of improved
seed, fertilizer, better weed control and better water management in a technology package broadly
characterized as SRI. Eight farm models were developed, and these were calculated for both Morogoro and
Zanzibar. In Morogoro the analysis additionally measured the expected gains resulting from the construction of
grain warehouses that would allow farmers to sell paddy in bulk and later in the season when prices tended to
be higher. The analysis assumed that farmers would not all have adopted the mix of SRI packages and thus
allowed for a phased approach. Eight models evaluated the ‘without project/baseline situation’ in which farmers
had yields of 1.2 tons/ha under informal irrigation / rainfed situation. The incremental ‘future’ yields and
production achieved due to irrigation infrastructure were estimates based on similar irrigation schemes in
Tanzania and supplemented by FAO data. All models generated positive incremental returns.

The ex-post economic analysis for the country as a whole was conducted on the basis of (i) a 12 percent
discount rate equal to the opportunity cost of capital for Tanzania, and (ii) a 20-year timeframe corresponding to
the life of the irrigation and other large facilities rehabilitated. On the cost side, only direct investments
associated with improved performance for farmers were considered (i.e. Components 2 and 3). However,
activities under seed system development (Component 1) were also directly related. In addition, project
management costs (under Component 4) needed to be included as well to be able to measure the overall
economic value added of the project. The ICR did not, however, present NPV and ERR for the project based on
total project costs and benefits.

The ex-post economic analysis calculated in this way resulted in a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$9 million at a
discount rate of 12 percent and an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 36 percent. In Morogoro the NPV
achieved was US$12 million, with EIRR of 51 percent, while in Zanzibar, the NPV achieved was US$0.5 million
with the EIRR of 25 percent (ICR, paragraph 50). The largest share of benefits was generated in Morogoro
given more hectarage under irrigation and the potential gains accruing from the warehousing schemes there.
Also, the rate of return was lower in Zanzibar due to flooding. The indirect benefits associated with spillover
gains to a broader range of producers, consumers and marketing agents were not included in the analysis which




                                                                                                         Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



only included the direct beneficiaries. The ICR (page 21) suggested that as the irrigation systems come into full
use, the improved yield gains should result in spillover benefits.

The Bank project team provided IEG with NPV and EIRR estimates resulting from an economic analysis that
included the total project costs and benefits. Accordingly, the estimated overall EIRR was 27.4 percent (with
Morogoro at 39 percent but Zanzibar only 4 percent).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project had operational and administrative inefficiencies.
There were significant delays in the execution of irrigation infrastructure and warehouses, which (as the ICR
noted in paragraph 52) will need further public support for effective operations and maintenance to ensure long
term sustainability, in particular for the irrigation investments. The delays were due to inadequate capacity of
Government institutions in terms of procurement, design, and supervision of works. Coupled with not very
successful efforts to decentralize design and supervision of irrigation works in line with government
decentralization policy. These efforts led to errors which had to be corrected by engaging private sector entities,
or sometimes led to cancelation of tenders. There were also delays by Ministry of Finance to pay contractors on
time after certification of various irrigation works.

Due to these serious administrative and operational inefficiencies which held back the project’s irrigation
development and also constrained improvements in the productivity and production of rice among smallholders,
this project’s efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  35.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      70.00
 ICR Estimate                                               36.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective is highly relevant to the strategies of the World Bank and the Government both at
appraisal and at closing. The Efficacy in achieving the development objective is rated as substantial based on
the evidence of increases in productivity and production of rice for smallholders that exceeded targets in
Morogoro and partly in Zanzibar. Efficiency is rated modest based on shortcomings in the project’s
administrative or operational performance, despite the relatively high estimated economic rate of return for



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



Morogoro. Overall there were moderate shortcomings in the project’s efficiency and therefore the project’s
outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several risks to the sustainability of development outcomes were identified by the ICR (page 33) and these
are concurred by IEG and summarized as follows:

Operational and Financial Risks: There is a risk of sustaining the investments in general due to limited
public funds. Although the Government has written to all implementing partners requesting them to
mainstream project activities in their budget, the provision of funds will depend on the availability of public
resources.

In addition, regarding irrigation infrastructure, while the project established and trained 50 irrigation operators
(IOs), they need further support for them to be functional and operationally and financially sustainable. To
ensure sustained operations and functionality of irrigation schemes, further public funding for irrigation and
maintenance will be needed, as well as enforcing the National Irrigation Act (2013) which requires that IOs
collect an irrigation fee for operations and maintenance in irrigation schemes.

Furthermore, the absence of a seed revolving fund remains a gap to sustain production of breeder and
foundation rice seed. The absence of such a fund (especially for breeder seeds) would mean that
Government or donors will have to support production of early generation seeds which cannot be
sustainable. Also, the absence of a vibrant private sector seed industry constrains the development of a
sustainable seed marketing system for certified rice seed.

Disaster Risk: Tanzania remains vulnerable to climate change shocks. For example, floods that occurred in
2019/20 wiped out most of the rice production gains in Zanzibar. Droughts have also created problems in
some years which reduced rice production and yields. In addition, the COVID-19 outbreak is likely to hold
back the attainment of the anticipated development outcomes in the short-term. The pandemic resulted in
increased vulnerability for consumers, and also will be negatively impacting food supply chains and thus will
adversely affect the smallholder farmers and sustainability of project outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design reflected lessons from past projects on irrigation, agricultural subsidies, technology
  delivery systems and particularly benefited from initial phase of the Agriculture Sector Development
  Program (P085752), Accelerated Food Security Project (P165848) and Participatory Agricultural
  Development and Empowerment Project (P067103). The Project design also considered the national

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



  agricultural development policy, its strategies and investment plans. A detailed mapping of donor projects
  was done, which identified collaborative partnerships. However, two shortcomings created challenges
  for the project: (i) The project assumed there would be complementary investment by development
  partners, which did not materialize, hence some targets had to be adjusted downwards. (ii) Sustainability
  issues including irrigation operation and maintenance, as well as private sector involvement in seed
  development and delivery were not addressed in advance.

  In addition, major risks were identified but underestimated at appraisal, particularly procurement related
  risks. The key risks included weak Government capacity to supervise the project The project was
  prepared at a time when Government was using its own institutions (i.e. National Irrigation Commission)
  to design and supervise projects which resulted in some errors in design and estimated budgets. During
  project implementation, it became clear that it would be difficult to attract competitive bidders for
  construction works due to low budgets. Further, local Government had limited capacity to manage
  procurement, led to subsequent cancellation of tenders. Specifically, the capacity of local Government to
  effectively design and supervise the irrigation infrastructure works was not examined.

  On the other hand, the project had a robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, capable of
  collecting and reporting adequately on the project’s implementation progress

  Due to the shortcomings mentioned above, the QAE is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project performance was slow. Performance only improved after the Mid Term Review (MTR) in October
 2018. The first years were associated with change of Task Team Leaders (TTLs), while Government took
 time to ensure that proper staff were assigned and seconded to lead the Project Until the MTR the
 disbursement was only at 29 percent. The MTR highlighted the significant implementation delays and gaps.
 Following the MTR, the task team became proactive and initiated two restructurings after which led to
 subsequent improved project performance. The assignment of a TTL based in-country helped to assist the
 client to catch up with the implementation of the project.

 The post MTR period the World Bank showed strong engagement and hands-on support. In total 11
 supervision missions were conducted. Aide- Memoires and ISRs were timely and contained relevant
 information, including the status of disbursements, implementation progress and flagging issues for
 management action. In addition to supervision missions, the task team provided support and flexibility in
 addressing problems, even during the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the ICR communications and
 consultations with the client were regular, open, and transparent; and virtual missions were conducted
 during the pandemic. The Bank team provided extensive hands-on support to the client including in areas
 such as FM, procurement, safeguards and M&E. Also, the Bank’s technical specialists provided necessary
 and timely advice to the client. Due to the inadequate supervision and lack of support for implementation at
 the start of the project when inadequate quality at entry needed to be rectified, quality of supervision is
 rated moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system had two main components. Firstly, it included monitoring of achievement of expected
 results, through baseline study, mid-term evaluation, end of Project evaluation, with annual surveys to
 supplement tracking annual progress of key results indicators. Secondly, a simple Management Information
 System (MIS) established in the Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives and the Ministry of
 Agriculture and Natural Resources to track implementation progress, including disbursements and
 procurements.

 While the PDO indicators were adequate to measure the achievement of the objective of productivity and
 production increases in rice, the targets were not realistic as some targets in Zanzibar were based on
 external financing that was beyond the control of the project. Those targets were revised during the second
 restructuring. While the indicators directly measured the objective of productivity and production, as the
 ICR suggested, measurement of higher -level results as well, such as incomes and poverty reduction would
 have better captured the impact of the project on food security.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was functional, with baseline study, annual surveys and mid-term evaluation and end
  year survey was carried out as planned. The project annual surveys helped to update the status on
  various indicators in the RF and provided good input into the implementation support missions. While the
  final Project annual survey done internally, and results submitted in March 2021, after Project closure; an
  external end of Project evaluation survey would be needed to better capture impacts of the Project (i.e.
  on food security, income), at least after two years after project closure. This would also capture the
  impacts from irrigation works that were delayed and completed towards the end of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data and annual survey results were used for decision making. These results informed areas
  to adjust during implementation, and informed subsequent changes during project restructurings.
  Harmonized data collection and reporting in Morogoro and Zanzibar made it easy to consolidate and
  compare results achieved from Morogoro and Zanzibar, while providing overall project status and
  learning. The project captured results stories and case studies which helped to confirm results achieved.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as Environmental Category B and the following safeguards policies were
   triggered: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), (iii) Pest
   Management (OP/BP 4.09); and (iv) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). There were no major
   safeguard problems anticipated in the Project. Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) were set up, for
   Mainland and Zanzibar and functional. Overall, Environmental and Social risk was assessed as moderate
   and the final rating during last mission was Moderately Satisfactory, but the ICR provides no explicit
   statement regarding compliance with these safeguards.

   The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) highlighted the need to prepare
   environmental impact assessments prior to development of new infrastructure works. The Integrated Pest
   Management Plan (IPMP) was developed to guide on the use of pesticides and fertilizers to ensure safe
   agrochemical usage. The IPMP was disseminated and served as an important tool towards management of
   pollution and safeguarding health of farmers.

   The ICR noted that (page 30) each sub-project developed an Environmental and Social Management Plan
   (ESMP) and was adhered to in a satisfactory manner. Safeguards’ activities such as water testing in
   irrigation schemes and safety of farmers were adequately implemented. All infrastructure works complied
   with the ESMPs, including use of Personal and Protective Equipment with timely reporting. The project did
   not record any incidences regarding Occupational Health and Safety.

   In terms of social safeguards, in view of limited and localized resettlement arising from limited expansion of
   some irrigation schemes, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed. The Project developed
   three Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs) for the irrigation schemes which resettled farmers and the ICR
   reported that (page 30) by the end of the Project, all resettlement issues were concluded satisfactorily. The
   Grievance Redress Mechanism was set up and operational, with complaints registers updated, and
   grievances addressed. The project had sound citizen engagement, with structures established to the village
   level.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): The responsible agencies were considered to have enough capacity and
   experience in implementing World Bank-funded projects, thus FM risk was moderate during appraisal.
   However, there was continuous low budget utilization at the beginning of the project due to implementation
   delays. Bureaucratic delays were also observed on effecting changes on new signatory authorities from
   Government, as well as untimely payment of funds to contractors by the Ministry of Finance and Planning.
   Nevertheless, performance and disbursements improved overtime. The FM risks were mitigated through
   training of staff in World Bank FM procedures and adequate adoption of sound FM procedures. Annual
   project audit reports, and Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were submitted on time and all outstanding

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



   issues were resolved within the project period .The last ISR rated the FM performance as moderately
   satisfactory (ICR page 30).

   Procurement: According to the ICR the project was confronted by a number of procurement
   challenges. Procurement risk was grossly underestimated at appraisal as moderate (ICR, paragraph 97)
   because in the event procurement and contract management capacity was limited at the national and local
   government levels. Contract management was also a challenge. In particular, timely monitoring of
   contracts under implementation, and ensuring that works and services were completed on time was a
   shortcoming leading to the inefficiencies in the project's performance mentioned in Section 5 above. In
   addition, as paragraph 73 in the ICR noted, "The project experienced late submission of procurement
   documents which were also of low quality. Efforts to devolve procurement functions to local government
   level resulted in further procurement challenges, leading to cancellation of some procurement of
   works". The World Bank team provided regular procurement and contract management training, with
   strong supervision support from the World Bank and the Government. Independent procurement audits
   and technical support were also provided. These efforts were apparently successful because procurement
   performance in the final ISR was rated Satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 98) . .




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended results were reported in the ICR, nor identified by this review.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified various lessons, most relevant ones are summarized as follows:

Combining investments on hardware (irrigation infrastructure) with software (improved
agricultural technology) leads to more benefits in terms of higher agricultural yields and
production. The project provided a combination of improved seeds and good agronomic practices


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)



(including SRIs), which created a strong foundation for impactful irrigation infrastructure investments.
A self-standing irrigation investment would not have added much value without complementarity
‘software’ investments.

To increase incomes of farmers improvements to productivity are not sufficient catalysts for
creating impact unless marketing and value addition are included in the program. The end of
project review confirmed that incomes and revenues increase more when farmers are also
supported with market linkages and value addition. For example, warehouses help farmers to
improve storage and defer sales to when prices are high, while mobilizing farmers in groups and
linking them to off takers provides an opportunity for bargaining prices.

A long-term approach to irrigation and agriculture development is key to ensure
developmental impact. This project 's experience showed that development of irrigation
infrastructure and long-term viability of intermediate outcomes need adequate time, and more than 5
years, to achieve developmental impact. Thus, sustained efforts are needed to institutionalize
intermediate outcomes, sustain operation and maintenance for irrigation schemes as well as,
linki farmers to markets, and create a sustainable seed production system.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  In order to verify project impacts from irrigation works that were completed towards the end of the project and
  thus could not be thoroughly assessed at project closing.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report was concise, and its structure followed the guidelines. The quality of evidence and analysis was
robust in general, results were given for ‘without project’ situation as well, which provided the counterfactual
and thus incremental benefits from the project support. The ICR developed a theory of change of the project
that helped to understand how the outputs, outcomes and impacts were linked and the ratings were reached.
The ICR’s lessons were clear and based on evidence. However, there were some weaknesses in terms of
quality of evidence and analysis: (i) the contribution of project beneficiaries to project costs as well as exit of the
Exim Bank from the project needed explanation; (ii) the project support for and results of private sector
involvement in seed production and marketing systems, the impact of government input subsidies at the start of
the project and after they were withdrawn, and the linkage between project results and the adoption of good
agricultural practices; as well as the extent to which market linkages were achieved not described well; (iii) the
economic analysis did not consider all the project costs.

Despite some shortcomings the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



                                                                                                        Page 16 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TZ-Expanding Rice Production (P144497)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                        Page 17 of 17
