     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022905

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P173984                                  COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                  Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-91150,IDA-66700,IDA-66710           30-Apr-2021                                       254,298,844.83

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 14-May-2020                              30-Jul-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        254,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         254,298,844.83                                              0.00

 Actual                                     254,298,844.83                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 12), the
   project objective was as follows:

            To provide temporary economic support to poor and vulnerable households impacted by the
            COVID-19 epidemic.



                                                                                               Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)




   The project objective remained the same, however, targets for key outcome indicators were revised
   downward, three months before project closing, at which time disbursement had already reached 99
   percent Therefore, this ICR Review did not apply a split rating as it was moot.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Temporary cash transfers to vulnerable households (Appraisal: US$ 99.72 million; Revised: US$
   3.08 million; Actual: US$ 3.08 million): This component aimed to address the significant impacts of COVID-
   19 on the income of poor and vulnerable households, with the aim of enabling those households to adhere
   to social distancing/ lockdown protocols. This component represented a vertical expansion of the existing
   safety net program by financing higher payment amounts to beneficiaries. Activities included: financing
   temporary payments to beneficiaries (identified by their participation in existing safety net programs) -
   namely the Bono Familia (BF) program targeted to households with children in public and private schools
   (US$ 72/ household) and the Bono Canasta Familiar (BCF) program targeted to households with pregnant
   women, children under two years old, and disabled or elderly individuals US$ 57/ household. Beneficiaries
   of both programs were already in the registries for schools and for the universal pension.

   2. Support the transitory expansion of the safety net to informal workers (Appraisal: US$ 150.93
   million; Revised: US$ 250.65 million; Actual: US$ 250.65 million): This component aimed to expand the
   safety net program to households with informal sector workers that were not already eligible for the above
   BF or BCF programs. This component represented a horizontal expansion of the existing safety net
   program, called Bono Universal (BU) by financing payments to a broader population namely informal
   workers (US$ 72/ household).

   3. Support project implementation arrangements (Appraisal: US$ 3.1 million; Revised: US$ 0.2 million;
   Actual: US$ 0.2 million): This component aimed to support the above vertical and horizontal expansion of
   the safety net program through support to the banking system. Activities included: expansion of the
   SINTESIS network, a private payment platform that enabled beneficiaries to cash out the benefits in any
   bank of the country, and a financial audit of the project.



   A Level II Restructuring was necessary to accommodate the government's decision to use project
   resources to finance mostly beneficiaries of the BU and only a small number of beneficiaries of the BF. The
   subcomponent providing cash transfers to vulnerable households with pregnant women, children below 2
   years of age, or disabled or elderly individuals (BCF) was dropped. Component 2 was expanded to support

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



   the BU program. The subcomponent to support the expansion of payments through the banking system was
   dropped, as it was financed by the government.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

        The project cost at appraisal was US$ 254.3 million, which disbursed in its entirety.
        Allocations to each component were revised at the time of restructuring to account for the shift in
           activities.

   Financing

        The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$200.0 million and two IDA Credits of US$ 21.0
           million and US$ 33.3 million, all of which disbursed.

   Borrower contribution

        There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates

        April 2021: While the project was prepared in a short time (six weeks) and approved by the Board on
           May 14, 2020, it was not declared effective until November 20, 2020. During that
           period, the government completed the payments to the beneficiaries of the three emergency cash
           transfer programs (by the end of September 2020), as the Board approval had led to the
           advancement of funds from the Central Bank of Bolivia to the government to immediately issue the
           cash transfers. A Level II Restructuring was approved to accommodate the government's decision to
           use these advanced funds almost entirely for the BU and not the BF or BCF. The project was also
           restructured to revise targets and drop key outcome indicators and reallocate funds among
           categories (given the shift in activities) and to extend the closing date from April 2021 to July 2021 to
           finalize reimbursement requests.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
This project was prepared as an emergency operation, under the Bank policy responding to situations of
urgent need, when the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic spread to the country of Bolivia. The
government immediately responded by declaring a national health emergency and putting forth prevention
measures such as citizens only being permitted to leave their homes once per week (organized according
to the last number of their official ID document). These strict measures were having substantial impacts on
the welfare and economy of the country, especially the poor and vulnerable. This was particularly the case
in Bolivia, given that approximately 80 percent of private sector workers are in the informal and self-

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



               employed sector and thus highly vulnerable to income shocks and the lack of access to social protection
               measures. As noted in the PAD (page 7-8), simulations indicated that if earners in sectors potentially more
               affected by the economic shutdown, such as commerce, manufacturing and informal client-facing services,
               were to lose just two weeks of income, half of the families in the second quintile would fall to the income
               level of the first quintile, and more than half of those in quintile 3 would fall under the income threshold of
               quintile 2. Thus, the project aimed to scale up existing programs and create new temporary ones to provide
               social assistance during the pandemic.

               The project objective was clearly aligned with the emergency country conditions, the existing country
               institutional capacity, and the Bank's COVID crisis response program (2020), which focused on protecting
               poor and vulnerable populations from impacts of the crisis. Although this operation responded to an
               emergency situation, it was still consistent with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (FY 2016-2020)
               which included increased access to basic services for the poorest as a key objective.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide temporary economic support to poor and vulnerable households impacted by the COVID-19
                             pandemic

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear. Rapid delivery of cash transfers to poor and vulnerable households, broadly
                             targeted, was likely to provide immediate income support to those who primarily worked in the informal sector
                             and did not have access to formal social protection programs. The cash transfer amounts were expected to
                             cover basic consumption needs, though only for a limited period, and enable compliance with government-
                             imposed social distancing measures. Beneficiaries were identified according to eligibility for existing social
                             assistance programs (universal pension), and then expanded to workers in the non-formal private sector.

                             As reported in the ICR (page 14), while the project was initially meant to support three temporary cash
                             transfers, it was the Government’s decision to apply the project’s resources to mainly support the horizontal
                             expansion through the Bono Universal (BU). The original targets for the PDO indicators regarding the other
                             two programs, the BF and BCF, were still achieved but through support from other international financial
                             partners. The overarching purpose was to ensure that all households in the bottom 60% of the population
                             would receive some form of social assistance, comprising 7.6 million individuals. The project reached 3.5
                             million individuals while other donors/ government reached 4.1 million individuals.

                             Note: As these programs were newly established, the baseline was zero for all indicators.


                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 12
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



                            Outputs

                                  Expansion of cash transfer programs, both vertical (increased payment amounts) and horizontal
                                     (broadened eligible population).
                                    Creation of registry for Bono Universal (BU) beneficiaries, thus representing the first social registry
                                     that could be used in future times of crisis.
                                    Communication strategy to inform households of eligibility.
                                    Expansion of single payment platform with access to a country-wide network of bank offices for all
                                     temporary cash transfer payments.
                                    Establishment of grievance mechanism.

                            Outcomes

                                  3,502,421 total beneficiaries received temporary cash transfers, falling slightly short of the original
                                     target of 3,576,013 and achieving the revised target of 3,502,421. Of these, 1,516,005 were female
                                     (original target: 1,827,291; revised target: 1,789,686). The target for women beneficiaries was only
                                     partially achieved because the percentage of female direct beneficiaries of BU was lower that of the
                                     BF or BCF (which served pregnant women and families).
                                    Of the above, 42,847 beneficiaries of existing social assistance programs received temporary cash
                                     transfers (mostly through BF), falling far short of the original target of 1,285,134. This represented
                                     1.08% of beneficiaries eligible for existing social assistance programs received temporary cash
                                     transfers (original target: 32.5%). At the time of project restructuring, this indicator was dropped.
                                    Of the above, 3,459,574 beneficiaries not in existing social assistance programs received
                                     temporary cash transfers (mostly through the BU program), surpassing the original target of 2,290,880
                                     and achieving the revised target of 3,459,574. This represented 46.0% of beneficiaries not in existing
                                     social assistance programs received temporary economic support (original target: 51.0%; revised
                                     target: 46.0%).
                                    According to data from the 2020 Household Survey, the poverty headcount (the percentage of people
                                     living on less than the poverty line of US$5.50 per day) was 21.76%. According to the ICR (Annex 4),
                                     the headcount would have been 23.5% (an increased from 19.9% in 2019) in the absence of the cash
                                     transfers.
                                    The ex-post economic analysis (ICR, Annex 4) showed that BU reached almost 80% of the poor, with
                                     75% coverage of the first four quintiles of the income distribution.

                            Achievement is rated Substantial, as the total number of beneficiaries achieved the target and the number of
                            beneficiaries not in existing social assistance programs far exceeded the target. However, the number of
                            beneficiaries in existing programs fell far short of the original target.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  As there was only one objective for this operation, the overall efficacy rating is the same as the rating for
  Objective 1, which is Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, pages 24-25) discussed simulations carried out based on a recent
household survey, which indicated that the three programs would expected to cover all the poor population,
98.3% of the indigenous population, and almost all the workers that may be affected by the economic downturn
(99.1% of self-employed and small-firm workers). There was expected to be some significant "leakage" of the
temporary benefits to the top income quintile, due to limitations of administrative registry information on
household composition and the high rate of informal employment in the economy. There was no other
economic rate of return analysis conducted at appraisal.

The economic analysis at completion (ICR, Annex 4) discussed similar simulations and concluded that the
temporary cash transfers reached virtually all the poor and the vulnerable, with the three programs covered all
the poor population and 98.7% of the indigenous population. There was significant leakage in the top quintiles,
with 86.5% of the households in the top quintile benefitting from at least one of the three programs.

Although there were no rate of return figures calculated, several elements likely contributed to substantial
operational efficiency of the project during implementation: (i) clear and transparent mechanisms to identify
beneficiaries, which facilitated targeting, while also ensuring that there was universal coverage of the poor and
vulnerable households impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic; (ii) low administrative costs of implementation, in
part due to use of existing ID registries and public administrative databases; (iii) a reduction of 40% in the
transaction fee for the temporary cash transfers, as negotiated by the government with the payment company,
and (iv) fast preparation and implementation, with the project fully disbursing and closing in less than a year
after approval.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with emergency country conditions and Bank COVID
strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to achieving targets in the total number of beneficiaries, and the
number of beneficiaries not in existing social assistance programs. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to
indications of implementation efficiency, including reaching the target population in a timely manner given the
emergency context, low administrative costs, and efficient use of single payment platform




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional capacity, including leveraging and expanding upon existing administrative databases, is likely to
be sustained and will be in place for future emergency responses. This also includes the expansion of the
single payment platform to almost all branches of private and public banks. However, as the PAD
highlighted, the main risk to development outcome arises from the continuation of the pandemic and the
adverse socioeconomic effects on the poor and vulnerable. While the cash transfers were explicitly intended
to provide only temporary support, even the short-term benefits are at risk due to the lingering pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design drew upon extensive Bank experience in emergency response operations, social
  protection programs in Bolivia, and analytic work in support for poor and vulnerable households. The
  Bank team provided key technical assistance, such as sharing actions being taken by other countries
  around the world and running simulations to finetune the various aspects of the program, such as the
  eligible population(s).




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



  The overall risk assessment was appropriately rated Moderate, with higher-level risks noted for
  institutional and fiduciary capacity. The M&E arrangements were simple and straightforward, drawing
  upon existing systems to accurately track project progress.

  The project was approved by the Bank Board in a very short timeframe, given the emergency situation,
  which guaranteed to the government that the proposed expenditures would be financed and thus enabled
  the Central Bank of Bolivia to advance the funds to the government to immediately issue cash
  transfers. However, project effectiveness took much longer (six months after approval) due to the period
  of transition government, and hence the use of funds per the appraisal document was different from
  planned (see below), although this did not affect overall outcomes. Further donor coordination during the
  preparation and appraisal stage, in terms of arranging broad and flexible lines of funding (perhaps
  through pooled funding options) might have avoided unnecessary restructurings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation was facilitated by the experienced counterpart staff and the supportive regulations
 passed by the government in a timely manner, given the emergency context. Supervision was conducted
 virtually given pandemic restrictions. After the project was approved, while awaiting government approval
 for the project to become effective, the government made the decision to use the project funds to mainly
 finance the BU (and not the BC or BF), as this was the only donor project that included BU as a
 reimbursable expenditure. The government financed the BC and BF programs with resources from two
 other bilateral donors. By December 2020 (one month after effectiveness), the government had already
 disbursed US$ 251.2 million (99% of the funds) for BU and requested retroactive financing and
 reimbursement accordingly.

 Fiduciary and M&E performance were satisfactory with no problems reported.

 The ICR (page 24) stated that the Bank team was diligent in working with the borrower to restructure the
 project "in a timely manner"; while this may have reflected the reality on the ground (and adaptability given
 crisis conditions), the actual restructuring was not formally in place until after the project had almost entirely
 disbursed. Given that the government had already changed its financing allocations and disbursed the
 funds, the Bank agreed to conduct the Mid Term Review at the same time as the restructuring mission,
 although due to the very short implementation period, this could not take place until March 2021 (one
 month before the original closing date), at which time the borrower formally requested the restructuring. As
 noted above, this sequence of events, however, did not affect project outcomes. Overall, the pro-
 activeness and responsiveness of the Bank team to government needs in a crisis situation was noteworthy.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results chain and the M&E framework were simple and straightforward, particularly as the project did
 not intend to achieve long-term outcomes. M&E arrangements relied on existing systems to track
 progress, and also included a financial audit to verify the outputs.

 Given the reallocation of funding across components, the results framework was revised at the time of
 project restructuring. Changes included the: (a) deletion of indicators (PDO indicators 1 and 2) that were no
 longer relevant due to the change in the scope of the financed activities, and (b) revision of existing
 indicators’ target values (PDO indicator 4) to better capture the contribution of the project to the PDO.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data were tracked as planned, with daily monitoring of payments by financial institution, type of
  transfer, and geographic location. The payment platform company prepared two payment reports and
  updates during the brief project period. The submission of the second report was somewhat delayed but
  the ICR (page 21) reported that the quality of the report was adequate.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 21) noted that the M&E data gathered on beneficiaries of the three temporary cash
  transfer were managed in line with the best international practices on personal data privacy and
  protection: data minimization, accuracy, limited use, and retention. The data was effectively utilized to
  monitor transfer payments and hence project results.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Due to processing of the project under emergency procedures, it was not subject to full safeguards and
   environmental policies. At appraisal, it was given a "moderate" environmental and social risk
   classification. Steps were taken during project appraisal to address the potential issues. Five virtual
   consultation workshops took place to share the analysis carried out during preparation, to ensure that most
   vulnerable and disadvantaged populations would be covered by the project. The Environmental and Social
   Framework (ESF) was implemented as it was agreed during preparation, including the Environmental and

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



   Social Commitment Plan, the Stakeholder Engagement Plan, and the Labor Management Procedures.
   A Grievance Redress Mechanism was also put in place

   Although the ICR (page 23) noted the lack of a specialist on the counterpart team, there were no problems
   in safeguards compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: The Bank team provided financial management training to the counterpart staff
   and although there was some turnover in staff during the project period, there were no concerns noted on
   financial management issues. The World Bank granted an exception to sign the project audit contract after
   the project closing date (due to delays in project effectiveness and restructuring, and also in the audit firm's
   internal procedures), thus allowing the audit to be financed with loan proceeds. The audit was completed
   by November 2021, although the ICR does not report whether there were any qualifications to the audit.

   Procurement: The sole procurement activity under the project was the contracting of the project’s audit,
   which was carried out with no problems reported.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (page 25), adapted by IEG:

      Existing strong institutional capacity, coupled with adaptability and innovation, can provide
         ripe conditions for an effective emergency response. In the case of this project, there were

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)



         existing relationships with long-standing public servants and other donors, open and
         constructive technical dialogue, a solid coordinating institution with a recognized mandate,
         and existing banking systems and administrative databases. These provided a strong
         foundation upon which to adapt and introduce innovations to speed up the emergency
         response, including designing complementary programs with other donors, expanding the
         reach of existing cash transfer programs, and using simulation tools to finetune the
         programs.
        A clear and simple project objective, with only a short-term view, can help maintain focus
         during an emergency operation. In the case of this project, the aim to provide temporary
         economic support to poor and vulnerable households - with broad and inclusive targeting
         approaches - was simple and straightforward and guided implementation decisions that
         ensured rapid implementation.
        Flexibility in project design and implementation can greatly facilitate the ability to respond to
         changes in Government priorities. In the case of this project, the Bank exhibited significant
         flexibility at the different stages of the project life: during preparation, waiving requirements to
         move preparation swiftly, and during implementation, restructuring the project to incorporate
         comprehensive changes.

In addition, the following lesson was identified by IEG Review:

        Effective donor coordination during the preparation stage in terms of quickly defining the
         broad lines of funding of social protection programs, including the consideration of potential
         fund pooling, would have contributed to avoiding an unnecessary project restructuring near
         project closing to accommodate government choices of financing sources.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The overall quality of the ICR is Substantial, with strong internal consistency and conciseness. The simple and
straightforward results chain facilitated a clear analysis of results - the evidence of project outputs was
sufficient to verify outcomes. The narrative was candid in outlining the sequence of events and decision-
making that led to the financing decisions and component restructuring. Lessons were clearly drawn from
project experience and informative for future operations in emergency situations.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                         Page 11 of 12
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
COVID-19 Crisis Emergency SSN Project (P173984)




                                                                               Page 12 of 12
