     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0022760

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P121611                                      Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa                  Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1410,IDA-H6410                         30-Mar-2014                                             25,451,894.90

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Jan-2011                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              16,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               25,980,884.84                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           25,451,894.90                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator             Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo           J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson           IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement (FA) on page 5 , "the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to establish
   the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries (EAC) Partner States". The
   PDO statement on page 8 in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) was identical.

   During the September 2016 restructuring, the concept of ‘foundation of financial sector integration’ was
   clarified to refer to "formulating a regional approach to financial inclusion, furthering legal and regulatory


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



   harmonization and building institutional capacity to manage the increasingly integrated financial sector in the
   EAC".

   This was a clarification and not a change of the original PDO and the 2016 Additional Financing (AF) was an
   expansion of the original project. Consequently, there will be no split assessment of the project, but this
   review will evaluate the project performance against the revised result framework and the clarified PDO,
   which is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To establish the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries
   (EAC) Partner States through formulating a regional approach to financial inclusion;

   Objective 2: To establish the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries
   (EAC) Partner States through furthering legal and regulatory harmonization;

   Objective 3: To establish the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries
   (EAC)Partner States through building institutional capacity to manage the increasingly integrated financial
   sector in the EAC.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Financial Inclusion and Strengthening Market Participants (at appraisal US$1.24
   million; actual US$4.30 million). This component was to support the completion of four studies as follows:
   (i) cross-regional mobile banking in the EAC, (ii) demand and supply barriers to provision of and
   participation by the unbanked in nonbank services, (iii) retail payments infrastructure and how it can better
   support access to finance, and (iv) financial education issues in EAC States, including EAC Certification on
   Banking and Financial Services.

   Component 2. Harmonization of Financial Laws and Regulations (at appraisal US$2.04 million;
   actual US$4.23 million). This component supported an EAC task force whose mission was to
   prepare the legal and regulatory EAC bills for legislation on microfinance, Savings and Credit Cooperative
   Societies (SACCOs), branchless banking, banking and accounting, securities markets, insurance, pensions,
   payment systems, and investment funds - and to submit them to the Council of Ministers.

   Component 3. Mutual Recognition of Supervisory Agencies (at appraisal US$2.26 million; actual
   US$0.70 million). This component aimed to strengthen compliance within the EAC and supported by an
   EAC Secretariat task force whose mission was to (i) develop compliance instruments consistent with
   international principles in banking such as Basel Core Principles, International Organization of Pension


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



  Supervisors, and International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS); (ii) assess compliance with
  International Principles in Banking, Pension, and Insurance; (iii) elaborate a multi-year action plan to comply
  with international principles in banking, pension, and insurance; (iv) assess compliance with International
  Principles in Securities Markets; and (v) implement a multi-year action plan to comply with International
  Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) Principles and support a peer reviewer process for
  Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Uganda.

  Component 4. Integration of Financial Market Infrastructure (at appraisal US$2.19 million; actual
  US$3.75 million). This component intended to support the following activities: (i) integration and upgrading
  of real-time gross settlement; (ii) sensitization of the population on use of electronic means of payment; (iii)
  Central Securities Depositories (CSD) project team and Steering Committee meetings; (iv) provision of
  review and advice on governance, ownership, source capital, and a public-private partnership framework for
  the EAC CSD; (v) purchase of CSD platform; (vi) demutualization (converting mutual or cooperative
  organizations to public companies owned by shareholders) of the stock exchanges; (vii) adoption of a
  common Automated Trading System (ATS) platform; (viii) a study on implementing regional trade reporting
  system for over-the-counter trades; (ix) development of an EAC regional trade finance legal and regulatory
  framework, and its enforcement mechanism; and (x) a study on the opportunities and barriers to the
  development of a regional commodities/futures market in the EAC.

  Component 5. Development of the Regional Bond Market (at appraisal US$0.31 million; actual
  US$0.00 million). This component was intended to achieve the following: (i) the elaboration and
  implementation of a government bond market development strategy in each Partner State, (ii) the
  development of a primary market for non-government bonds, and (iii) the development of a secondary
  market for non-government bonds.

  Component 6: Capacity Building (at appraisal US$7.60 million; actual US$12.10 million). This
  component aimed to strengthen capacity at both the regional and the national level to ensure that the
  integrated market functions effectively and that all economic agents in the regional area aware of the
  benefits from the process of integration. The component was initially rolled out in Rwanda and Burundi to
  address the highest skills gap in these two countries and extended to other Partner States. This component
  also focused on (i) strengthening the Department of Financial Regionalization Policy at the EAC, and (ii)
  establishing a Project Administration Team (PAT) within this department.

  Unallocated: at appraisal (US$0.36 million; actual US$1.10 million). This amount was set aside to fund
  unplanned activities in case of need.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (i) Cost: The estimated cost at appraisal totaled US$16.0 million and the actual cost amounted to
  US$25.7 million fully funded by World Bank (IDA) grants to the EAC.

  (ii) Financing: The project was financed by two World Bank (IDA) grants totaling US$26.5 million;
  comprising an original grant in the amount of US$16 million, and an additional grant amount of US$10.5
  million.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



(iii) Borrower Contribution: There was no beneficiary contribution proposed at appraisal or during
successive restructurings.

(iv) Date: The project was approved on January 31, 2011, became effective on June 20, 2011, and was
initially scheduled to close on March 30, 2014. A mid-term review of project implementation was completed
on October 22, 2012, and the project closed six years and nine months behind schedule on December 31,
2020.

(v) Restructurings: The following changes were made through seven Level 2 restructurings as detailed
below:

      The first restructuring was approved on February 28, 2014 and aimed to: (a) reallocate funds
       between the six components, (b) extend the project closing date by an additional 15 months to June
       30, 2015 and, (c) revise the results matrix.

      The second restructuring was approved on June 18, 2015 and aimed to extend the closing date
       until February 29, 2016. The proposed change was to extend the project closing date by eight
       months from June 30, 2015 to February 29, 2016 to: (a) provide adequate time to successfully
       complete the implementation process for the CMI IT System and related procurement packages, (b)
       facilitate and build on the natural continuation of several ongoing activities, and (c) begin the process
       of identifying and prioritizing activities for Phase II.

      The third restructuring was approved on February 25, 2016 and intended to request a seven-
       month extension until September 30, 2016. The goal was to: a) provide adequate time to
       successfully prepare and finalize the additional financing package and b) facilitate the uninterrupted
       implementation of several ongoing activities, particularly those relating to the Capital Markets
       Infrastructure IT system and the passage of capital markets Council Directives. With this extension
       the project was 5 years and 8 months old.

      The fourth restructuring was approved on 28-Sep-2016, and intended to change the loan closing
       date until the end-September 2016.

      The fifth restructuring was approved on 30-Sep-2016 for the purpose of providing Additional
       Financing (AF) for activities related to the Original Project, with a closing date set on September 30,
       2019. The AF in the amount of US$10.5 million equivalent aimed to leverage the momentum gained
       and lessons learned during the past five years of implementation. The purpose of the AF was to
       scale up activities in partner states, and a new member (South Sudan) was associated to the project
       to facilitate peer-to-peer knowledge exchanges with other EAC Partner States.

      The sixth restructuring was approved on August 02, 2019. The proposed changes included: (a)
       an extension of the project closing date from September 30, 2019 to June 30, 2020, and (b) the
       revision of the Results Framework, specifically to revise one PDO indicator in order to better capture
       the implementation progress of the project; and to add six new intermediate indicators and delete
       one intermediate indicator.

      The seventh restructuring was approved on 29-May-2020 for a proposed closing on December
       30, 2020. This extension intended to complete remaining capital market infrastructure (CMI)
       activities including on-site capacity training on User Acceptance Testing (UAT) and Go Live, which

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



          faced serious challenges following the advent of the Coronavirus pandemic. A final six month
          extension of the closing date was therefore approved to complete these activities.

   (vi) Restructurings and Split Rating: The operation used grant resources to fund TA with an original
   amount of US$16 million at the 2010 approval, and an additional financing at the June 2016
   restructuring. The purpose of the AF was to scale up activities in partner states which (a) made notable
   progress toward broadening and deepening the EAC financial sector, (b) were in line with the natural
   progression from activities previously supported by the project, and (c) were supported by strong client
   priorities within the large financial sector integration agenda (ICR, para 19). The scope of the project
   became overall more ambitious, and generally the operation can be assessed on the basis of the more
   ambitious revised outcomes and outcome targets (OPCS, 2021). Outcomes and outcomes targets were
   revised three times (2014, 2016, and 2019) to adjust to ground conditions. While there were some glitches
   in the M&E implementation, the main thrust of the operation was to achieve more ambitious outcome
   targets set at the AF restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was consistent with the priorities for regional development in Eastern Africa. The EAC
originally included Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, but in 2007, the membership was extended to Burundi
and Rwanda, and in 2018 to South-Soudan. The project aimed to support an ongoing regional
integration with the ratification of the Common Market Protocol by all partner States in April 2010. The
agreement envisaged, among other things, a phased liberalization of trade in financial services and the
elimination of restrictions on the free movement of capital by 2015 at the latest. The private sector has also
played a major role in propelling regional financial integration in East Africa. Several banks that have
operations in more than one partner State have, to some degree, adopted a regional business model
motivated by a range of factors including client-demand, their own corporate structures, and by
opportunities perceived along the regional trade corridors.

The project aimed to address key weaknesses in the regional financial systems which were
consistent with the Bank's recommendations. Weaknesses identified in the PAD were as follows: (i)
financial systems in East Africa are generally small even relative to the size of their Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) and were dominated by the banking sector, (ii) low levels of access to formal financial services, (iii)
limited development of national securities markets and institutional investors. Moreover, the PDOs were
consistent with the World Bank's recommendations from the financial sector assessment of the EAC
completed in 2014 in the key areas of (i) banking structure and efficiency, (ii) banking supervision and crisis
management, (iii) payment systems, and (iv) capital markets.

The project was consistent with the Bank's suggested strategies in most partner States throughout
until the closing date. The World Bank Group has been active in most of the CEA countries supporting the
financial sector (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, including South Sudan more recently). For

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



               instance, the CPS for Kenya (FY14-FY20) had a pillar supporting competitiveness and sustainability under
               which the following advisory work was planned: (i) financial sector innovation, (ii) financial deepening &
               development, and (iii) capital markets. For Uganda, the FY2018-2022 has a pillar 5 supporting improved
               business environment with results expected in the areas of expanded loans to businesses, and credit to the
               private sector.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To establish the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries (EAC) Partner
                             States through formulating a regional approach to financial inclusion

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             The goal of the first part of the PDO was to have in place a regional approach to financial inclusion as a pillar
                             for financial integration within the EAC partner states. Specific activities were identified and aimed to
                             establish a single market of financial services within the EAC Partner States, and to generate a wide range of
                             financial products and services at competitive prices. Under this objective, those activities aimed at facilitating
                             access to finance and market participation. Expected outputs included the completion of several regional
                             studies and EAC certifications while key outcomes included an increased volume of cross border payment
                             transactions and a large number of direct project beneficiaries, including women. The key assumption was
                             that each partner state be fully committed to financial sector integration, which was overall observed
                             throughout the period of project implementation.

                             Efficacy toward the first objective is described below and it draws from the ICR material presented on pages
                             11-13, and the Annex 1.

                                  Outputs

                                        A financial education strategy for the EAC Partner States was prepared aiming to enhance financial
                                          literacy and inclusion across the region, and increase savings and investments;
                                        Twenty trainers were trained in each country through a Training of Trainers program aimed at
                                          providing financial education;

                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




        Financial Education Implementation Guides were designed and printed ready for distribution, with a
         content agreed upon among the Partner States;
        The number of implementation strategies for certification programs developed in banking and
         insurance was fully achieved, reaching the target of 3. Those strategies aimed to enhance the
         professional standards, and to increase the quality and volume of services in the EAC community; and
        The number of training programs developed for each of the financial sub-sector was fully achieved,
         reaching the target of 10 as planned.

Outcome

        The number of accounts within regulated institutions [banks and deposit-taking microfinance
         institutions (MFIs)] reached 109,500 in all partner states exceeding the target of 75,000 by 46 percent.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To establish the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries (EAC) Partner
States through furthering legal and regulatory harmonization.

Rationale
Theory of change

The goal of the second part of the PDO was to strengthen the legal and regulatory harmonization as a step
stone toward financial sector integration among EAC partner states. Specific identified activities aimed to
establish a single market of financial services within the EAC Partner States, and to generate a wide range of
financial products and services at competitive prices. Under the second objective, there were activities aimed
at expanding the legal and regulatory financial sector harmonization, including the harmonization of financial
laws and regulations against Common Standards and the development and approval of instruments aimed at
strengthening the legal and regulatory basis of the financial sector integration. Key outputs included approved
Council Directives (CDs), bills, policies and strategies. Some of the outcomes included the number of EAC
legal instruments supporting financial sector harmonization. The key assumption was that each partner state
be fully committed to financial sector integration.

Efficacy toward the second objective is described below and it draws from the ICR material presented on
pages 11-13 and the Annex 1.

Outputs

        21 Securities Markets Council Directives (CDs) to facilitate the flow of funds among Partner States
         and to ensure the harmonization of the laws and regulations across the capital markets in the region
         were developed and approved by the EAC Council;



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




    Investment principles were standardized so that investments made by pension funds and insurance
       companies could be treated as domestic within the EAC by regulators;
      An EAC Pension and Retirement Benefits Policy and Implementation strategy was developed and
       approved by the EAC Council;
      An EAC Insurance Bill and six regulations were prepared, including fifteen other regulations that were
       at an advanced stage of drafting toward supporting the regional growth of the insurance industry;
      An EAC microfinance bill which created opportunities and access to financial services for the small
       and micro enterprises was developed;
      An EAC bill on the establishment of the East African Financial Services Commission (EAFSC) was
       developed and aimed to coordinate the oversight of nonbank financial sector in the EAC within the
       context of the Monetary Union;
      An EAC Retirement Benefits Bill was prepared and aimed to allow pension funds operate freely in
       each Partner State’s markets and employees (or self-employed persons) able to move their accrued
       pension benefits/ future benefits between funds and across the EAC region;
      Guidelines for consumer protection, principles on extending pension coverage to the informal sector,
       and investment guidelines were developed, strengthening the pension portability and the pension
       sector in the EAC partner states;
      The following studies were also completed: (i) study on assessment of pension structure in the EAC
       from the perspective of regionalization, and (ii) study on the Risk-Based Supervision in EAC Securities
       Markets;
      The number of finalized EAC policies and implementation strategies were fully achieved, reaching the
       target of 3 established at appraisal;
      The target for the development of the regulations and guidelines to harmonize legal and regulatory
       framework was partially achieved , reaching 27 out of a target of 37. The indicator was achieved at
       73% of its end-project target;
      Key prepared laws and regulations at the project’s close included: (i) Six (6) Insurance Regulations
       which were approved by the Capital Markets, Insurance and Pension Committee (CMIPC) meeting in
       Nov. 2020 and were to be submitted to the next Sectoral Council on Finance and Economic Affairs
       (SCFEA), which was expected to take palace in Q1 2021; and (ii) the last set of 15 Insurance
       regulations were to be discussed by the Regional Technical Working Group meeting which
       was scheduled in Q1 2021. The update since the project closure is as follows: (i) no further
       developments were made on the last set of 15 insurance regulations, partly because there were no
       funds to convene the Regional TWG meeting; (ii) the six insurance regulations which were approved
       by the CMIPC were to be considered by the Sectoral Council on Finance and Economic Affairs
       (SCFEA) in May 2022, and (iii) the draft Council directives on principles for EAC securities market
       legal and regulatory framework were adopted by the Council.

Outcome

    The number of EAC legal instruments relating to financial sector harmonization completed during the
       project implementation reached 24 against a target of 25 (96 percent).




                                                                                                Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To establish the foundation for financial sector integration among Eastern African Countries (EAC) Partner
States through building institutional capacity to manage the increasingly integrated financial sector in the
EAC.

Rationale
Theory of change

The goal of the third part of the PDO was to build institutional capacity that has the ability to manage the
increasingly integrated financial sector in the EAC. Specific activities aimed to establish a single market of
financial services within the EAC Partner States, and to generate a wide range of financial products
and services at competitive prices. Some of them consisted in (i) the mutual recognition of supervisory
agencies, (ii) access to finance banking, and (ii) integration of financial market infrastructure, and the
completion of studies. Expected outputs included (i) the installation of an information technology (IT) system
facilitating stock exchanges operations and settlements, and depository systems in the region, and (ii)
a central database mapping intra-EAC positions and macro-financial data. Some of the expected
outcomes were: (i) an increase of cross border payment transactions and (ii) the number of the securities
markets established. The key assumption was that each partner state be fully committed to financial sector
integration.

Efficacy toward the third objective is described below and it draws from the ICR material presented on pages
11-13, and the Annex 1.

Outputs

      The interoperability of Capital Markets Infrastructure (CMI) was established through the purchase
         and installation of an information technology (IT) system, which has linked stock exchanges and
         settlement and depository systems among countries in the region;
        The EAC successfully tested functionality with the participation of the Dar es Salaam and Rwanda
         stock exchanges. The onboarding process for the technology was to continue with Uganda and
         Burundi after the project closed, and Kenya maintained its previous stance as an observer;
         Four participating Partner States stock exchange and trading platforms were connected and mock
         sessions were ongoing. The CMI was expected to go live in the first week of December 2020, and
         support was provided to Burundi in establishing its capital market;
        Regional Road Maps for the Establishment of Payment Switches were developed, allowing the
         development of national road maps to synchronize implementation, and facilitating more efficient retail
         payment systems and enhancing cross-border trade;
        The target of developing a Road Map for establishing a centralized database for capturing cross
         border financial flows as fully achieved;
        A central database mapping intra-EAC positions and macro-financial data from all Partner States was
         established, and the project supported collection, collation, and standardization of data, aiming to
         improve regional oversight of an increasingly interlinked financial sector and architecture;

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




                                  A standardized training curriculum in banking and insurance for financial sector professionals was
                                   developed, aiming to have a pool of skilled financial sector professionals in the EAC;
                                  There was a regionalization of long-term institutional savings through assessments and development
                                   of pension/insurance policies and implementation strategies, setting the stage for pooling long-term
                                   savings in the region to meet the demand for large scale investment projects;
                                  The following studies were also completed: (i) a study on the promotion of interoperability of card
                                   switches in the EAC, (ii) a study on the requirement for implementation of cross border mobile
                                   payments, (iii) a study on the Development of Insurance Certification Program, (iv) a study on EAC
                                   regional Banking certification, (v) a regional study on financial education issues in EAC Partner States
                                   to develop regional/national strategies, (vi) the assessment of IOSCO 8 New Principles for Rwanda,
                                   Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania ,(vii) a study on the Assessment against IOSCO Principle 38 for
                                   Rwanda, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, (viii) a study on the IOSCO Principles Assessment for
                                   Rwanda on the original 30 principles, (ix) a study on the assessment of compliance with IAIS
                                   Insurance Core Principles, and finally (x) a study on demutualization of Uganda Securities Exchange,
                                   and (xi) the study on the development of a Burundi securities legal and regulatory framework.
                                  The target for the number of policy papers prepared by the Project Administration Team (PAT) was
                                   exceeded, reaching 13 against a target of 10.

                            Outcome

                                  The target of four markets successfully linked to the EAC Capital Markets Infrastructure (CMI) IT
                                   platform was fully achieved;
                                  The target for the estimate of cross border payment transactions was partially achieved, reaching 80
                                   percent of the target at US$5.90 million against a target of US$7.40 million;
                                  The target for the Development of a Regional Road Map and five other National Road Maps for
                                   universal switches on retail payments was exceeded, reaching 6 out of the target of 5. The
                                   outstanding strategy is for Tanzania, which opted to develop its own roadmap based on the developed
                                   EAC regional roadmap.
                                  However, only one securities market was established. It was in Burundi but is yet to
                                   become operational.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated substantial based on the following achievements toward the three distinct objectives
                            embedded in the PDO:


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




         Toward formulating a regional approach to financial inclusion in the EAC, key results included
          (i) completion of a financial education strategy and programs as well as implementation guides; (ii) the
          training of trainers in financial integration, and (iii) an increased number of accounts (reaching the
          target) in regulated financial institutions (banks and deposit-taking microfinance institutions);
         Toward strengthening the legal and regulatory harmonization in the EAC, key achievements
          were (i) the issuance of Council Directives (CDs) and the harmonization of the laws and regulations
          across the capital markets in the region, (ii) the standardization of investment principles related to
          pension funds and insurance companies within the EAC by regulators; (iii) the approval of an EAC
          Pension and Retirement Benefits Policy and Implementation strategy, (iv) an EAC Insurance Bill and
          six regulations, and (v) the adoption of a Microfinance Bill, a bill on the establishment of the East
          African Financial Services Commission; as well as an EAC Retirement Benefits Bill.
         Toward building institutional capacity to manage the increasingly integrated financial sector in
          the EAC, key results were: (i) the successful linking of markets to the EAC Capital Markets
          Infrastructure (CMI) IT platform, and (ii) the Development of Regional Road Maps for universal
          switches on retail payments. Partial achievement was related to the increase of cross border payment
          transactions. However, the target for established securities markets was missed.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
An economic and financial analysis was not carried out at appraisal as this was a predominantly technical
assistance project with limited investments. Instead, an in-depth technical analysis of all project components
was completed. Similarly, no economic and financial was conducted at project closure. Instead, the ICR
reported on page 14 elements related to the operational efficiency of the implementation processes of the
project.

Key findings were as follows: (i) overall, the project structure was unchanged, but the activities and scopes
under each component were increased, especially when the Additional Financing was approved, leading
to changes of PDO indicators and intermediate result indicators and targets, (ii) the project life span of nine
years helped in the development of a regional bond market, and the harmonization of EAC financial laws and
regulations, which were essential for EAC regional integration, and (iii) the long period of project implementation
resulted in staff turnover at the EAC Secretariat and the World Bank. The change in senior management of the
EAC Secretariat delayed the AF effectiveness, but implementation pace was accelerated and the allocated IDA
fund was fully disbursed. The World Bank task team leaders changed three times, thus affecting the ability to
extract project-related data and transfer the initial knowledge and ideas of designing the project, but overall
there were no major operational efficiency weaknesses of project implementation.

However, the ICR did not compare the cost of project implementation to similar Bank regional projects. In this
case, the ICR noted various reasons for increased costs of project management ranging from the project's
complexity to delays in procurement. In the event the cost of project management tripled in comparison to the
budgeted amount at appraisal. Overall efficiency is therefore rated as Modest.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO relevance was high as it was consistent with the Bank's EAC regional strategy and the priorities of the
most recent CPS of most of the EAC member countries. The overall efficacy was substantial, as one element of
the PDO was highly achieved, while the two others were substantially achieved. Finally, efficiency was modest,
as there were shortcomings in the project's operational efficiency since administrative costs for the project
tripled compared with those costs at appraisal. Since there were moderate shortcomings in the project's
efficiency the overall outcome of this project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified on pages 25-26 a series of risks that may curtail the impact of long-
term expected outcome as follows:

      Sustainability of the reform agenda launched by the project is not anticipated: The project's
       implementation relied on a dedicated team of professionals funded by the project and supported by
       the EAC Secretariat staff and management and the relevant committees and organs of the EAC.
       Without further financial support, this dedicated team was demobilized, and the desired long-term
       outcomes pursued by this project may not be fully achieved. Moreover, efforts by the EAC
       Secretariat to secure the resources needed to consolidate financial sector regional integration were
       unsuccessful, and a dedicated directorate to achieve the task was therefore not established.

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



     There are financial constraints in partner states to sustaining the achieved outcome: Some
      EAC partner states may not find sufficient budget to finance the implementation of the financial
      education strategy/financial literacy within their respective countries. Inadequate budgets will
      therefore remain an important constraint to pursuing the financial integration agenda of the
      community forward, including the goal of achieving a single market in financial services and the
      implementation of the Monetary Union Protocol.
     The economic and political risks remain high in the EAC. The COVID-19 pandemic might
      exacerbate the downward economic trends as most businesses were forced to scale down
      operations and others close shop altogether. The pressure on the regional economy is expected to
      persist due to the interlinkages between the EAC economies and the global markets. Furthermore,
      most EAC work is driven through the Government and the public sector, with the summit being the
      highest decision-making organ of the community, constituted by the heads of state in the respective
      partner states. The economic and financial developments are closely connected to the
      political developments within the East African region, and the political risk remains high, driven by the
      election cycles in the partner states, and the existence of fragile states within the EAC.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR discussion of the quality-at-entry issues on pages 17-19 and 23-24 has inspired the overall
  assessment presented below.

  The project design drew from a conducive regional environment. This project addressed an issue
  that was at the core of the Partner States cooperation as it aimed to enhance the free movement of
  capital as envisioned in the EAC Common Market Protocol. Technical notes related to the EAC financial
  sector status accompanying the Project Appraisal Document were prepared to shed light on the context
  of project design and implementation. The project intended to facilitate the creation of a single market in
  financial services across the EAC as a prerequisite for attaining a common currency expected to be
  achieved in 2024. The project also intended to leverage the will and commitment of the EAC members to
  make progress toward a financial sector integration as envisioned in the EAC Treaty.

  Senior Bank staff were at the forefront in selecting project activities and assessed key aspects of
  the project. Experienced and committed task teams at the World Bank headquarters provided technical
  support to the project from the outset, as the EAC Secretariat had limited financial sector expertise to
  design and support project activities, thus constituting a high risk for the project. During appraisal, the
  World Bank team adequately assessed the project design and major aspects, including technical,
  institutional, and procurement, in order to create the conditions of PDO achievement.

  The project design factored in the diverse dynamics within the partner states. The project benefited
  from the diagnostic work undertaken before appraisal which provided a better understanding of the
  landscape for financial sector integration. The project had to take into account the complexity and
  diversity of the EAC financial sector which had disparities in the policy and regulatory frameworks at the
  Partner States level. For instance, the regulatory infrastructure of small markets tended to be of higher
  cost and lower quality than in larger markets, and various Partner States in the EAC were at different

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



  levels of economic and financial sector development. Therefore, building a consensus among Partner
  States was one of the most important tasks, justifying why the project design and launch moved quite
  slowly. Finally, all Partner States had mixed feelings about the strengthening of the Secretariat in terms of
  both technical capacity and its convening role. The Bank project team took the lead in bringing all EAC
  member states to agreement on the main thrust of the project development objective.

  While operational arrangements were well-crafted, implementation readiness lacked during the
  earlier years. The project team relied on a well-staffed Project Management Unit (PMU), called the
  Project Administration Team (PAT), which comprised not only the usual fiduciary staff (procurement and
  FM), but also the technical specialists in payments, insurance and pensions. By placing the project within
  the framework of the EAC Secretariat organizational structure and not as an independent Project
  Implementation Unit (PIU), the project endorsed the EAC institutional governance framework. This
  institutional alliance meant that the project could not independently move ahead with the creation of the
  Directorate of Regional Financial Integration (as planned during project appraisal) because it could not
  obtain the endorsement the EAC Secretariat. However, the EAC Secretariat had limited dedicated staff
  including financial sector expertise and faced capacity challenges to support project activities, causing
  delays during the earlier years of project implementation.

  Overall the project quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The project was grounded on
  the realities in the partner states and their problems. It was consistent with the EAC
  Secretariat's perspectives, and the diverse spectrum of the respective financial sectors in the Partner
  States, and the Bank engaged the partner states well ahead of time and was informed
  by their knowledge and the Bank's experience with similar projects. However, because inadequate
  preparation, project implementation readiness lacked and led to delays in the project launching.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR discussion of the quality of supervision and implementation issues on pages 19-21 and 24 is
 reflected in the overall assessment presented below.

 The World Bank staff remained focused on the goal, despite complex reforms and inefficient
 implementation procedures: Reflecting the challenges associated with implementing a complex financial
 sector reform agenda involving six Partner States, and significant capacity constraints on the ground, the
 project faced severe implementations delays in the initial stages. There were vastly different degrees of
 financial sector development across EAC Member States, and these disparities constituted a major
 challenge to the establishment of a single financial market in the community, especially with Partner States
 having disproportional implementing capacity. While originally planned to last 3 years, it took seven closing
 date extensions and 8.5 years of implementation, due predominantly to procurement delays. The
 latter arose from the complex internal approving system of the Procurement Committee, which took two
 months to approve bid evaluation reports, and delays were in large part due to the capacity challenges at
 the implementing agency (EAC Secretariat). For instance, the budget approval process was long and
 inflexible, and any resource reallocation required full approval of the Council of Ministers meeting twice in a
 financial period. These bureaucratic processes adversely affected the ability of the project to quickly

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



respond effectively to the need of the Partner States in a dynamic financial sector environment. However,
both the Bank team remained focused on maintaining sustained dialogue with the PIU and on pursuing the
project's goal.

The WB team provided close supervision to compensate for the limited EAC implementation
capacity and the complexity of the project. The World Bank’s main counterpart was the EAC Deputy
Secretary General (Planning and Infrastructure) at the EAC Secretariat. At the technical level, the Director
of Planning led the project implementation, and the PAT was housed under this directorate. While the
directorate was fully committed to the project, it relied heavily on the staff of the PAT with financial sector
technical expertise. The task team was led by experienced and seasoned professionals (one task team
leader during project preparation and two during implementation) in the finance sector and included a mix
of skills that was adequate to cater for a thorough implementation support of this project. The team
included financial sector specialists, emerging market specialists, pension insurance specialists, M&E
specialists, FM and procurement specialists, all with experience in supporting financial sector development
projects in environments similar to the Partner States. The overall procurement risk, for example, was
considered high from the outset and the risk had to be mitigated by intense involvement of a large number
of project-financed staff in the PAT. The World Bank’s guidance was therefore provided in all dimensions of
project conception, preparation, and early implementation well beyond what is common practice in World
Bank projects.

Implementation had to address gaps and delays in decision-making processes. Within the framework
of the EAC Secretariat, all policy matters and those with a cost implication had to be approved through the
relevant Sectoral Committee, Sectoral Council, and the Council. Considering the structure of the meetings
and competing priorities when it came to convening of meetings, there were substantial delays in the
decision-making processes, thus affecting execution of activities. There was a need for support and
collaboration with the Partner States’ governments, ministries, departments, and agencies as well as the
private sector for the implementation of activities and programs in the Partner States. In most cases, the
relevant officers at the Partner State level were engaged with other activities and priority was not given to
regional activities, and necessary financial and human resources are not always allocated to implement the
regionally agreed actions plan at the Partner State levels. This also applied to the private sector, whose
representatives were not always directly involved in regional work especially EAC meetings and policy
decisions.

The Bank team continued sustained implementation despite external shocks. The COVID-19 global
pandemic was a major challenge as it restricted movement between the Partner States as well as within
the Partner States, hampering a great deal of regional work, particularly the nature of the project which
included a series of technical meetings and consultations. Shifting from in-person meetings to virtual ones
were challenging due to the different level of connectivity between the EAC Secretariat and the Partner
States. Partner States’ specific challenges included political and natural disasters. The election cycles by
and large affected other affairs on the economic front, especially the periods leading to and after the
general elections. The governance mechanism at the EAC level requires unanimous agreement among all
Partner States and the head of states and minister-level participations (in some cases, physical
participation to the meeting) are required to ratify regional law, regulations, policies, and strategies, which
are distracted by such national challenges and the political landscape, in particular, election cycles.

The overall quality of supervision was Satisfactory. During the first two years, progress was limited
mainly because the implementation readiness was missing. Moderate shortcomings were that it took two
years to recruit staff, disbursement was low at the original closing date, the Results Framework was

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



 revised three times, and two out of five indicators were dropped. The project team introduced changes in
 the Results Framework and extended the closing date multiple times. The World Bank’s technical and
 fiduciary teams provided regular support to focus on maximizing the project’s development impact, which
 resulted in adjustments, including project restructuring and extending the project closing dates. The task
 team conducted regular implementation support missions to take stock of progress. The ISRs were candid,
 detailed, and well-targeted to outline important events and formulated a clear and complete picture. The
 project team also produced clear and detailed Aide Memoires.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 This assessment of the M&E issues of the project draws for a major part from the material presented on
 pages 21-22 of the ICR.

 The PDO was generally clear, although it was improved at restructuring. There was a congruence between
 the theory of change presented under Section 4 and the results framework. The PDO indicators and
 expected targets were compatible with the Partner States’ approach and their overall financial sector
 reform agenda to support broadening and deepening of the financial sector through a single market among
 EAC Partner States. An M&E specialist was recruited soon after project effectiveness, which ensured the
 partners in the implementation units were fully integrated into the management information process of the
 project.

 A results framework detailed in the Annex 1 of the PAD, which included output and outcome-level
 indicators, was monitored by the EAC Secretariat on a monthly basis. Indicators were generally specific
 and measurable, but mostly at the output-level, as this was an essentially technical assistance project. For
 instance, approval of legal and regulatory texts at regional level was the starting point to move toward
 financial sector regional integration, and all PDOs were articulated around that kind of achievements.
 Quantitative indicators were also identified to gauge achievement of outcome, including the change in the
 number of accounts in the financial institutions of Partner States, and the volume of cross-border
 transactions.



b. M&E Implementation
  The EAC Secretariat maintained a robust M&E system. The M&E system tracked the performance
  indicators, scheduling, and implementation data and expenditure as agreed within the framework of the

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



  annual work plans and budgets. The EAC Secretariat provided regular implementation reports to IDA.
  The project’s Results The project contributed to strengthening not only the EAC Secretariat but also
  regulators and financial sector market participants at both the regional and national levels

  The EAC Secretariat prepared quarterly reports with results framework data, reviewed by the Project
  Steering Committee and discussed in conjunction with the World Bank implementation support and
  devoted substantial resources to support financial education, certification programs, and other capacity-
  building activities. A technical expert within the EAC Secretariat performed regular M&E of project results

  Changes in the results framework were later introduced through restructuring to further enhance results
  monitoring. While the original M&E framework was not considered complex, the PDO indicators were
  revised during restructuring where some were dropped and replaced with new ones, while some metrics
  were changed without material changes to the project design or level of ambition. Discussions during
  implementation support missions related to institutional capacity building, financial viability, technical
  reviews, and site visits provided. A midterm review was conducted on October 22, 2012, to assess
  implementation progress. The team consulted with counterparts to understand their needs and reached
  out to the relevant experts within the World Bank to provide required support.

  Overall, the project was subjected to regular implementation support missions that monitored progress
  and provided extensive support. The progress and guidance were recorded in 18 Implementation Status
  and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoires. The task team regularly collected data, updated
  progress against the baseline, and highlighted issues for the World Bank management’s attention.
  Several reports, including quarterly and annual progress reports and monthly fiscal reports were used to
  monitor the project’s outcome and results indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  Appropriate data collected from the progress reports on indicators were evaluated and used to inform
  decision-making on project activities. For example, based on the data and information collected from the
  midterm review, the World Bank, and the EAC Secretariat decided to restructure the project and extend
  the closing date. Modifications of annual work and procurement plans were also done whenever
  required.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and social safeguards compliance. The project was assigned the Category C as it did
   not have any activities that were likely to have adverse environmental or social risks and/or impacts.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   According to the ICR on page 23, overall financial management (FM) was eventually satisfactory.
   Initially, FM performance was considered Moderately Unsatisfactory due to weak budgeting processes and
   inadequate keeping of accounts and internal audits. Main FM issues faced by the project
   included (a) delays in recruiting one additional accountant and two internal auditors and in resolving
   ineligible expenditures; (b) slow implementation of internal audit recommendations in the early life of the
   project; and (c) delays in concluding capital markets infrastructure (CMI) consultancy arrangements.
   However, these issues were eventually addressed, and FM was improved substantially and was
   subsequently rated Satisfactory during the later stages of the implementation period. The project complied
   with the relevant provisions of the Financing Agreement including timely rendition of quarterly interim
   financial reports (IFRs) and the annual audited financial statements. The external auditors’ opinion on the
   financial statements was unqualified throughout the life of the project. After project closure, assets
   acquired with the project resources were handed over to the EAC Secretariat.

   Procurement

   Overall procurement performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Procurement for the project was carried
   out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Guidelines. The EAC Secretariat was responsible
   for all procurement aspects as it had experience in implementing activities funded by development partners
   including the World Bank mostly in the form of grants. The project encountered procurement delays mainly
   due to the slow internal procurement approval process and the non-readiness of Partner States. The main
   contributing factor in slow contract implementation was the lack of readiness on the side of Partner States
   in the implementation of the CMI system. When the implementation of the CMI system was delayed and
   later started, some Partner States went ahead with upgrading their national system by engaging other
   vendors. The World Bank acted as a mediator by having separate meetings with each party to discuss and
   resolve contentious issues and signing the amendments with the supplier (Infotech).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)



                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified a series of findings and lessons discussed on the pages 26-27, and this review
selected two lessons which are rephrased below:

(a) A complex objective can be achieved by drawing on a conducive broad context, a phased
implementation and additional financing. The idea of contributing to financial integration among
the CEA countries at different levels of economic development initially appeared ambitious and
unachievable. To succeed, the project drew from the goal of free movement of capital as envisioned
in the EAC Common Market Protocol and the commitment of the political leadership in the five
member countries of the EAC. Moreover, the project team selected phased activities that
were considered as a common denominator for all countries, and their implementation produced
results. Given the broad-based nature of financial sector integration, the project’s agenda was
complex and wide ranging. The Bank team adopted a phased agenda: (i) first, the project team
restricted activities to the fastest moving parts of the larger financial sector agenda, which
responded to the client demand. Second, the above principle continued to guide the design and
implementation of the AF and selectivity was exercised within the broad areas of support. The
project ended up being a front runner for the regional integration in Africa and globally, and the
challenges faced were acceptable for any innovative project of this nature. With the Bank project
team’s close implementation support, the project picked up momentum toward the last years and
was able to meet its development objective.

(b) Crafting the appropriate implementing arrangements is as important as the other key
features of the project. The structure and location of the PAT were key to project
implementation. The Project Administration Team (PAT) was supported by a Steering Committee
and an EAC Executive Committee with senior-level membership drawn from relevant institutions in
the partner states that helped smooth decision-making. The PAT relied, not only on the usual
fiduciary staff, but also on the technical specialists in payments, insurance and pensions. To
complement the EAC Secretariat limited technical capacity, the Bank project t eam provided the
needed expertise and just-in time advice. A clear articulation of the EAC’s commitment toward
regional integration also provided a supportive and enabling framework under which most of the
project’s initiatives were premised. The adequate implementing arrangements coupled to the Bank's
team expertise were key to the results achieved by this project.




13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP (P121611)




  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This was an innovative and original TA project implemented in a regional context. The Bank would gain
  in preparing a Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) to analyze the status of outcomes a couple of
  years after the project closure including the extent to which the project's achievements have been
  sustained. Lessons learned from PPAR would benefit the World Bank in its interventions supporting financial
  sector integration in Africa, and in other parts of the world as well.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive and provides a concise narrative of the project
design, context, and achieved results, and it is generally evidence-based. The quality of analysis was strong,
but the results orientation was limited by the fact this was a TA project, for which achieved outcomes are
difficult to measure and to attribute. The ICR was internally consistent, as all parts of the storyline were mutually
reinforcing from the activities, the implementing arrangements, the achieved outputs and the progress toward
the PDOs. Moderate shortcomings of the ICR arose from the fact that the assessment of results was output-
based and component-focused instead of being objective and outcome-based. An objective-based assessment
should have focused on a parsed PDO. The overall quality of ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 20
