     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022743

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Tonga                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 0                                           0

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P155133                                     Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-57710,IDA-D1070                       30-Jun-2017                                          2,251,502.20

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2016                               30-Jun-2017
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              2,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                               2,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                           2,251,502.20                                           0.00




P159262_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Tonga                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P159262                                   Tonga Second Inclusive Growth DPO ( P159262 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-57710,IDA-60200,IDA-D1070,IDA-        31-Dec-2018                                             14775064.03
 D1780,IDA-D3490

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Apr-2017                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                           14,775,064.03                                             0.00



 P159263_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Tonga                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P159263                                   Tonga Third Inclusive Growth DPO ( P159263 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-57710,IDA-D1070,IDA-D4580             30-Sep-2020                                              5565640.03

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-May-2019                               30-Sep-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                               5,500,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                5,500,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                            5,565,640.03                                             0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof      Paul Holden                   Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Inclusive Growth Development Policy Operation (IGDPO) consisted of a programmatic series of three
operations. The original Project Development Objective (PDO) described in the Program Document (PD) for the
first operation was to support policy reforms to: (i) increase fiscal resilience; (ii) support a more inclusive, modern
and accountable state; and (iii) support a more dynamic and inclusive economy. Objectives (ii) and (iii) were
adjusted for the third operation in the series, removing the concept “inclusiveness” from the second objective to
avoid duplication with the third objective.

For the purposes of this ICRR, the objectives of the series are simplified as follows:

      Increasing fiscal resilience by strengthening revenue, debt and expenditure management

      Supporting government accountability

Supporting a more dynamic and inclusive economy by improving the environment for private sector activity.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The series was structured around three pillars/policy areas. It included 21 prior actions (PAs) spread over the
three operations (see Section 3b).

Pillar 1: supporting fiscal resilience by stronger revenue mobilization, and debt and public service
management through revenue and customs legislation; a medium- term debt strategy; and a new public sector
remuneration framework.

Pillar 2: supporting government accountability and private sector regulation by improving compliance with
procurement regulations; improving budgetary classifications; introducing more robust systems to pursue audit
recommendations; and introducing new regulatory frameworks into selected sectors.

Pillar 3: supporting a more dynamic and inclusive economy by adopting investor-friendly foreign investment
legislation; improving oversight and private participation in public enterprises; and introducing regulation into
private sector labor markets.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The three-operation DPO totaled US$22.5 million equivalent, of which US$22.6 million equivalent was
disbursed. The first operation of the series was approved on March 16, 2016, and the third one closed on
September 30,2020.

DPO 1 was an IDA credit of US$1.0 million equivalent and a grant of US$1.0 million equivalent, approved on
March 16, 2016, and effective on May 11, 2016. It closed on June 30, 2017, having disbursed US$2.25 million
equivalent.



                                                                                                        Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



DPO 2 consisted of two grants and one IDA credit totaling US$15.0 million, approved on April 27, 2017, and
effective on June 15, 2017. It closed on December 31, 2018, having disbursed US$14.8 million equivalent.

DPO 3 consisted of a grant of US$5.5 million equivalent, approved on May 16, 2019, and effective on June
18,2019. It closed on September 30, 2020, having disbursed US$5.6 million equivalent.

Discrepancies between amounts allocated and amounts disbursed are due to exchange rate fluctuations.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The Program Objectives are aligned with government policy and Bank strategy for Tonga and are considered
 essential elements in building a resilient and inclusive economy while addressing challenges posed by its
 geography – small islands spread over a large and remote area in the Pacific – which pushes up the cost of
 economic activity, offers limited scope for growth while the narrow economic base and high reliance on
 imports leave it vulnerable to economic shocks.

 The Bank worked with the government (and development partners –ADB, Australia, New Zealand, EU) to
 elaborate the key reform actions supported under the Program. They are aligned with the government’s
 national development plan for 2015-2025, and continue themes introduced under previous DPOs, deepening
 reforms to revenue mobilization and public financial management including reform of state-
 owned enterprises, and measures to address non-communicable diseases (NCD. They are aligned with the
 Bank Group strategy as articulated in the Regional Partnership Framework for the Pacific Island Countries
 2019-2021. There, the current Program covers three focus areas: strengthening macroeconomic
 management, protecting incomes and livelihoods by addressing NCDs, and enhancing access to
 employment opportunities by broadening opportunities for labor mobility.

 The macroeconomic policy stance was considered adequate for the GDPO program at the time of GDPO 1
 (2016) and for the two subsequent GDPOs. However, with a slow recovery from the 2018 cyclone Gita, and
 the subsequent twin shocks of COVID-19 and cyclone Harold, the 2020 IMF Article IV consultation
 assessment of the short- and medium-term outlook in 2021 is of a modest and fragile economy. While
 proactive and timely actions helped mitigate these external shocks, the economy nevertheless contracted by
 some 2.5 percent in 2020 and is estimated to have contracted by 3.5 percent in 2021. Tourism and
 remittance inflows are expected to decline, and reconstruction-related imports, are expected to rise,
 worsening the current account deficit. Tonga had requested IMF financial assistance under the Rapid Credit
 Facility


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)




Objective 1 – increasing fiscal resilience

DPO 1                                DPO 2                              DPO 3
PA1: The Recipient has increased
the rate of fuel excise tax by TOP PA2: The Recipient has increased
                                                                        PA3: The Recipient’s Cabinet has
0.06 per liter (an increase in the   the rate of fuel excise tax by TOP
                                                                        approved for submission to
rate of 12%) and other excise tax 0.09 per liter (an increase in the
                                                                        Parliament a revised Revenue
and import duty rates to improve     rate of 16%) and other excise tax
                                                                        Services Administration Bill that
revenue mobilization and             and import duty rates in order to
                                                                        introduces additional avenues for
strengthen incentives to consume improve revenue mobilization and
                                                                        revenue recovery and sets updated
healthy foods (to reduce the         strengthen incentives to consume
                                                                        and graduated penalties
incidence of non-communicable        healthy foods, as evidenced
diseases, NCDs), as evidenced        through the Excise Amendment and
through the Excise Amendment and the Customs Amendment
the Customs Amendment
                                                                        PA4: The Recipient’s Cabinet has
                                                                        approved for submission to
                                                                        Parliament a new Customs Bill that
                                                                        aligns with international standards
                                                                        (including the Revised Kyoto
                                                                        Convention and World Customs
                                                                        Organization recommended
                                                                        practices) and simplifies customs
                                                                        administration
                                      PA6: The Recipient's Cabinet has
PA5: The Cabinet has approved a approved a transparent, target
new Medium-Term Debt Strategy based fiscal anchor system and
which has been made public           monitoring framework that supports
                                     medium- term fiscal sustainability
                                     and a more efficient mix of public
                                     spending
                                                                        PA9: The Recipient has: (i)
                                                                        realigned the performance
PA7: (a) The Recipient’s
                                                                        management system year; (ii)
Remuneration Authority has           PA8: The Recipient’s Cabinet has
                                                                        provided target performance-rating
completed a remuneration review of approved and begun to implement
                                                                        distributions to public institutions;
the public service to ensure         a new public service remuneration
                                                                        and (iii) clarified the eligibility of
equitable, competitive, and fiscally structure and performance
                                                                        public sector employees to receive
sustainable remuneration and         management system to ensure
                                                                        performance rewards and the
submitted its recommendations to effective public service delivery,
                                                                        application of procedures to
Cabinet; and (b) the Recipient’s     adequate pay, and consistency with
                                                                        manage poor performance, based
Cabinet has reviewed the said        fiscal sustainability
                                                                        on a review of its new public service
recommendations.
                                                                        remuneration structure and
                                                                        performance management system
Objective 2: government accountability and private sector regulation

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



PA10: The Recipient’s Cabinet has PA11: The Recipient has
approved a revised set of           implemented a new procurement
Procurement Regulations, and        tracking database and adopted
prepared standard bidding           compliance and performance
documents and procurement           indicators and associated targets
manuals in support of the           for monitoring system performance,
Regulations                         to be publicly disseminated
PA12: A new biannual report of
audit recommendations and actions                                            PA13: The recipient has removed
for all ministries and agencies has                                          the non-economic items from the
been prepared, and a new Audit                                               economic segment of the Chart of
Oversight Committee of Cabinet                                               Accounts, which will improve the
established and tasked with                                                  accuracy and integrity of budget
ensuring timely and thorough                                                 reporting
follow-up of audit recommendations
Objective 3: a more dynamic and inclusive economy
PA14: The Recipient’s Legislative
                                    PA15: Cabinet approved for public
Assembly has approved a new
                                    consultation a National Energy Bill
Communications Commission Act
                                    that includes provisions for multi-
that will establish an independent
                                    sector regulation for all energy
regulator
                                    subsectors (electricity, gas,
                                    petroleum)


                                                                         PA17The Recipient’s Cabinet has
                                       PA16: The Recipient’s Cabinet has
                                                                         approved revised foreign
                                       approved the Foreign Investment
                                                                         investment regulations, which
                                       Bill for submission to the
                                                                         provide clearer and more
                                       Recipient’s parliament, which
                                                                         transparent requirements for foreign
                                       includes provisions to facilitate
                                                                         investment application
                                       foreign investment in the
                                       Recipient’s territory
PA18: The Recipient’s Cabinet has
approved the appointment of
shared boards of directors of public   PA19: The Recipient’s Cabinet         PA20: The Recipient’s Cabinet has
enterprises in the information,        has directed the Ministry of Public   approved a recommendation that
communications, and technology         Enterprises to proceed with a sale    the Ports Authority Tonga adopts a
sector, and the utilities sector to    of shares in Tonga Cable Ltd          landlord model for Nuku'alofa port
streamline the number of Directors
and achieve greater efficiency
                                       PA21: The Recipient’s cabinet has
                                       approved for submission to
                                       Parliament the Employment
                                       Relations Bill, which will ensure
                                       fundamental labor rights are
                                       enshrined in domestic law



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)




Objective 1 – increasing fiscal resilience

There was a credible results chain linking PAs 1-4 to stronger revenue mobilization and PAs 5-9 to greater
fiscal sustainability. Both results chains contributed to enhancing fiscal resilience. Revenue mobilization was
strengthened by a better-functioning revenue and customs administration. Fiscal sustainability was
strengthened with better medium-term fiscal planning and monitoring, and better management of the public
sector wage bill.

PA1, PA2 – Excise tax and import duty changes to support revenue mobilization and healthy
lifestyles. Tonga has limited options for generating public resources, with excise taxes and import duties the
major sources of public revenue, in addition to revenue from remittances and foreign assistance. PA1 and
PA2 increased in import duties and excise taxes to improve revenue mobilization, while also being used to
address a growing fiscal burden from public health interventions to cope with a growing crisis of non-
communicable diseases (NCD) by incentivizing healthier food choices through consumer taxes on specific
food items. The PAs were expected to result in an average annual increase of 3.2 percentage points in
revenue as a proportion of GDP between FY14/16 and FY18/20.

(Relevance PA1 = S; PA2 = S)

PA3, PA4 – Revenue services administration and customs legislation. To further strengthen revenue
mobilization and bring better control over high cost structures that reduced the competitiveness and
consequently fiscal resilience of the economy, a revenue services administration bill (PA3) and a customs bill
(PA4) were introduced. The former (PA3) introduced a new public service remuneration structure and
performance management system, including new pay scales, a performance management framework and a
policy framework to ensure that remuneration and performance management would be consistent with fiscal
sustainability (the public sector wage bill covered about 60 percent of domestic revenues). The latter (PA4)
was to introduce a new customs bill developed to international standards; it was expected to contribute to
enhanced customs collection by bringing greater efficiency and lower transactions costs into the system. The
two PAs were part of an explicit results chain linking them to improvements in revenue and customs
administration and, together with P1 and P2, contributing to improved revenue mobilization.

(Relevance PA3 = S; PA4 = S)

PA5, PA6 - Medium-term debt strategy and a fiscal anchor system. Tonga’s exposure to external shocks
makes careful fiscal management and oversight over public spending crucial. PA5 introduced a first medium-
term debt strategy for a more rigorous vetting of new borrowing, lowering the portfolio risk. It was to be
complemented by a transparent, target-based fiscal anchor system and monitoring framework (PA6). Both
were major factors in strengthening medium term fiscal planning and monitoring, together with PA7-9
contributing to greater fiscal sustainability.

(Relevance PA5 = S; PA6 = S)

PA7, PA8, PA9 – Improved management and control of the public sector wage bill. These prior actions
were expected to achieve cost savings by removing automatic features of the current system, which
contributed to annual automatic pay raises irrespective of performance. PA7 undertook a remuneration
review of the public service to achieve cost savings by removing the automatic features and creating a
competitive and more fiscally sustainable remuneration model. PA8 and PA9 were to ensure that the new
remuneration structure would be implemented with a focus on relevant elements: pay scales, performance

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



management, consistency of remuneration with fiscal sustainability, and based on consultations with public
services. All three PAs would improve management and control of the public sector wage bill and thereby
contribute significantly to fiscal sustainability and fiscal resilience.

(Relevance: PA7=S; PA8=S; PA9=S)

Objective 2 - Supporting a modern and accountable state

This objective supported measures to strengthen accountability and oversight frameworks in the public sector
and in private markets. Policy areas included improved procurement systems (PA10, PA11), improved
accuracy and integrity in budget reporting (PA12), and improved effectiveness of external audit
recommendations (PA13), responding to shortcomings that had been brought to light in PEFA assessments
(2010, 2014) and Australia’s 2015 assessment of national systems. Reforms under this objective built on
previous DPO-supported reforms (in preparation of public accounts, transparency of budget execution
information, earlier stages of procurement reform).

PA10, PA11 – Procurement. These two PAs addressed accountability for government finances and
continued public procurement reform started under a previous DPO series (Economic Reform Support
DPO). The reform drew on a 2010 PEFA report that raised issues of low levels of compliance, an absence of
usable records for auditing, and a chronic lack of procurement capacity. Improving the procurement process
was expected to create more competitive public sector tendering to provide greater value for money. PA10
introduced a new set of procurement regulations to address the issues identified in the PEFA report, while
also removing inconsistencies in earlier regulations, rules and procedures. Complementary measures to build
capacity in line ministries to implement the regulations were less effective due to high turnover of staff,
according to the ICR (page 20; see also Efficacy Objective 2). PA11 introduced a new procurement tracking
database with a compliance and performance framework to address the lack of capacity to systematically and
centrally record and monitor procurement activity. The tracking database established an institutional
mechanism that allowed the government to monitor key performance indicators on procurement. Both PAs
formed part of a results chain towards better value for money and increased transparency in public spending
to improve government accountability. There is reason to be concerned about the government’s ability to
utilize the instruments provided under PA10 and PA11 due to human resource capacity constraints
(Relevance: PA10 = S; PA11 = S)

PA12 – Budget reporting. The 2010 and 2014 PEFA assessments noted serious shortcomings in the
follow-up to audits. PA12 introduced procedures that were to ensure follow-up: a bi-annual report on audit
recommendations and follow-up actions; and establishment of a Cabinet-level audit oversight committee to
monitor that recommendations were being followed. That committee has not met since 2017; instead, an
audit committee internal to the Ministry of Finance and chaired by the Minister, meets regularly to consider
audit recommendations. While the PA was appropriate, the IEG (page 20) notes that the arrangements were
insufficient to meet indicator targets, given the lack of, and need for, capacity at the management and staff
levels of the Ministry.

(Relevance: PA12 = S)

PA13 – External scrutiny. PA13 aimed at improving accuracy and integrity in reporting budgetary
information and facilitating access to analytical information through the Chart of Accounts (CoA). This, in
turn, would allow the classification of expenditures in the budget system to be standardized (including by
removing non-economic items from its economic segment). Other, related reforms – redesigning the CoA


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



and upgrading the economic segment - were to be completed in parallel, based on recommendations under
an ongoing Asian Development Bank project.

(Relevance PA13 = S)

Objective 3 – Creating a more dynamic and inclusive economy

The objective, building on a series of earlier DPOs supporting business development, focused on creating a
more supportive environment for the private sector. It included reforms in: (i) public enterprises management
to increase efficiency and lower costs, (ii) the foreign investment regime to make Tonga more attractive to
foreign direct investment; and (iii) labor markets by introducing a first-ever labor law for a more inclusive
economy.

 PA14, PA15 – ICT and energy sector regulation. With small markets, little scope for competition, need
for regulation and low capacity to regulate, the government seeks public enterprise reform that raises
productivity and maintains reasonable cost structures by striking a balance between the separation of public
ownership and regulation, and meeting the additional capacity requirements on the public sector of such a
separation. This approach is sought in PA14, PA15, and in PA19 and PA20 below. PA14 included a new
communications commission act establishing an independent utilities regulator. This was to help bring
about separation between ownership and regulation of firms and mitigate perceived conflicts of interest in the
ICT sector. A further PA, PA15, was to approve a national energy bill on multi-sector regulation for all energy
sub-sectors for public consultation. It was to bring together regulation of the energy sector under one entity
for better-informed decisions, while also helping to clarify regulatory responsibilities in other areas.

(Relevance: PA14 = S; PA15 = S)

PA16 – Labor conditions. This PA included the submission to parliament of Tonga’s first employment
relations bill, focusing on introducing basic labor protection (right to leave, non-discrimination, fair dismissal,
etc.) and reducing gender disparities. It was drawn up with the help of the ILO. The law had a particular
resonance in an environment where workers had little bargaining power due to low numbers of employers
and low levels of skills and education. Tonga did have provisions under the Public Service Act that
established rights for civil servants, but private sector workers were not covered. Since Tonga at the time
lacked any form of labor regulation for the private sector, the PA was relevant in securing assurances around
basic working conditions

(Relevance: PA16 = S)

PA17, PA18 – The foreign investment regime. Low foreign investment (at 3 percent of GDP) is a constraint
on growth and job creation in a country that is highly dependent on foreign investment. PA17 was to lay the
groundwork for a foreign investment bill for submission to parliament with the aim of facilitating foreign
investments into Tonga – seen as a critical catalyst for private sector development in the country. Such
investments have so far been modest, reflecting an overly burdensome and complex legislation that has kept
capital inflows at a modest level. The bill includes several key changes rationalizing restrictions on
investment and cutting red tape: specifying the definition of foreign investment; clarifying reserved and
restricted lists; and providing better guidelines on screening investment applications. In PA18, foreign
investment regulations were to be subsequently adjusted to provide clearer requirements for foreign
investors.



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



 (Relevance: PA17 = S; PA18 = S)

  PA19, PA20, PA21 – Public enterprises. The ongoing public enterprise (PE) reform aims at full or partial
 privatization where that is a viable alternative and in the public interest; and at better governance where
 public ownership is maintained. Such initiatives were expected to improve PE performance through more
 dynamic management, more rigorous cost containment, privatization, and/or public private
 partnerships. Ultimately, they were expected to result in a more dynamic business
 environment. PA19 aimed at strengthening the management structures of public enterprises in key sectors,
 seeking greater efficiency and, plausibly, improved PE performance. The initiative introduced joint public-
 private boards of directors for PEs to address management capacity constraints in the public sector and
 thereby increase the professionalism of PE management. (There are altogether 15 PEs in Tonga.) PA20
 started a process of separating ownership from regulation with the sale of a minority share of state-owned
 Tonga Cable to a private sector telecommunications operator in Tonga. This was expected to facilitate the
 expansion of the telecommunications network throughout the archipelago by attracting new
 investors. PA21 involved the adoption of a landlord model for Nuku’alofa port, the main port for Tonga, with
 service provision entrusted to a private operator (a model that internationally has demonstrated efficiency
 gains).

 Relevance: PA19 = S; PA20 = S; PA21 = S



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicator, noting associated PAs, baselines/targets, and status

                                                                                          Actual
                                                                                       Change in
   Results indicator Associated     RI                                                               RI efficacy
                                          Baseline        Target         Actual       RI relative to
         (RI)           PA      relevance                                                              rating
                                                                                       Targeted
                                                                                         change
 Objective 1: Fiscal resilience
    RI1(revised):                            21.8%        >25%
                                                                     24.2% (average
 Domestic revenue PA1 – PA4         MS      (average    (average                          75%            S
                                                                        FY18-20
  as share of GDP                           FY14-16)    FY18-20)
        RI2:
 external borrowing
                                              100%        100%                         Targeted
   above 35% of         PA5          S                                    100%                         High
                                            (FY13-15)   (FY16-20)                       change
   GDP which is
    concessional



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



  RI3: Ensure that
    annual budget
                                                               Annual budget
    estimates are                                 Consistency
                                          None                 estimates were
   consistent with      PA6     S                   with m-t                       100%         High
                                       indicated                 consistent w
medium term fiscal                                  anchors
                                                                fiscal anchors
 anchors in budget
       document
  RI4: Public wage
                                          62%     53% or less
 bill as a proportion                                             50.1% (ave
                        PA8     S     (average of (ave. FY18-                      132%           S
      of domestic                                                  FY18-20)
                                       FY14-16)        20)
         revenue
      RI5: Annual
      moderated
     performance
                      PA7, PA8,                                New remunera-
process completed               S    No baseline       Yes                       Achieved       High
                        PA9                                    tion framework
and ratings used in
 determining public
     sector wages
Objective 2: Government accountability
 RI6: Proportion of
  contracts above
        the small
                       PA10,                         At least                      -47%
       purchases                MS   35% (FY14)                   28% (FY20)                      N
                        PA11                      50% (FY20)                     (decline)
 threshold that are
   subject to open
      competition
                                           Old
RI7: New economic                                     New       New segment      Targeted
                                        segment
segment is used in      PA12    S                   segment completed and         change        High
                                          used
  budget systems                                  used (FY20) used (FY20)        achieved
                                         (FY17)
    RI8 amended
     under DPO3:
Proportion of public
                                                               22 issues from      -65%
    accounts audit
                                                      40%       previous audit (increase in
 recommendations        PA13    MS   60% (FY17)                                                   N
                                                   (FY19,20) outstanding, 8 proportion
        noted as
                                                              resolved in FY19 outstanding)
“outstanding” in the
   following year’s
      audit report
Objective 3: A more dynamic and inclusive economy
    RI9 amended
                                                              Communications
     under DPO3:                                   Regulators
                                                               regulators exist
 Regulators for the                               operational
                       PA14,                                    but dependent 0 (neither
communication and               S    No baseline for both                                         N
                        PA15                                   on Ministry, no      met)
   energy sectors                                    sectors
                                                                energy sector
  established and                                    (FY20)
                                                                   regulators
      operational

                                                                                           Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



      RI10 amended
       under DPO3:
    Number of basic
        labor rights
                                              None of 7
     (including equal                                                       Passed by
                                              targeted
  pay for equal work,                                       6 in new      parliament, Not   Target not
                         PA16         MS       rights in                                                    Modest
       gender non-                                         legislation     approved by       fully met
                                               place in
   discrimination and                                                           King
                                                 2015
    right to maternity
  leave) enshrined in
          domestic
         legislation
       RI11: Vetted      PA17                     21
                                                               30
   applications from                  MS     applications                    27 (FY20)      67% met       Substantial
                                                          applications
    foreign investors    PA18                  (FY15)
     RI12 amended:
                                                                         Tonga Cable
   Number of public      PA19
                                                                       completed; Ports
     enterprises that    PA20
                                      MU        None       At least two authority to be 50% met             Modest
         have been
                                                                         completed in
      reformed since     PA21
                                                                            FY22
            2015

Fiscal resilience

RI1 to RI5. The five results indicators all aimed at measuring PA contributions to building fiscal resilience, either
through increased revenue mobilization or through better fiscal management.

RI1 initially measured the impact of adjustments in excise taxes and import duty rates on the economy; later
revised to measure changes in the share of “domestic revenue” in GDP following two hurricanes and the onset
of COVID 19. The latter version, while relevant to the extent it included the effects of excise taxes and import
duties, was broader in scope and likely to register the effects of a wider selection of revenue
sources. Therefore, RI1 only partly measures the impact of the PAs.

Relevance: MS

RI2 and RI3 related to strengthening medium term fiscal planning and monitoring: RI2 monitored the impact of
PA2 (the introduction of a debt strategy) on concessional borrowing as a share of external borrowing; while RI3
(medium term fiscal anchor and monitoring framework for addressing eventual shocks) related to key debt,
revenue, and wage bill targets, capturing the impact of PA5, PA8 and PA9, as well as their objectives. Both RIs
were relevant and measurable.

Relevance RI2: S; RI3: S

RI4 and RI5 relate to improving the management and control of a growing and increasingly unaffordable wage
bill – the former RI supporting a systematic program of reform of the public service remuneration structure that is
likely to contain public wage increases; and the latter introducing a new remuneration framework for



                                                                                                         Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



equitable and performance-related pay. Both are well-defined and directly capture the impact of and progress
towards the PAs. (PA7, PA8, PA9)

Relevance: RI4 = S; RI5 = S

2. Government Accountability

RI6 measured an increase in the use of competitive tender mechanisms for procurement above the small tender
threshold as an indicator of the effect of revised procurement regulations introduced under PA10; and monitored
a new procurement tracking data base (PA11)

Relevance: RI6 = MS

RI7 confirmed the use of the new economic segment of the CoA in budget reporting, introducing increased
accuracy in standard economic classifications in the government’s budget system and in line with PA12. This
consolidated all of the government’s public financial management reporting requirements.

Relevance: RI7 = S

RI8 measured improvements in the external scrutiny and timeliness of actions to address audit requirements as
determined by outstanding audit recommendations (PA13).

Relevance: RI8 = MS

3. A more dynamic and inclusive economy

RI9 was originally to target effectiveness in regulation, measured in terms of regulatory monitoring reports being
prepared, supporting PA14 that established an independent regulator. The indicator was subsequently revised
for DPO3 to specifically recognize the establishment of communications regulators and the introduction of
energy regulators (PA15)

Relevance: RI9: S

RI10 originally measured the number of basic labor rights introduced into in domestic legislation as a result of
PA16, including seven basic rights: paid annual leave; notice period for redundancy; severance; equal pay for
equal work; gender non-discrimination; maternity leave; paid sick leave. The indicator is relevant as it measures
progress towards achieving basic labor rights and their inclusion in domestic legislation

Relevance: RI10: MS

RI11: The results indicator targets an increase in interest from foreign investors, as measured by the number of
vetted applications. In doing so, it provides an indicator of the effectiveness of PA18, introducing revised foreign
investment regulations. As an indicator, it is relevant and measurable, albeit also influenced by external factors.

Relevance: RI11 = MS

RI12: The results indicator for PAs 19, 20, and 21 targets the number of public enterprises that have been
reformed in the direction of rationalizing scarce local PE management capacity and increasing private
participation in PEs. The indicator was relevant in allowing this monitoring, which measured the diversification of

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



  PEs and the introduction of private interests into the Tongan business community. It was not, however, clear
  about the reforms that were being undertaken (for instance, restructuring, privatization, and so forth); nor was it
  designed to adequately capture the likely impact of the PAs on the performance of the involved PEs.

  Relevance: RI12 = MU




  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improve fiscal resilience
               Supported by PAs 1 to 6 and PAs 7 to 9. Progress measured by RIs 1 to 5.

               Rationale
               Fiscal resilience was supported by measures that contributed to stronger revenue mobilization and greater
               fiscal sustainability. The increase in excise taxes and import duty rates was partly achieved, with positive
               effects on tax collection and consumption of health damaging products. A revised revenue services
               administration bill introduced additional sources of revenue, as did a new Customs bill set to international
               standards, and a simplified customs administration. Positive effects/trends were negatively impacted by
               external shocks (weather, COVID 19). Still, the ICR indicates a rise in domestic revenues from an average of
               21.5 percent of GDP over FY14-16 to 24.2 percent over FY18-20, albeit below the target of 25 percent of
               GDP set for FY18-20.

                Fiscal sustainability was reinforced through stronger medium-term fiscal planning and monitoring, and better
               management and control over the public sector wage bill. A new medium term debt strategy was approved,
               as was a target-based fiscal anchor system and monitoring framework – both strengthening medium-term
               fiscal planning and monitoring. There were two targets – one to maintain concessional borrowing above 35
               percent of total external borrowing, the indicator was relevant, measurable, and achieved. A second indicator
               sought consistency between annual budget estimates and medium-term fiscal anchors over the FY18-20
               period. Annual budget estimates for the period were consistent with medium-term fiscal anchors.

               In summary, the achievements of four out of five RIs was high, and one – RI1 – was substantial.

               Outcomes per results indicator:




                                                                                                              Page 14 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



RI1 (domestic revenue as a proportion of GDP) increased from a baseline of 21.8 percent on average over
FY14-FY16 to 24.2 percent for FY18-FY20, compared to a target of over 25 percent. Thus, the achievement
of this RI was substantial.

RI2 (concessional borrowing above 35 percent of GDP) remained at a baseline of 100 percent. The
achievement of this RI was high. RI3 (consistency between annual budget estimates and medium-term fiscal
anchors); annual budget estimates were consistent with medium-term fiscal anchors. The achievement of this
RI was high.

RI4 (public wage bill as a proportion of domestic revenue) declined from a baseline of 57 percent in FY14 to
an average of 50.1 percent for FY18-20, surpassing the target of 53 percent or lower. The achievement of this
RI was high.

RI5 (annual moderated performance process completed and ratings used in determining public sector wages)
– new remuneration framework was applied. The achievement of this RI was high.

Thus, with all RI targets rated either substantial or high, efficacy at the Objective level is rated satisfactory.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve government accountability
Supported by PAs 10, 11 and 13. Progress measured by RIs 6 to 8, of which, the achievements of 2 of 3 RIs
were negligible, and one was high.

Rationale
Improvements in government accountability focused on procurement, budget reporting and audit
oversight. All three aimed at addressing weaknesses in the control and accountability of public funds and
were expected to increase value for money in public financial management. A revised set of procurement
regulations with standard bidding documents and procurement manuals was prepared, as well as a new
procurement tracking database. Both were operational. The results, however, fell short of intentions as
measured by the results indicator, RI6, which measured increases in the share of contracts subject to open
competition. The proportion of such contracts reached only 28 percent in 2020 compared to a baseline of
35 percent in 2014 and a target of 50 percent in 2020. The shortfall reflects a lack of capacity in line ministries
to fully implement procurement regulations, as well as a challenging regulatory design with several different
levels of rigor for different types of contracts. Thus, the achievement rating of RI 6 was negligible.

A new relevant and measurable economic segment was introduced (RI7), following up on PA12 and
improving the accuracy of budget reporting. The achievement rating of RI 7 was high.



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



External scrutiny and timeliness in addressing public accounts’ external audit recommendations (RI 8) (a
measure of the effectiveness of audit oversight) did not meet its target of 40 percent of audit matters raised in
the previous year still outstanding the following year, with some 70 percent still outstanding in FY19 against a
baseline of 85 percent (115 of 136 reports not scrutinized). The achievement of RI 8 was negligible.

With achievement of two out of three RI targets rated negligible, efficacy for this Objective is
rated moderately unsatisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
A more dynamic and inclusive economy
Supported by PAs 6, 10, 14-15, 17-18, 21. Progress measured by RIs 9 to 12.

Rationale
The objective was to be pursued by seeking improved regulation of markets with little or no
competition. Here, the relevant and measurable results indicator (RI 9) targeted effective regulation in the
communications and energy sectors, included as prior actions (PA14 and PA15), that is, regulators in the two
sectors established and operational. That has not been achieved, as appropriate funds were not allocated in
the budget (ICR, para. 45); moreover, the relevant national energy bill had not been submitted to parliament
at series’ closing. Thus, the achievement of RI 9 was negligible.

Employment relations legislation codifying basic labor rights has been passed by parliament and awaits the
King’s final approval (RI10). That has not yet occurred, as government is concerned that the legislation may
be too onerous for employers at this time (given the recent climatic and environmental shocks).The
achievement of this RI was modest.

The series supported a foreign investment bill aimed at facilitating foreign investment in Tonga. However, the
outcome – number of vetted applications, and perhaps more importantly, the number of approved
applications (RI 11) – appeared to be strongly influenced by external factors (climate, etc.) creating variability
from one year to the next rather than showing a trend or indicating that the legislation has the desired effect.
The target – vetting 30 applicants from a baseline of 21 – was substantially achieved with 27 vetted in FY20.
The achievement of this RI was substantial.

To improve governance and operational efficiency of PEs in an environment with a limited pool of suitable
candidates (RI 12), reform focused on selected sectors (ICT and utilities) and involved the appointment of
shared boards of directors serving multiple PEs in similar fields. The two shared boards will span utilities,
covering Tonga Power Limited, Tonga Water Board and Waste Authority Limited; and ICT covering Tonga
Broadcasting Corporation, Tonga Communications Corporation, Tonga Post and Fast Print Ltd. Initially, RI12
aimed at reforming at least four PEs, which was later reduced to two. Finally, only one was completed under
the operation, with the second one delayed due to external circumstances but is expected to be completed in

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



                  2022. The timetable for this item may have been too ambitious as the target was downsized from four PEs to
                  two during implementation. Thus, the achievement of this RI was modest.

                  In summary, the progress of the establishment of independent regulators for the communications and energy
                  sectors (RI 9) was negligible; basic labor rights have been codified (RI 10), but are not yet official, therefore
                  progress was modest (RI10); the progress for vetting of foreign investment applications (RI 11) was deemed
                  substantial, albeit strongly influenced by external factors; and there was modest progress in the number of
                  reformed public enterprises (RI 12), targeted at at least four, is currently at one.

                  With at least half of RI targets rated modest or better, efficacy at the Objective level is rated moderately
                  satisfactory.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall efficacy rating draws on the efficacy rating for each Objective, in this case satisfactory, moderately
unsatisfactory and moderately satisfactory. Overall efficacy is moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of prior actions rated satisfactory and efficacy rated moderately satisfactory, the operation's
outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                                     Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The sustainability of the series’ development outcomes is likely to face a number of risks, including natural
hazards, macroeconomic risks, limited implementation capacity, and fluctuating political priorities. While
efficiencies introduced under the series – continuous dialogue, technical assistance, selectivity in policy choices
- are likely to mitigate the impact of those risks, they are likely to continue to influence implementation of each of
the series’ objectives.

Fiscal resilience will continue to face challenges in revenue mobilization and, more generally, in fiscal
management: vulnerability to frequent natural disasters and external macroeconomic developments will divert
scarce human and financial resources from longer-term reforms to immediate priorities, testing the resilience of
more effective tax collection and revenue management. Stronger government accountability is still a work in
progress, and recent political developments in Tonga have introduced a measure of unpredictability into
decision-making at the highest levels that may result in a slower reform process than was originally anticipated,
and one that may also deviate from the model introduced under this series. Efforts towards creating a more
dynamic economy are also still underway: opening markets to competition by regulatory means and by
facilitating foreign direct investment have so far only been partially successful, as has been the case with
employment legislation. Again, the mixed record of progress reflects political uncertainties in the
archipelago. Influencing successful follow-up on all three objectives is Very limited institutional capacity – a
small number of civil servants with the necessary qualifications or experience to implement reforms, and often
stretched thin among several responsibilities – is also likely to limit implementation of reforms, even when scarce
capacity is being buoyed by Bank advice.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The operation was strategically relevant and aligned with government and Bank priorities (see Section 3a). It
continued the process of public sector reform that had begun under two earlier DPOs to build resilience against
external shocks to the economy through domestic revenue mobilization, while also introducing policy reforms in
public financial management and creating an enabling environment for private sector development. Program
design drew on the experience under those DPOs, as well as on analytical work by the Bank and IMF, and
PEFA assessments in Tonga. That experience underlay the introduction of several features, among them the
evidence base for a new fiscal strategy, the remuneration framework, and the performance management
system. It also allowed the anticipation of risks such as scarce human and financial resources and political
volatility, resulting in PAs that for the most part were directly linked to either outputs or outcomes related to the
PDOs. Sometimes, however, they would not be sufficient to reach targeted results (for instance, the
establishment of the procurement, audit, and energy regulator, or the underestimation of capacity constraints
that especially made itself felt in applying new procurement standards – Efficacy, Objective 2). Program design
also drew on a Joint Policy Reform Matrix of priority reform actions developed by the government together with
five development partners under World Bank leadership, and including ADB, Australia, New Zealand and the



                                                                                                       Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



European Union – a Matrix against which the partners provide budget support, including the focus areas of the
current operation.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Existing institutional structures were used to implement and monitor the policy actions that were supported in the
operation. The Ministry of Finance assumed overall responsibility for coordinating implementation, monitoring
and evaluation of the operation; as well as for reporting progress and coordinating actions among government
agencies. The Bank team monitored the indicators for each policy area and played a coordinating role among
the development partners to ensure that development partners agreed on the implementation of policy actions
under the Program.

Client capacity constraints was a significant factor challenging implementation, as was the apparent reluctance
on the part of the client to launch into perceived sensitive reforms, for instance labor relations, which might have
required more time beyond series’ completion to mature.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank performance, while adequate in many areas was challenged by an ambitious agenda that introduced
relatively complex reforms into an environment with limited capacity.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty



                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



While the ICR makes no quantitative assessment, policy actions supported by the series will have a positive
effect on poor and vulnerable households, and women: increased taxes on selected consumer goods (alcohol,
tobacco, etc.) will reduce consumption of unhealthy goods; the employment act will improve working conditions;
while the restructuring of the ports authority will reduce jobs.



b. Environmental

While the ICR makes no quantitative assessment.



c. Gender

See Section 9a.



d. Other

None identified.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a robust evidence base supporting the analysis in the document although it could have made
a stronger linkage between the challenges that the operation’s interventions were addressing and the
subsequent outcomes; now the emphasis is strongly on “PA will do this…” but less so on articulating what
deficiency is being addressed. That said, it summarizes well key achievements. In most instances the
discussion is mostly results-oriented, allowing assessment of the results and ratings of the operation. ; in some
cases, greater emphasis could have been placed on outcomes rather than outputs (recognizing that that is not
always possible. The text is internally consistent, allowing the linking of the various parts of the series. A
deviation from this appears to be the ratings for Efficacy and Outcome, both rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory. This is based on the assumption that reforms will take time to be fully realized, and when that is
the case, it should be reflected in targets and indicators. This is of course valid for many, if not most, reforms,
which take time to mature. In Tonga, this may especially be the situation today following the recent volcanic
eruption that is likely to represent a severe setback to the country's development in the short to medium term.


a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tonga First Inclusive Growth DPO (P155133)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                                                              IEG rated PAs satisfactory
                                                                              reflecting their overall relevance
                                                                              and consistency to objectives
                                                                              sought; and efficacy moderately
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory satisfactory, noting that while
                                 Unsatisfactory
                                                                              objectives often were only partly
                                                                              achieved, the process of change
                                                                              was well underway, or achieved,
                                                                              in all key areas.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The lessons are drawn from the ICR.

Institutional capacity and political support should be continuously monitored. In a dynamic institutional
and political environment, frequent changes in key counterparts and ministers highlight the importance of
working with a broad set of stakeholders. In this series, this was addressed by requiring all participating
ministries to appoint working level staff to support coordination and continuity, as well as introducing regular
meetings with the Cabinet and/or the Finance Minister, to maintain political support for the reform.

Politically sensitive reforms should be well-grounded in client ownership. Success in the wage bill
management reform was grounded in analysis undertaken by the government (with development partner
assistance). The reform process started with a review of remuneration to ensure a common reference base,
followed by extensive consultation and awareness raising about performance-based pay, including extensive
training to support implementation, and regular consultations and adjustments to improve implementation.

While PAs may be highly relevant to achieving Program objectives, they need to be consistent with
capacity constraints and efforts to build capacity. This series underlined the importance of having a stable
team or being able to adjust the reform program (including triggers) to ensure its continued relevance. That was
a particular concern in attempting to improve accountability in government, as Tonga struggled to address
capacity constraints in trying to implement new procurement regulations, better budget reporting and audit
recommendations.,


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
