     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022847

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P164190                                   RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Yemen, Republic of                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2450                                 31-Dec-2020                                        148,420,697.54

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Nov-2017                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      148,420,697.54                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur             Vibecke Dixon                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to restore access to critical urban services in selected
   cities within the Republic of Yemen" (Financing Agreement page 1 and PAD paragraph 23).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)




  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  20-Apr-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Component 1: Service Restoration (appraisal cost US$130.0 million, actual cost US$131.5 million). This
   component sought to support the restoration of critical urban services in selected cities in Yemen, covering
   five sectors: tertiary municipal services and solid waste management, urban water and sanitation, urban
   roads, electricity for critical services, and housing. Infrastructure investments under the project were based
   on the Build Back Better principle, reducing the restored assets’ vulnerability to climate change‐related
   hazards (including flooding and landslides).

   Component 2. Implementation Support and Capacity Development (appraisal cost US$20.0 million,
   actual cost US$18.7 million). This component would provide funding for: (a) project implementation and
   management support; (b) technical assistance to support capacity building activities for the stakeholders
   involved in the project, as well as citizen engagement and communication activities; (c) third party
   monitoring of sub-projects funded under the project.

   Component 3. Contingent Emergency Response (appraisal cost US$0.0 million, actual cost US$ 0.0
   million). This component was expected to improve the country’s response capacity in the event of an
   emergency, following the procedures governed by OP 10.00 paragraph 12 (Situations of Urgent Need or
   Capacity Constraints). The component was put in place to enable a rapid response to a major emergency in
   the country by reallocating funds from other project components for eligible emergencies to mitigate,
   respond to and recover from the potential harmful consequences arising from the emergency.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project costs: The project cost at approval was US$150.0 million (PAD paragraph 49). The actual project
   cost at completion was US$148.4 million (ICR datasheet). There is a discrepancy in the ICR, Annex 3
   reports total project cost by component as US$150.2 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by IDA only. The credit amount at appraisal was US$150.0 million.
   The actual disbursement was US$148.4 million. The credit was fully disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: There was no planned or actual Borrower Contribution.

   Dates: The project was approved on November 2, 2017, and became effective on November 15, 2017. The
   Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 21, 2019. The project’s original closing date was
   December 31, 2020, which was extended, and the project closed on June 30, 2021. The project closing

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



   date was extended in response to the challenges posed by COVID-19 and to complete all activities(ICR
   paragraph 69).

   Restructuring: The project experienced two Level 2 restructurings:

         The first restructuring on April 20, 2020, updated the targets of the results framework to better reflect
          the type of interventions and their expected outcomes. The original end-targets were not reflective of
          the reality and were estimated quite modestly at the time of appraisal.

         The second restructuring on November 3, 2020, extended the closing date to June 30, 2021, to
          accommodate implementation delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. It further updated the
          targets of the results framework and added two new intermediate results indicators.

   The two restructuring introduced a more ambitious end-target for the outcome indicator.

   Split Rating: Although a PDO outcome indicator was revised, this review will not use the split rating
   methodology because its target value became more ambitious.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The Republic of Yemen has been in the midst of a military conflict that has
caused major loss of life, internal displacement, destruction of infrastructure, and disruptions in service
delivery across the country’s main sectors. The Yemen Disaster Need Assessment highlighted that more
than 40% of water and sanitation facilities in major cities were damaged. and lost functionality due to
conflict. Many cities in Yemen were seriously confronted with the risk of cholera outbreak. The local
corporations responsible for service delivery faced many challenges, including financial difficulties to pay
salaries and to repair or replace infrastructure.

Since the conflict, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of sewage system breakdowns and
untreated sewage water overflow has also become a common occurrence.

Due to the conflict, the road sector incurred widespread damage affecting more than 60% of intra-urban
roads. The roads damaged during the conflict remained unrepaired, impeding mobility and access.

Public electricity supply has been completely dysfunctional in large areas of the country with many
electricity generation facilities damaged. As a result, only an estimated 10% of the population had access to
reliable electricity. The impact on hospitals, water pumping and treatment stations, and other important
facilities has been devastating (ICR paragraph 3).

Government Strategy. The government strategy is not mentioned in the PAD or ICR.

Bank Strategy. The PDO is fully consistent with the World Bank Group’s Country Engagement Note (CEN)
for the Yemen 2017-2018. It directly supports the first objective of CEN “Provide emergency support to
preserve local service delivery capacity to support conflict-affected families and communities.” This would

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



               be done in full partnership with the United Nations (UN) institutions (CEN paragraph 39). The PDO is also in
               line with the new CEN for FY22-FY23. The Bank will “remain engaged” in Yemen during the conflict,
               providing sustained support to help deliver critical services, protect human capital and preserve Yemeni
               institutions (CEN paragraph 2).

               The PDO is also aligned with IDA paper on “IDA18 Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, Resilience, and
               Opportunity” and its special theme on fragility, conflict and violence. This paper identified the World Bank’s
               comparative advantage in helping solve complex problems through multi‐sectoral expertise. With its
               integrated approach towards service delivery restoration and activities across several sectors, the project
               will offer best‐fit solutions that are adequate to the current complexities of operating in Yemen (PAD
               paragraph 20.

               Previous Bank Experience. The project was designed to complement the ongoing World Bank emergency
               operations in Yemen. By restoring service delivery in urban settings, the project complemented the
               Emergency Crisis Response Project (P159053), which focused on improving livelihoods, infrastructure, and
               services primarily in rural areas. Moreover, the project was expected to coordinate closely with the
               Emergency Health and Nutrition Project (EHNP) (P161809) by complementing the infrastructure‐heavy
               approach of the EHNP in the water and sanitation sector with targeted small‐and medium‐scale
               investments that aim to restore water at the city level (PAD paragraph 64). The ICR does not indicate if this
               coordination occurred.

               The degree to which the PDO was pitched was at a very low level of the results chain. The PDO aimed at
               “restoring access to critical urban services in selected cities within the Republic of Yemen". IEG finds this
               acceptable, however, given the conflict situation in the country and the destruction of infrastructure, and
               disruptions in service delivery. The PDO lacked clarity in terms of what type of services were to be restored.

               On balance, the relevance of objectives is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To restore access to critical urban services in selected cities within the Republic of Yemen.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change indicates that inputs such as small-scale investments in neighborhood-level
                             tertiary municipal infrastructure would result in outputs such as: (i) restoration of urban water and sanitation
                             services; (ii) improved solid waste collection and management; (iii) improved primary and secondary urban
                             roads; (iv) restoration of electricity supply to critical urban services; and (v) capacity building activities for local

                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



stakeholders. All these inputs would result in outputs such as restored access to critical urban services and
strengthened institutional capacity of local partners. The longer-term outcomes envisaged were: (a) increased
development opportunities for the residents; (b) improved living conditions for Yemenis; and (c) increased
resilience to shocks and response capacity

Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outputs were valid and direct, and the outputs achieved could be
attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs

Overall, 378 subprojects were completed in 11 cities: Aden, Taiz, Al Dhale'e, Al Hodeidah, Al Mukalla, Amran,
Sada’a, Dhamar, Lahj, Sana’a, and Zinjibar:

    1. To address urgent community priorities in tertiary municipal services and solid waste management,
       146 sub-projects for tertiary municipal services in 8 cities were competed (original target 90, revised
       target 130):
            o Solid waste management. Before the project intervention, as a result of conflict related
               collapses in local municipal service provision, people used to dump garbage on the road and
               street corners, and vacant spaces, which caused annoyance and increased health risks
               ranging from the spread of unpleasant odors to pests that spread diseases. The project carried
               out 10 waste collection campaigns (no target) in these cities and successfully collected over
               1.5 million cubic meters of accumulated waste (no target), delivered service contracts to
               restore collection and transfer of solid waste to the landfill sites; developed environment and
               social safeguards mitigation measures for landfill sites; provided weighing stations for landfill
               sites and waste collection bins for the residents. In addition, a total of 7 landfill assessments
               (no target) were carried out and action plans produced for the cities of Sana'a, Aden, Mukalla,
               Dhamar, Sa'adah and Zinjibar.
            o Rainwater drainage. The project helped address urban flooding through investments in
               stormwater flood protection, through provision of box culverts, stormwater pumps and the
               suctioning of stagnant flood water from urban areas. It provided a total of 79 km rainwater/flood
               drainage (no target) in 5 districts of Amran, 2 districts of Sana'a, and 5 districts in Sa'adah.
            o Rehabilitation of public parks. The project revamped local parks: 7 in Sana'a, 5 in Dhamar, 3
               in Aden (no target). It funded paved pathways, provided sitting spaces and shades, planted
               greenery, provided fencing, and created children’s play areas. The rehabilitation of local parks
               and green spaces provided a significant social benefit for the beneficiary communities (ICR
               paragraph 34).
            o Neighborhood sanitation. The project helped repair and expand sanitation network and its
               connection to treatment and disposal systems: 14 in Sana'a, 9 in Aden, 8 in Mukalla. It also
               repaired inspection chambers and manholes (no target).
            o Neighborhood stone pavement. The project also made stone pavements in the
               neighborhood, particularly on pedestrian sidewalks. Stone pavements have been done in 19
               districts in Aden, 16 in Sana'a, 14 districts in Mukalla, 5 each in Zinjibar and Dhamar, 3 in Al
               Dhale's, and 2 districts in Amran (no target).
    2. To address the urgent community priorities in urban roads, 266 km of primary and secondary urban
       roads were rehabilitated in the target cities, exceeding the target of 240 km. This included spot and
       pothole repairs, crack sealing, patch works, asphalt resurfacing, road safety improvement works and
       intersection rehabilitation.


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)




   3. To address urgent community priorities in urban water and sanitation, the project implemented a
      total of 74 subprojects (no target) in 11 cities. It financed rehabilitation of 129 water wells with a
      production of 1,879,200 m3/month; supplied and installed 8 large Solar Photovoltaic (PV) systems for
      municipal water wells and 40 solar PV systems for rural communities’ water wells; provided 50 diesel
      generators; established an analytical system for water quality control; rehabilitated 7.7 km of water
      network and 176 km of sewer network (no target).
   4. To address urgent community priorities in energy, the project funded a total of 108 subprojects in ten
      cities. It installed and rehabilitated solar PV-based electricity supply systems and diesel generators in
      205 health and education facilities, 104 water wells in the target cities. The project interventions
      resulted in:
            o Generation of 106,572 Megawatt hour (MWh) energy, exceeding the target of 60,000 MWh.
            o 10,460 tons of CO2 emissions were avoided, exceeding the target of 10,000 tons.
   5. The project provided 110 ton of emergency Personal Protective Equipment, safety equipment,
      hygiene, and sterilization materials for Covid-19 response.
   6. To build institutional capacity of local service providers (which was eroded as a result of conflict),
      the project provided trainings to 239 participants (no target was set) on technical design, contract
      management, project monitoring, occupational health, and safety (OHS), implementation of the E&S
      mitigation measures, and COVID-19 prevention.

Outcomes

    Access to critical services, as measured by the PDO indicator “the number of beneficiaries with
     restored access to urban services” was achieved. The project reached 3.05 million beneficiaries,
     compared to the target of 3.0 million. Total female beneficiaries were 1.4 million, lower than the target
     of 1.48 million. According to the beneficiary surveys carried out by the United Nations Office for
     Projects Services (UNOPS) in the cities of Aden and Sana’a: (a) in terms of access to improved
     services, 98 percent (97 percent in Aden and 98 percent in Sana’a) of the respondents felt that project
     investments fully reflected their needs, as these subprojects corresponded to the priorities identified in
     verified in consultation with the communities; (b) 98 percent (96 percent in Aden and 100 percent in
     Sana’a) assessed the situation after the project intervention to be better than before; and (c) 94
     percent of the beneficiaries (92 percent in Aden and 96 percent in Sana’a) attributed the
     improvements to project's support. In addition, 93 percent of the surveyed beneficiaries mentioned
     that the project contributed towards “reviving optimism” among the residents; and 81 percent of
     surveyed beneficiaries stated that the project helped protect local environment (ICR paragraph 29).

    1.2 million people were provided access to rehabilitated water and sanitation services, achieving the
     revised (1.2 million people) and original target (0.6 million people). All beneficiaries reported that the
     improvement of urban water enhanced their living conditions status by saving money, because they
     now pay less compared to the situation before the project interventions. The ICR reported (paragraph
     37) that owing to solar energy and submersible pumps provided by the project, the managers of the
     local water supply companies in Sana’a and Aden were able to continue providing water to citizens at
     lower costs than the commercial water tankers.

    As a result of solid waste management interventions, 84% of the beneficiaries (no target) reported
     cleaner areas and reduced sewer clogging. As reported, the residents noted the positive impact of
     solid waste interventions on their health and livelihood (ICR's Annex 6-D. Beneficiary


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



                                     Testimonials). 73 percent of beneficiaries testified that the situation has very much improved, because
                                     there is no longer sewage floating in streets and backup.

                                    The beneficiaries reported that that the energy support improved the quality of learning environment in
                                     various ways such as: using the air fans during extreme heat in Aden and access to and use of the lab
                                     and computer room for practicing various school’s activities. This boosted morale among students and
                                     teachers and provided conducive learning environment.

                                    The ICR reports (paragraph 34) that the rehabilitation of local parks and green spaces provided a
                                     significant social benefit for the beneficiary communities and helped the target communities in coping
                                     with some of the effects of conflict and Covid-19 pandemic.

                                    The project generated more than 1.6-million person person-days temporary employment (target was
                                     1.5 million person-days).

                            The project fully achieved its PDO of restoring access to critical urban services of selected cities within
                            Yemen. Efficacy is rated high.




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Project fully achieved its PDO of restoring access to critical urban services of selected cities within
                            Yemen. Efficacy is rated high.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis. At appraisal, the PAD estimated Economic Rate of Return (ERR) to be 94.3 percent of
   investment. It noted that due to uncertainties and lack of data, the tertiary municipal service and solid waste
   management sector was estimated to yield a neutral ERR. The project activities in all other targeted sectors
   yielded a positive ERR: water and sanitation (237.5 percent), roads and transport (57 percent), and energy (40
   percent). The ERR was significantly influenced by the activities in the water and sanitation sector, namely its


                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



high positive impact on health, nutrition, and combating cholera and other water‐borne diseases (PAD
paragraph 75).

The ICR noted that it did not use the PADs economic analysis methodology, since the PAD did not fully capture
the intended results due to lack of data (ICR footnote 12, page 11). Annex 4 presents efficiency by comparing
the actual project achievements to its targets. As discussed in the efficacy section 5 of the review, the targets
were largely met. The ICR does not provide ex-post ERR because of the high number of subprojects and the
lack of knowledge of the exact starting point (baseline). For the purposes of the efficiency analysis, sectors are
grouped in two categories: (i) roads and Tertiary Municipal Services (TMS); and (ii) water and Energy for critical
Services (ECS).

The roads and TMS - are labor intensive and entailed significant cash transfers towards poor segments of the
population (24% of the project component costs). Assuming a poverty rate of 75 percent, the minimum benefit-
cost ratio (BCR) required for labor intensive projects was 0.68 for a uniform cash transfer and 0.76 for a targeted
(to poor households) cash transfer (ICR page 38). A conventional project should have a BCR above one.

On the other hand, water and ECS - are less labor intensive (only 3% of the project component costs are
expected to directly flow towards poor people) but entails a strong social impact. The ICR conducted a
probabilistic modelling of the opportunity cost for "water for critical services". The benefits included savings of
the costs that would otherwise be incurred to access water, i.e., water trucking and time savings only. The
average BCR) was 2.4, with only 8.9% of probability to fall below the requested threshold of 0.96. With a
probability of 90%, the BCR would range between 0.96 and nearly 6 (5.97), while the remaining 1% outcomes
are above – the best-case scenarios (ICR page 40).

The projects efficiency was also reported in terms of the wider FCV context, in which the project activities were
implemented. The project contributed to business opportunities to about 350 contractors by injecting US$18.5
million.

Administrative efficiency. The ICR states (paragraph 51) that there was an efficient management of resources
and no procurement/fiduciary irregularities were reported. The project closed 6 months behind the schedule.

On balance, efficiency is substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   94.30
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's relevance of objectives is rated high. The Project fully achieved its PDO of restoring access to
critical urban services of selected cities within Yemen. Efficacy is rated high, and its efficiency is rated
substantial. The project's overall outcome is rated highly satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:

      Political Risk. The main risk to the development outcomes relates to political risk. Given the
       uncertain security situation, there is high risk that the development outcome would be difficult to
       maintain. There is a high risk that the infrastructure build might be damaged again in the violent
       conflict.

      Institutional Risk. This risk is substantial. Although the project integrated operations and
       maintenance arrangement to ensure that the assets built with project financing were properly
       maintained; due to prolonged instability, a complex political economy, the buildup of public sector
       wage arrears, and lack of transparency, institutional capacity remains low. Moreover, since the
       project was operated entirely by UNOPS, it did not contribute to any strengthening of local
       government structures.

      Financial Risk. Due to prolonged conflict and instability, there is a high risk that the financial
       resources needed for operations and maintenance of the infrastructure may not be available on time
       and in adequate amount.

      Stakeholder ownership risk. This risk is low as the investments under the project were selected
       based on community priorities identified through citizen engagement mechanisms and the community
       validation of investment options.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PDO was clearly set and was appropriately ambitious given the challenging context of conflict, high
  poverty rates, and extremely limited access to basic urban services. The project introduced an integrated,

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



  multi-sector, participatory approach to the reconstruction of urban centers in Yemen based on good
  practices and lessons from other post-crisis reconstruction efforts. The project integrated the Country
  engagement note lessons on the need for simple and realistic design, as well as the focus on local level
  service delivery modalities that have proven to deliver results despite the conflict.

  The overall risk to achieving the PDO was appropriately rated as High. The main risks were correctly
  identified as political and governance risks; macroeconomic risks; technical design risks; safeguards,
  fiduciary, and stakeholders’ risks. Safeguards were adequately identified.

  The project used the procedures already in place for implementation with UNOPS. The Bank provided
  funding and technical expertise, and specialized UN agencies contributed operational experience for in-
  country project supervision.

  The project’s design was flexible to respond to evolving developments and needs on the ground during
  implementation. For example, the first-year program focused on interventions that could quickly restore
  the delivery of the most critical services, while investment plans for the subsequent years were prepared
  during implementation to address the most critical and emerging needs. Given the multisectoral design of
  the project, each sector had its own designated team leader, and all worked collaboratively to support
  implementation.

  Quality at entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR notes (paragraph 88) that diligent supervision was maintained throughout the project
 implementation, with implementation status and results reports (ISRs) submitted on time, and
 corresponding Aide Memoires capturing the key issues and next steps in detail. A total of six
 implementation support missions, comprising core team members, were conducted over almost four years
 of implementation. From March 2020 until project closure (during the COVID-19 pandemic), virtual
 meetings were held with UNOPS. The Bank effectively worked through UN partners in this complex FCV
 environment.

 The project experienced staff continuity with just two TTLs , most of the team members remained during
 the course of the project. The Bank team was proactive in quickly responding to challenges and coming up
 with possible solutions. To ensure the robust implementation support throughout the project
 implementation the task team adequately addressed challenges through project restructurings (as outlined
 in Section 2 D above).

 Due to COVID-19 pandemic, the task team could not conduct Reverse missions (i.e., with the Third-Party
 Monitoring Agents) and held virtual missions, which allowed the task team to maintain oversight of the
 project. The last ISR filed in the Bank’s portal was dated January 2021.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



 Quality of supervision was satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the PAD - UNOPS was responsible for results monitoring through field visits to
 implementation sites, regular follow‐up with its local partners, and progress towards the results indicators in
 accordance with the results framework. In addition, UNOPS would also engage a Third‐Party Monitoring
 (TPM) agent to undertake independent results verification of subprojects funded under the project (PAD
 paragraph 60).

 The results framework included one PDO indicator "number of beneficiaries with restored access to critical
 urban services” and seven intermediate results indicators. This indicator was adequate to measure
 achievement of the PDO, as the PDO level was low, - and number of people with increased access to
 urban services is a relevant indicator to the PDO. There were additional sectoral level indicators, not
 included in the results framework, but part of the UNOPS project tracker that supported monitoring
 outcomes and achievement of the PDO (ICR para 74). These were: (i) energy supply to critical urban
 infrastructure restored; (b) urban water and sanitation restored; and (c) solid waste management services
 improved.

 The institutional responsibility was clearly established at appraisal with UNOPS given overall responsibility
 to collect information and maintain the reporting. The PAD (paragraph 59) indicated that as part of the
 reporting process, UNOPS would provide updated GIS maps of the project areas to help monitor progress
 towards infrastructure‐related activities, in addition to its regular monitoring and evaluation activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports that M&E implementation was satisfactory. Semi-annual M&E reports were received on
  time, and the annual progress reports contained the required details on progress of the project in field. As
  required by the PAD, UNOPS provided updated GIS maps of the project areas to help monitor progress
  towards infrastructure-related activities. In addition, throughout implementation, local partners prepared
  quarterly progress reports, which were reviewed by UNOPS and shared with the World Bank. An
  innovative tool, FieldSight, was used by UNOPS to monitor implementation progress, take photos of the
  project sites, carry out physical spot checks using site coordinates to ensure remote monitoring. All
  implementing partners were trained to use this innovative tool, particularly its mechanism of capturing
  data during supervisory field visits (ICR paragraph 44).



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



  The end-targets for a number of indicators were upgraded to reflect a more realistic scenario. The.
  original end-targets were not reflective of the reality and were estimated quite modestly at the time of
  project appraisal.

  An beneficiary survey was carried out at the end of the project implementation. As described by the ICR
  (Annex 6-D), the methodology used a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, which
  included semi-structured interviews with beneficiaries and key informant interviews with
  various stakeholders: service providers, district sector managers, community leaders, and NGOs
  representing disadvantaged groups. The total sample size was 515 beneficiaries. The assessment
  measured beneficiary satisfaction and provided important and useful feedback to complement the results
  framework. The detailed methodology and scope of the beneficiary survey is provided in Annex 6-D.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (paragraph 44) that the M&E system was used for tracking progress and making
  necessary course corrections. It allowed the project team to adjust activities as needed throughout the
  implementation stage. It was also used to design the future project.

  As planned that UNOPS engaged a TPMA to undertake independent results verification of subprojects
  funded under the project, and then carried out surveys at project completion. The ability to measure the
  project results in FCV context is notable. Overall, M&E quality is high.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned a Category B since the potential environmental and social impacts were deemed
   to be minor, site-specific, and manageable. The project triggered two safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
   (RPF) were prepared and approved by the Bank, disclosed during implementation in May 2018. The ESMF
   included an environmental and social screening tool for subprojects in order to: exclude all Category A
   interventions; identify subprojects that require the preparation of a safeguards instrument; and the type of
   instrument needed. Following the project’s ESMF, a total of 152 site specific Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared for different types of interventions under the project.

   The PAD (paragraph 90) stated that project would not involve any land acquisition and/or physical
   resettlement as it would support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged infrastructures, and that
   all activities were planned to take place on existing footprints. However, project activities could have an
   impact on livelihoods, mainly to informal businesses and waste pickers on landfill sites, which were to be
   compensated for the loss of their income. If there were encroachers or squatters within the location or

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



  proposed area of any activities who would need to be relocated, the activities would not be implemented.
  For these reasons, the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is applied for precautionary
  purposes to the entire project.

  A permanent environmental and social officer based in United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)
  Yemen office oversaw the overall implementation, monitoring, and reporting of safeguards aspects. In
  addition, each local partner had a safeguards focal point for ensuring on-site compliance with environmental
  and social mitigation measures and health and safety requirements. The ICR reports (paragraph 81) that
  the environmental safeguards performance was rated satisfactory throughout project implementation.

  The UNOPS’ office in Yemen was responsible for managing GRM system. During implementations, there
  were several grievances relating to damages occurred to people’s assets. The Bank team monitored the full
  resolution by UNOPS. The ICR reports (paragraph 82) that the social safeguards performance was rated
  satisfactory throughout the project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The project’s financial management arrangements (similar to other 3
  emergency projects of Yemen) were governed by the Financial Management Framework Agreement
  (FMFA). The FMFA provided for the use of UNOPS’s Financial Rules and Regulations. A dedicated
  international finance specialist supported by two finance officers at UNOPS’ FM unit in Yemen were
  assigned to work on the project. The UNOPS regional office in Amman provided the UNOPS Yemen Office
  with technical support, advisory services, and oversight. The ICR reports (paragraph 83) that UNOPS
  maintained all of relevant, original supporting documentation related to the project expenditures. An
  independent auditor carried out the audit and had unqualified clean auditor’s opinions. The unaudited
  Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and Project Financial Statements (PFS) were acceptable and provided on
  time. FM performance was rated satisfactory and moderately satisfactory throughout the life of the project.
  At project closure, FM was moderately satisfactory due to delays in project audit. The audit was received
  and there were no outstanding FM issues.

  Procurement. The procurement was carried out in accordance with UNOPS’ procurement procedures.
  This Alternative Procurement Arrangements was allowed by the World Bank’s new Procurement
  Framework Policy. The day-to-day implementation of procurement activities was carried out by the
  UNOPS’ procurement team, which was led by an experienced international procurement specialist , and
  supported by 3 national procurement experts. A total of 152 contracts for works, goods and consultancy
  services were procured and successfully implemented. The ICR reports (paragraph 83) that the
  procurement supervision carried out by the Bank team found that procurement processing and contract
  management were overall satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other

                                                                                                Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pages 21 - 23) identified several lessons, of which the main ones are presented below with
paraphrasing from IEG:

For projects implemented in the midst of conflict and where the Bank lacks field presence, it
might be useful to leverage partnership with the United Nations (UN) agencies working in the
country. The Bank’s lack of staff field presence and the deteriorating security environment are
challenges common to many FCV countries. The World Bank Group has the resources, the
technical capacity, and the ability to come up with innovative solutions, and to deliver them even
under the most challenging conditions. To respond to the devastating consequences of the conflict
in Yemen the Bank reengaged through an innovative strategy under OP 2.30 (the operational policy
on “Development Cooperation and Conflict”) at strategic and operational levels. This operational
partnership ensured that the Bank contributed financing as well as technical and operational
expertise, and the UN agencies carried out on-the-ground project implementation in coordination
with national institutions and provided supervision of project implementation.

An integrated area-based approach can be effective in responding to the needs of
populations, especially in urban contexts. This approach is particularly appropriate if residents in
an affected area face complex, inter-related and multisectoral needs. This approach was at the core
of the project and proved to be highly appropriate, effective, efficient, and impactful in providing
critical basic services of multisectoral nature, to support Yemen during the conflict. Furthermore, this
approach allowed the project to be responsive, selective, and pragmatic. The project chose to put an
emphasis on prioritizing and sequencing activities to respond to immediate needs in the first year of
implementation and then gradually enlarging the span of support based on community consultations
for subsequent years of implementation. Through this approach, the project activities were prioritized
if they achieved inter-sectoral and spatial linkages. For instance, for power and water supply
restoration to a hospital, priority was given to repairing the access road to the hospital to make it a
functional facility. The approach to clustering of small-scale investments helped maximize the
development impact for beneficiaries, as confirmed by beneficiary survey results, whilst achieving
value for money.

Use of a Third-Party Monitoring Agent (TPMA) in the absence of an on-the-ground presence
may help ensure proper monitoring and verification. The project relied on the TPMA for

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RY: Integrated Urban Svcs Emergcy CLOSED (P164190)



supervision and monitoring of project activities to offset difficulties in access and supervision by
Bank staff and complement the efforts of the task team. The TPMA’s services were procured by the
UNOPS, with the Bank’s approval of the TOR, to carry out visits to project sites to verify
implementation in accordance with the project objectives and the signed contracts.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, candid, and follows the OPCS's ICR guidelines. The ICR provides an
excellent presentation of evidence in support of the achievement of the PDO reporting on different aspects of
service delivery. It describes in sufficient level of detail the level of public services prior to the project and draws
heavily on evidence from the surveys of multiple beneficiaries, discusses O&M arrangements, and institutional
capacity. The ICR provided details of the methodology and scope from the beneficiary perception survey in
Annex 6-D.The ICR is internally consistent and it provides lessons learned that are of broader relevance to
similar projects in FCV context.

There are a few minor discrepancies: (i) the total actual project cost - ICR datasheet reports US$148.4 million,
while Annex 3 reports total project cost by component as US$150.2 million; and (ii) the ICR should have
referred to the 'beneficiary surveys' rather than calling them the 'impact assessment'. It would also have been
useful to reflect on the role of the World Bank investments and prioritizing specific geographic areas over others
at the design stage- in terms of ensuring impartiality. These issues, however, do no detract from the overall
high quality of the ICR.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                         Page 15 of 15
