     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022867

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P131094                                     HN Disaster Risk Management Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Honduras                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51900                                   30-Apr-2019                                          23,752,619.83

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2012                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              26,000,000.73                                               0.00

 Actual                                          23,752,619.83                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph.10),
   the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to support Honduras to (a) continue strengthening its
   capacity for integrated disaster risk management at the municipal and national level; and (b) improve its
   capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

   This review will assess the project against the following objective:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



         To continue strengthening its capacity for integrated disaster risk management at the municipal and
          national level.
         To improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Apr-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Strengthening of National-level disaster risk management (DRM) capacities: (US$2.2 million at
   appraisal, increased to US$4.7 million at the June 2020 restructuring, US$4.47 million actual). This
   component was to finance training, equipment, software, studies, a communication strategy, and the
   establishment of a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). It included the following subcomponents:
   (i) territorial planning; (ii) the DRM capacity of the Permanent Commission of Contingencies (Comisión
   Permanente de Contingencias or COPECO) and Ministry of Planning and External Cooperation (Secretaría
   Técnica de Planificación y Cooperación Externa or SEPLAN / the General Directorate of Territorial Planning
   (Dirección General de Ordenamiento Territorial, or DGOT); (iii) good practice environmental code for
   DRM, an updated construction code, studies on climate change and environmental sustainability; and (iv)
   the risk monitoring and modeling capacity of the Secretary of State for Natural Resources and Environment
   (Secretaría de Recursos Naturales y Ambiente, or MiAmbiente).

   2. Strengthening of Municipal and Community-level DRM Capacities (US$2.9 million at appraisal,
   increased to US$4.3 million at the June 2020 restructuring, US$4.25 million actual). This component was to
   finance training, equipment, software, emergency simulation exercises, studies on risk and territorial
   planning, the development of a DRM Geoportal, and outreach activities to strengthen municipal and
   community DRM capacity. The capacity-building efforts were to support the Municipal Committees for
   Emergency Response (Comité de Emergencia Municipal or CODEMs) and Local Committees for
   Emergency Response (Comité de Emergencia Local or CODELs), in engaging communities in participatory
   DRM, in incorporating DRM in territorial planning, land use, and emergency plans, in institutionalizing risk
   management in local planning, and in improving local monitoring and early warning systems.

   3. Implementation of Mitigation Measures (US$13.05 million at appraisal, slightly
   increased to US$13.7 million at the June 2020 restructuring, US$11.76 million actual). This component was
   to finance the design and implementation of structural and nonstructural measures to reduce local
   vulnerability to natural hazards. Activities financed in Component 2 above would identify the structural risk
   mitigation measures (i.e., physical construction such as riverbank protection and/or drainage). Nonstructural
   measures included workshops on environmental (climate change), social (gender), and technical (DRM)


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



  aspects. Nonstructural measures were prioritized for Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Descendant
  communities.

  4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.85 million at appraisal, increased to
  US$2.77 million at the June 2020 restructuring, US$2.82 million actual) This component was to finance
  costs associated with project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), audits, conducting the
  baseline, Mid-Term Review (MTR), and final evaluation. This component would also finance the oversight of
  the communication and gender strategies.

  5. Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$ US$10.0 million at appraisal, cancelled
  US$4.0 million in the April 2014 restructuring, further revised to US$0.53 million at the June 2020
  restructuring, US$0.42 million actual). This component was to provide immediate liquidity to the
  Government to respond to an eligible emergency. This would finance a positive list of goods, works,
  services, including audit, and emergency operating costs to recover from an eligible emergency. CERC had
  an initial allocation of US$10 million. In 2014, the government requested to cancel US$4.0 million. In April
  2019, the reduced CERC funds were reallocated to Components 1, 2, 3, and 4 (see above). In June 2020,
  CERC funds were further revised to US$0.53 million reallocated from project components 1 to 4. CERC was
  triggered twice - the first in June 2020 for the Government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic; and the
  second, in May 2021 in response to the impact of the Tropical Cyclones Eta and Iota. The Emergency
  Action Plan (EAP) for the first CERC for COVID-19, was to finance the refurbishment of twelve (12) centers
  Mass Attention Units (Unidades de Atención Masiva or UAMs) and International Sanitary Offices (Oficinas
  Sanitarias Internacionales or OSIs) to support the COVID-19 response. Tropical Cyclone Eta and Iota in
  November 2020 flooded 90% of the centers. In May 2021, the second CERC refocused available funds
  to address the damages caused by the tropical cyclones. A new EAP was developed to finance equipment,
  transport for COPECO, computer equipment, early warning system equipment, a hydrological study,
  a geologist, and remote sensing specialists.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$30 million. US$4.0 million was cancelled at the 2014
  restructuring (see below). The credit disbursed US$23.8 million at closing. The balance was cancelled.

  Financing: The International Development Association fully financed this credit.

  Borrower Contribution: None.

  Dates and Restructuring: The credit was approved on December 13, 2012 and became effective on
  March 18, 2013. The Mid Term Review was on May 16, 2016. The original closing date was on April 30,
  2019 but was extended three times for a total of 26 months to close on June 30, 2021. There were 5 level 2
  restructurings:

        April 22, 2014 to cancel US$4.0 million from the initial CERC allocation at the request of the
         government, and make changes to component costs. The cancelled IDA Credit was made available
         to the Honduras and Nicaraguan Catastrophe Risk Insurance project (P149895).

        September 2, 2015 to change the institutional arrangements after a new administration was elected.
         The DGOT was moved from SEPLAN to the Ministry of the Presidency (Secretaría de Estado del

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



          Despacho Presidencial, or SDP); (ii) the Secretary of State for Natural Resources and Environment
          (Secretaría de Recursos Naturales y Ambiente or SERNA) became the Secretary of State for
          Natural Resources and Environment (Secretaría de Recursos Naturales y Ambiente or MiAmbiente);
          and (iii) the Ministry of the Interior and Population (Secretaría del Interior y Población or SEIP)
          became the Secretariat for Human Rights, Justice, Government and Decentralization (Secretaría de
          Derechos Humanos, Justicia, Gobernación y Descentralización or SDHJGD).

         April 8, 2019 to introduce changes to the results framework, reallocate funds from CERC to the
          other components (see above) and extend the closing date of the credit by14 months from April 30,
          2019 to June 30, 2020. A new core PDO Level outcome indicator was added: "Cities with improved
          livability, sustainability, and/or management." In the PDO outcome level indicator evaluating
          mitigation measures, the technical, economical, and environmental "soundness" of mitigation
          measures was replaced for "satisfactory or above". Satisfactory was defined as achieving a level of
          at least 4 on a 5 level-scale (see Section 4 Efficacy, PDO outcome level indicator 4 below).

         June 10, 2020 to introduce changes to the results framework, trigger CERC, reallocate resources
          to other components, and extend the closing date of the credit a second time for an additional 6
          months, from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020. During the extension, 5 mitigation works
          delayed by the COVID-19 restrictions would be completed. The CERC component added a new
          intermediate results indicator. The project’s risks (macroeconomic, institutional capacity for
          implementation, sustainability) were updated to consider the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

         December 18, 2020 to extend the closing date of the credit a third time for 6 months from December
          31, 2020 to June 30, 2021 following Tropical Cyclones Eta and Iota, which struck the country in
          November 2020. The impact from the two cyclones resulted in delays and damage to the minor
          refurbishment works in the 12 selected UAMs and OSIs that were planned when CERC was first
          triggered in June 2020. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) suspended the refurbishment works
          because the tropical storms destroyed 90 percent of the works, and access to the sites of the 3
          remaining structural mitigation measures also proved difficult. This third extension was 26 months
          from the original closing date.

   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome was not carried out. The PDOs remained the same throughout
   implementation. Changes in target values of indicators expanded the scope of work. The cancellation of
   US$4 million from the contingency component at the beginning of the project to be reallocated to another
   project did not lower the ambition of the project. The reduced CERC allocation was not fully utilized (see
   Section 4 Efficacy below). The project is assessed based on the revised outcome targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Honduras is a country highly vulnerable to natural hazards, including hurricanes, tropical storms, floods,
droughts, earthquakes, and landslides. Following the devastating impact of Hurricane Mitch in 1998, the
government focused its attention from recovery to prevention and mitigation, embodied in their various
plans and institutional arrangements. The project area covers the Sula Valley region, with its two biggest


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



cities, San Pedro Sula and Choloma, characterized by high vulnerability to natural disasters, and rapid
population growth (PAD, paragraph 50).

Country Context: Increasing poverty, rapid urbanization, environmental degradation, and climate change
contributed to the country’s high vulnerability to natural hazards. Several gaps in the DRM sector were
identified, such as the need to: (i) strengthen the capacity of national institutions, including COPECO
(whose mandate has been expanded mandate but without commensurate capacity or budget), and the new
SEPLAN; (ii) better understand the environmental perspective behind disaster risk; (iii) generate new and
publicly available information on disaster risk to inform risk reduction decision-making; (iv) improve
DRM local capacity and invest in mitigation measures as people living in high-risk areas increase; (v) adopt
disaster risk financing strategies to manage fiscal vulnerability and provide rapid access to funds post-
disaster; and (vi) develop risk reduction strategies that mainstream prevention and mitigation issues into
key sectors such as transport, water and sanitation, and energy.

Country Plans: The project was aligned with Honduras’ Country Vision for 2010-2038 and the National
Plan for 2010-2022. Both plans included DRM provisions in national laws. Both plans linked environmental
degradation, high poverty levels, and increased vulnerability to natural disasters. The National Plan
included goals and objectives to strengthen resilience; the DRM legal, institutional and planning
frameworks; mitigate risks; and improve enforcement mechanisms. The Country Vision aimed
to consolidate regional development using an environmentally sustainable process. This project directly
contributed to building the national DRM agency, COPECO, and its National Center for Atmosphere,
Oceanography and Seismic Studies (Centro Nacional de Estudios Atmosféricos, Oceanográficos y
Sísmicos or CENAOS). CENAOS produced and disseminated hydrometeorological/seismologic
information. The project supported the integration of disaster risk information in national and local territorial
planning processes and engaged local authorities and communities CODEMs and CODELs, to identify risks
and prepare local plans, including Municipal Land Use Plan (Plan Municipal de Ordenamiento Territorial or
PMOTs), Municipal Disaster Risk Management Plan (Plan Municipal de Gestión de Riesgos or PMGRs),
and Municipal Emergency Plan (Plan de Emergencia Municipal or PEMs).

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDOs were relevant to the current World
Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2016 - FY2019. At closing, the Bank was preparing the
CPF for FY22-FY26 (ICR, footnote 10). The PDOs were relevant to Pillar 3: “Reducing Vulnerabilities”. This
pillar was to strengthen institutions and activities to build resilience; integrate hazard risk information in
development planning decisions; improve financial response capacity following disasters; and
strengthen national and municipal capacity for integrated climate change resilience and DRM. The project
complemented the CPF emphasis on local planning capacity building, promoting decentralization
and financing high-impact DRM measures. The project would also improve financial response capacity in
the aftermath of disasters by implementing the CERC. The project contributed to the outcome of the
CPF pillar 3 by “Increasing the government's ability to respond to natural disasters and manage climate
change resilience risks.” The catastrophic floods from the Tropical Cyclones Eta and Iota, reminded
Honduras of the primacy of managing floods risk. In this project the CERC recovery response to the tropical
storms Eta and Iota showed that small-scale mitigation measures could reduce the loss of life and assets
of vulnerable population.

Prior World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: Over the past 23 years, following
Hurricane Mitch in 1998 the Bank has supported the country’s DRM agenda by partnering with the National
System for Risk Management (Sistema Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos or SINAGER) and COPECO. In
2000, the World Bank-financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Project (Proyecto de Mitigación de Desastres

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



               Naturales, or PMDN, P064913) and in 2007, provided the project with Additional Financing (P105386) to
               further reduce disaster risk. The government then requested this follow-on project to address institutional
               gaps identified by PMDN. This project complemented existing Bank projects that addressed multi-sectoral
               risks, including climate, crime, violence, poverty, and social exclusion in Honduras. These projects included
               the Second Land Administration Project (PATH II, P106680), the Barrio-Ciudad Project (P088319), and the
               Safer Municipalities Project (P130819). The World Bank continues to support COPECO and SINAGER
               through the first Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO, FY20, P172567, that has a pillar
               focusing on COPECO), and a second Cat DDO (P177001, currently in preparation, with a pillar on the
               SINAGER reform, reinforcing COPECO’s central role in it). The World Bank also approved the Tropical
               Cyclones Eta and Iota Emergency Recovery Project (P175977) in FY 2021 for Honduras' response and
               recovery needs and to strengthen institutional capacity to manage a resilient and inclusive recovery and
               reconstruction. The Bank has also provided the following technical assistance (TA) over the years: Disaster
               Risk Financing TA, Urban Resilience and Hydromet TA, Hands-on Implementation Support to the
               Emergency Recovery Project TA).

               The PDOs were pitched at the appropriate level, addressing capacity needs simultaneously at the national
               and local levels.

               Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated High. The PDOs were highly relevant to both the country's
               and the Bank's priorities. The PDOs were pitched at an appropriate level although a somewhat timid
               ambition of the PDOs reflected in the shortcomings in measuring the outcome indicators of the second
               objective (see Sections 4 Efficacy, and 9 M&E below).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To continue strengthening its capacity for integrated disaster risk management at the municipal and national
                             level.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) (ICR, paragraph 8). The Results
                             Framework (PAD, Annex 1) showed the logical causal link between inputs that led to outputs and expected
                             outcomes of the project. The ICR provided a ToC (Figure 1). Inputs were to include training, studies,
                             equipment, and software to enhance the capacity of COPECO, SEPLAN / the DGOT and improve risk
                             monitoring and modeling capacity of the Secretary of State for Natural Resources and Environment
                             (Secretaría de Recursos Naturales y Ambiente, or MiAmbiente). Outputs were to include a communication
                             strategy, a number of staff trained in territorial planning, risk monitoring and modeling, and a grievance
                             redress mechanism (GRM). After the MTR, the third (April 2019) restructuring, the extension increased the

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



number of municipalities to be reached (ICR, paragraph 23), with the following changes: 1 output was
dropped and 3 new outputs were added. The output, "Environmental Management Unit in COPECO” was
deleted because its proposed function was now to be implemented under the newly created MiAmbiente. The
3 new outputs referred to the number of (i) annual climate and meteorological reports/bulletins issued by the
COPECO-CENAOS; (ii) municipalities with new and/or updated municipal planning or management tools; and
(iii) community early warning systems strengthened or rehabilitated. Another output was redefined from
"seismic" to "hazard monitoring stations collecting and transmitting data” to include not only seismic but
hydromet stations. Target values were increased. Outcomes were to include a consolidated institutional and
policy DRM framework, improved DRM coordination at the national and community level, and increased
environmental sustainability. A participatory approach was adopted throughout the project cycle (design,
implementation, supervision of the works). The 2019 restructuring made changes to four PDO outcome level
indicators (see below).

The ToC included the following critical assumptions for the operation to achieve its objectives. These
assumptions materialized at implementation.

      Inter-institutional coordination was adequate to strengthen national-level DRM capacities.
      Municipal authorities and communities participated in identifying, prioritizing, and supervising
       mitigation measures to promote ownership and sustain investments.
      Communities were involved in planning and implementing the operations and maintenance (O&M) of
       the structural mitigation measures.
      The quality of the structural mitigation works and their impact on risk reduction depended on adequate
       supervision, design, and construction.
      Municipalities allocated budgets for O&M of the structural mitigation measures.

OUTPUTS:

      40 priority mitigation measures were implemented (original target 60 but no separate targets
       for structural or nonstructural measures). A target of 40 structural mitigation measures was adopted at
       the third (April 2019), restructuring, target achieved). Structural measures refer to physical
       construction such as bridges, riverbank protection, and/or drainage (ICR, paragraph 16).
      55 priority nonstructural measures were implemented (target of 20 nonstructural measures was
       introduced at the third (April 2019) restructuring, target exceeded). These were: (i)) workshops for
       municipal personnel addressing climate change, gender, DRM, waste management, vetiver grass
       planting, Indigenous Peoples plans, geographic information systems (GIS), watershed management
       and resettlement; (ii) films on DRM; (iii) workshops for journalists; (iv) training workshops for the
       CODELs and CODEMs on DRM and damage assessment; (v) watershed management plans (La Pita-
       Las Palamas and the Molombo Rivers); (vi) booklets and manuals (Informative Booklet on Climate
       Change with DRM and Gender Approach, Good practice environmental code for DRM, Operational
       Manual of the Honduran Builder with a DRM approach; (vii) guidelines (Methodological Guidelines of
       DRM for teachers, Guide for the Organization of CODELs and CODEMs); (viii) a radio soap opera on
       DRM; (ix) short DRM films; and (x) DRM video clips. 13 Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Honduran
       communities hazard atlases were developed and socialized to the Garifuna and Tolupanes
       communities (ICR, Annex 5, paragraph 47). At the national level, a standard methodology for
       municipal development and territorial planning was developed and disseminated as targeted.
      Three new output indicators were added during the third (April 2019) restructuring:


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



            o COPECO-CENAOS issued 130 (target 40, target exceeded) national level annual climate and
               meteorological reports or bulletins.
            o 18 (original target 16, target exceeded) municipalities with new and/or updated municipal
                plans or management tools with a risk management approach (municipal DRM plans or
                PMGRs, municipal land use plans or PMOTs, and municipal emergency plans PEMs). After
                the reorganization of SEPLAN, the land use plans (PMOTs) were now part of the municipal
                development plans.
             o 12 (original target 12, target achieved) community early warning systems were strengthened or
                rehabilitated.
       42 (original target 100 percent, revised to 42, target achieved) hazard (seismic and hydromet)
        monitoring stations were collecting and transmitting data.
       225 (original target 60, revised target 100, target exceeded) functional CODEMs and CODELs were
        established. Women accounted for 42 percent (original target 35 percent, revised to 40 percent, target
        exceeded) who were in CODEMs and CODELs management positions.
       At least 96 percent (original target 70 percent, revised to 85 percent, target exceeded) of sampled
        technical staff from municipalities rate training Satisfactory.
       Database of risk and vulnerability analyses and municipal plans were now publicly available, as
        targeted.
       34,448 persons participated in consultative activities during project implementation (no original target
        at appraisal, revised target of 14,094 persons, target exceeded) of which 14,692 were female
        participants (target 6,423, target exceeded) and 1,929 were Indigenous or Afro-Honduran people
        (target 1,000, target exceeded).
       The ICR (paragraph 60) adds that the project temporarily employed 4,571 people (no target) from
        the municipalities where the mitigation works were implemented.

OUTCOMES: Two original outcomes and a new outcome added at the April 2019 restructuring were
achieved.

Outcome 1: National-level DRM capacities strengthened:

     1,343,780 direct project beneficiaries (original target 850,000 revised to 1,285,000; target exceeded)
      52 percent were female (target 51 percent, target achieved).
     At least 96 percent of a representative sample of direct beneficiaries, and 93 percent of sampled
      female beneficiaries, (original target 70 percent, revised to 85 percent, target exceeded for both direct
      and female beneficiaries) were satisfied with COPECO's DRM activities.
     At least 18 municipalities (original target 16, revised target 18, target achieved) adopted DRM
      (PMGRs) and emergency (PEMs) plans.
     38 cities (original target 20, target exceeded) are reported to have improved livability, sustainability
      and/or management. The indicator was added during the implementation "to measure the cumulative
      number of cities or municipalities for which the direct interventions of the project have resulted in
      improvements in (a) living conditions for residents; (b) financial, economic, environmental, and/or
      social sustainability of the city; and/or (c) city planning, systems, and governance". The ICR (Annex 5,
      page 96), however, admits that the degree of improvement is difficult to determine from some
      indicators. For example, in terms of risk reduction, few measurable targets were set (e.g., reduction of
      annualized flood damage or people whose risk level was reduced).



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)




      100 percent (baseline 0, original target 85 percent, revised target 90 percent, target exceeded) of a
       representative sample of mitigation works was independently assessed as technically, economically,
       and environmentally satisfactory or above. The original indicator was initially intended to assess the
       works' economic, environmental, and technical “soundness”, however it was revised to measure
       “satisfaction”, which significantly lowered its effectiveness as an objective measure and criterion. The
       ICR (Annex 5, page 84) acknowledges that "the assessment of the design and construction from a
       technical, economic, and environmental point of view ... was not available"

Outcome 2: Municipal and community-level DRM capacities strengthened:

      18 municipalities adopted PMGRs and PEMs based on a participatory methodology (original target,
       16, revised target 18, target achieved) as evidence that municipal and community-level DRM
       capacities were strengthened. This is an output level indicator. Outcome would have been the impact
       from implementation of those plans.

Outcome 3: Mitigation measures implemented and functional:

      38 cities had improved livability, sustainability, and/or management (target 20, target exceeded).
       Improved livability referred to (a) living conditions for residents; (b) financial, economic, environmental,
       and/or social sustainability of the city; and/or (c) city planning, systems, and governance. Improved
       livability, sustainability, and/or management was measured as part of the PMGRs and PEMS that the
       38 cities adopted. In these participatory plans, residents and local authorities identified risks and
       mitigating measures, institutionalized local planning activities, increased the number of local land use
       plans and DRM regulations. Residents of the most vulnerable areas of El Negrito reported a better
       understanding of natural hazards, pointed to mitigating risk measures they needed to adopt, and
       acknowledged the roles of institutional actors who would support them during emergencies (ICR,
       paragraph 36 and footnote 20). As clarified by the ICR (Annex 5, paragraph 9), however, the degree
       of improvement was difficult to determine.
      Interviews with beneficiaries reported increased preparedness following Tropical Cyclones Eta and
       Iota. Residents of historically flooded areas noted that their preparedness and the mitigation works
       implemented in their municipalities protected their lives and properties with no damages reported.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective - to continue strengthening DRM capacity - is rated
substantial, but with some shortcomings. All, target outcome indicators were achieved or exceeded.
However, the outcome indicators have limitations discussed above and the evidence largely relies on the
perception of risk mitigation measures by the communities, without the assessment of the technical,
economic, and environmental criteria or soundness as originally envisaged. The objective - to continue
strengthening capacity - did not have sufficient indicators to address the outcome of the strengthening
capacity interventions. Some outcomes were described particularly the outcome of the plans implemented,
but without targets and not monitored, considering an 8.5- year project implementation period.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The logical causal relationship among the inputs leading to an effective response to an
eligible emergency was embodied in the CERC Emergency Action Plan (EAP). Response to COVID-19
triggered the first CERC. In November 2020, the Eta and Iota Tropical Cyclones destroyed 90 percent of
the health centers making the scope of the first CERC obsolete and were cancelled. On May 3, 2021, the
government triggered a new CERC to address the impact of the storms and updated the EAP. Inputs were
to include an agreed upon emergency that would trigger CERC; a CERC specific Operation Manual to outline
financial management, procurement, safeguard, and other implementation arrangements (PAD, paragraph
28). Once triggered, the Operation Manual would be updated, an Emergency Action Plan (EAP) was to be
prepared. The government would request to disburse the remaining unallocated funds. For its part, the Bank
would issue its No Objection and disburse CERC funds. Outputs were to include a government declaration of
an emergency to trigger CERC, an updated Operation Manual, an Emergency Action Plan, and a request for
CERC disbursement. Outputs also included the equipment and goods used for the COVID-19 health
emergency response (June 2020) and a revised EAP in May 2021. Outcome was to be the release and use
of CERC funds to supplement the government's response to an emergency (COVID-19 pandemic, and and
Tropical Cyclones Eta and Iota.

      The CERC Operations Manual was updated on March 15, 2020. The Bank issued its No Objection on
       March 25, 2020. The Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud or SESAL), COPECO and the Ministry of
       Finance (Secretaría de Finanzas or SEFIN) jointly prepared the Emergency Action Plan (EAP) on May
       8, 2020. The government requested the release of US$533,124 in uncommitted funds on May 14,
       2020 to supplement the country's COVID-19 pandemic response. The Bank received this request on
       May 25, 2020 and disbursed CERC funds on June 2, 2020.
      When CERC was first triggered in June 2020, a new output indicator was added: "COPECO support
       to 12 OSIs and UAMs (target 8, target exceeded). Because the storms in
       November 2020 delayed and damaged the refurbishment works of the 12 selected UAMs and OSIs
       under the June 2020 CERC (ICR, paragraph 26). The scope of the EAP was cancelled. CERC was
       triggered a second time in May 2021 to address the impact of the storms. The EAP was revised. The
       Bank approved the activation of the CERC on May 11, 2021, to assign uncommitted funds to finance
       immediate recovery activities to address the compound impacts of tropical cyclones Eta and Iota
       (US$432,929) and redirect the COVID-19 pandemic response (US$100,108).

The improved government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency was
measured through a rapid availability of CERC funds- that were disbursed within three weeks (exceeding the
targeted four weeks) to finance recovery needs. This is a process and not an outcome indicator. However, as
most of the funds were re-allocated to other project activities, and the objective was related to capacity
strengthening in disaster risk management, the results under PDO2 are interconnected with PDO1 above.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                               Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. All six
                            outcome indicators were achieved. All 15 output indicators were achieved or exceeded. The efficacy of the
                            project to achieve both the first and second objectives is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The
                            values of the outcome indicators were supported by the 2020 Project Evaluation (see Section 9 M&E
                            Implementation below). The study surveyed 1,000 beneficiary households and 260 members of CODEMs,
                            CODELs and co-executing agencies in the project area (ICR, paragraph 78). The study was used to support
                            the efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives and project efficiency. Annexes 4 and 5 detailed the
                            results including short- and long-term effects of DRM measures.

                            The tropical storms Eta and Iota in November 2020 measured in real terms the improvement in the country’s
                            disaster management capacities without specific indicators in the results framework to capture these, e.g.,
                            low number of fatalities (99 in Honduras). COPECO planning and support at the local level were reportedly an
                            improved response during the 2020 hurricane season (but no data to compare timely response). The forty
                            structural mitigation measures avoided significant losses (reported as qualitative only, ICR, paragraph 40).
                            Some life-saving overall improvement in emergency preparedness and response could be reasonably
                            attributed to the project interventions.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the following economic and financial analyses were conducted: (i) a cost
   benefit using a "with" and "without the project" scenarios; (ii) financial sustainability analysis; and (iii) fiscal
   impact analysis (PAD, Annex 8, paragraph 2). The analyses used costs and benefits associated only with the
   disaster risk mitigation measures such as measurable strengthened capacities at the national and municipal
   levels; and mitigation investments using a sample of 18 types of structural mitigation works. The financial
   analysis used the average municipal budget and the average costs of the new mitigation works. The fiscal
   analysis estimated the average maintenance costs of the mitigation works and its impact on average municipal
   budgets. Using a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital, the Net Present Value (NPV) was estimated at US$1.89
   million, benefits at US$10.77 million and costs at US$7.9 million. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was
   estimated at 12.89 percent.

   At closing, the report used the same ex-ante methodology including (i) 10 percent opportunity cost of capital;
   and (ii) costs and benefits over a 25-year return period for the structural mitigation works. Using actual outputs,
   costs, and estimates of the likely impact of the forty (40) structural mitigation measures built, the NPV was
   estimated at US$ 3.4 million with an IRR of 21 percent. Costs reached US$8.5 million, benefits at US$19.3
   million, a benefit/cost ratio of 1.21. Sensitivity analysis used 2 scenarios of costs and benefits. The first



                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



scenario reduced benefits by 20%; the second increased costs by 20%. Results showed sensitivity to decreases
in benefit than increases in costs.

Administrative and operational Efficiency: The project underwent five restructurings, cancelled US$4 Million
from the CERC allocation, and extended the closing date three times for a total of 26 months. The extension
allowed the achievement of the PDO outcome and output Indicators with reduced resources. Early
implementation delays were attributed to government commitment. First, lack of Government budget allocation
significantly limited disbursements in the first three years of implementation. Second, political turmoil and social
unrest following the 2017 presidential elections affected the implementation of activities in the project area (see
Section 10 Other Issues, (b) Fiduciary Compliance below).

The Credit originally allocated US$10.0 million for CERC. During implementation, the CERC allocation was
reduced to zero in two steps: first, by canceling US$4.0 million in April 2014 and second, by reallocating the
remaining amount to other project activities in the April 2019 restructuring. CERC was triggered twice - first in
May 2020, to supplement the government response to the COVID-19 pandemic (the nationwide curfew caused
several delays in the construction of the structural mitigation measures), and second, on May 3, 2021 to fund
eligible response activities following the tropical cyclones. CERC was triggered in both cases, and funds
released within three weeks (ICR, paragraph 45).

Although the project was implemented over a longer period than originally planned (26 months), the project
achieved a higher internal rate of return than estimated at appraisal. The ERRs noted below refer to
the structural mitigation works allocation - US$13.05 million of US$30 million at appraisal and US$11.76 million
of US$23.72 million at closing.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       43.50
 Appraisal                                                   12.89
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       49.60
 ICR Estimate                                                21.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated High. The efficacy of the project to achieve the first and second objective is
rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. Operational inefficiencies did not detract from the economic



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



efficiency of the structural works implemented. The outcome of the project to achieve its objectives is
rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified the following risks to the development outcomes (paragraphs 95-96). IEG added the
impact of the war in Ukraine in the economic risk below:

      Government commitment: This is a low risk. The government has demonstrated its commitment to
       DRM evident in its country plans and development strategies (see Section 3 Relevance of Objectives
       above). The increased capacity at both the national and local levels and the close interinstitutional
       collaboration and coordination facilitated by this project would likely sustain the institutional outcomes
       of the project interventions.

      Municipal government ownership risk: This is a high risk. The completed structural mitigation
       works require budgetary commitments from municipalities for its continued operations and
       maintenance (O&M). There is no evidence that municipal budgets have taken the maintenance of
       completed structural mitigation measures on board. Issues remain about the long-term role of
       municipalities in DRM although the municipal institutions, CODEMs and CODELs linked to the
       implementation of structural mitigation works showed an impact on capacity to respond and
       community empowerment. In interviews, leaders of CODELs indicated that they maintained the
       structural mitigation measures in their communities because municipalities were not providing O&M
       support. Absent allocations for O&M of these work in municipal budgets and continuing support
       to CODEMs and CODELs jeopardizes the sustainability of the mitigation works.

      Institutional Support. This is a moderate risk. COPECO requires adequate government resources to
       continue to strengthen the integrated disaster risk management capacity at the municipal and
       national levels.

IEG added the following risk.

      Economic Risk: This is a high risk. The continuing COVID 19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine and
       its impact on increasing oil prices pose high risks to the outcome of this project. In March 2020, the
       COVID-19 pandemic weakened Honduras economic growth. Nationwide restrictions in movement
       caused construction delays. The war in Ukraine has global reach and its impact will be evident in the
       prices of commodities affected by rising prices of oil and gas.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was a follow-on to the Bank-funded PMDN and benefited from the long-standing partnership
  between the country and the Bank on DRM. The government's commitment to DRM was embodied in
  its strategy for reducing vulnerabilities, promoting inclusive growth, and reducing poverty. The Bank's
  PMDN task team helped prepare this project. Design adopted the following lessons from PMDN (i) a
  participatory methodology to engage municipalities and the community in territorial planning and DRM; (ii)
  implementing small scale, structural measures with high impact in mitigating loss of lives and
  properties in at-risk municipalities; (iii) establishing clear lines of accountability and resource
  management; and (iv) the value of reliable monitoring and evaluation (M&E), sound economic analysis,
  and lessons to prioritize DRM on limited budgets and competing priorities (PAD, paragraph 31).
  Lessons from the Bank's DRM experience, good global practices, emerging DRM technological advances
  and innovations, and international standards on DRM and territorial planning also informed design.

  The Bank selected the implementing agency, COPECO as meeting minimum fiduciary requirements
  after the agency implemented the PMDN and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)-
  financed Disaster Risk Prevention and Mitigation Project (MITIGAR) and signaled a readiness to
  implement. Design, implementation, and works supervision adopted the participatory approach
  throughout the project cycle. Activities were customized for specific groups such as women and
  Indigenous Peoples to gain legitimacy of interventions with this cohort. At entry, the team assessed
  substantial implementation risk and initial delays proved this assessment to be correct.

  The ICR acknowledged that M&E lacked appropriate data collection methods, which led to underutilized
  M&E data for project management, and limited the ability for timely reporting (see Section 9 M&E design
  and implementation below). However, the MTR addressed this shortcoming.

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings in the lack of sufficient
  indicators to be supported by data in M&E design to capture the impact of the project interventions in
  improved capacity to respond to emergencies (see Section 4 Efficacy above and Section 9 M&E design
  below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was led by four Task Team Leaders (TTLs) in the conduct of 50 supervision missions and
 16 videoconferences over the 8.5-year implementation period. Part of the Bank task team were in the
 country, coordinated with the Country Office, and worked closely with the implementing agency and co-
 executing agencies. The presence in country also helped deliver technical and operational advice in a
 timely manner and closely follow up on issues as these emerge to reduce implementation challenges.
 There were specialized technical and operational support to the Project Implementation Unit to manage
 environmental and social, and fiduciary risks (see Section 10, Other Issues below). After the last in-country
 mission on January 2020, and during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank team conducted virtual meetings
 to support the country counterparts.


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



 In May 2019, the Bank M&E specialists helped structure a methodology for measuring indicators to
 address the design shortcoming at entry (ICR, paragraph 80). The MTR was conducted as planned. After
 the MTR, issues affecting implementation were adequately handled. Communities were enjoined to use a
 gender lens in its participatory approach and consistency with the Indigenous Peoples and Afro
 Descendant communities' culture and priorities. Workshops were held to understand guidelines and
 processes for accessing CERC; with technical advice on measuring the economic, social, and
 environmental impacts of the project, address the challenges of gathering data for baseline, MTR, and final
 evaluation studies; and technical expertise to strengthen risk management capacities at the municipal and
 community levels. The team demonstrated a proactive approach to implementation challenges such as
 ensuring that the project had sufficient funds to close the project satisfactorily.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory. There were operational inefficiencies encountered
 evident in the extension of the project but these were addressed in a timely manner.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were broadly defined "to continue strengthening" because of the follow-on nature
 of the project. According to the PAD, the implementing agency was to implement M&E through bi-annual
 progress reports on project performance, including physical and financial progress and provide periodic
 information on 11 intermediate results and progress toward 5 PDO level outcome indicators represented in
 the project's results framework (PAD, Annex 1). These indicators were largely adequate but had room for
 improvement. For example, POD1 outcome indicator of satisfaction with project activities did not sufficiently
 demonstrate the progress on strengthening capacity for integrated disaster risk management at
 the national level. Overall, the benchmark between the past performance and the improved capacity as a
 result of the project was not sufficiently established and clear. The revision of the PDO indicator on the
 technical, economical, and environmental "soundness" of mitigation measures to the perception of
 "satisfactory or above" weakened the indicator. Flood risk perceptions may reflect a false sense of security
 of the beneficiaries and need to be supplemented by technical assessments. Lastly, in the outcome for
 emergency response, the time taken to disburse funds was a process indicator and not an outcome level
 indicator. Perhaps how rapid release of funds addressed the speed of recovery would have better reflected
 the impact of the CERC.

 Participating municipalities and other agencies were to provide supporting information. The credit was to
 finance baseline data to assess social, environmental and economic (including gender differentiated)
 impacts of key activities. Indicators and impacts were to be assessed independently at midterm and for the
 final evaluation of the project (PAD, paragraph 37). The ICR acknowledged a shortcoming in M&E design



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



 in the lack of method for collecting data to monitor and evaluate the indicators of the Results Framework
 (ICR, paragraph 64). This was addressed at implementation (see below).



b. M&E Implementation
  COPECO implemented the M&E system. Baseline data for project impact, mid-term evaluation, and final
  evaluation were completed as designed. The ICR reported no changes from the baselines at appraisal or
  during the April 2019 and June 2020 restructurings. Several analyses were carried out to assess the
  project results (ICR, Annex 5). At MTR and closing, consultants completed the following assessments: (i)
  technical, economic, and environmental evaluation of the structural mitigation measures; (ii) economic
  and financial analysis; (iii) social audits; (iv) emergency drills; (v) quantity evaluation and database; and
  (vi) consolidated evaluations (ICR, paragraph 78).

  In May 2019, with Bank M&E specialists, the Project Implementation Unit prepared an Action Plan, an
  M&E Plan, and designed a methodology to measure each indicator and monitor progress quarterly using
  an Indicator Measurement Fact Sheet. In the June 2020 project restructuring, one intermediate indicator
  was added to the Results Framework to monitor the CERC. The PIU implemented this methodology from
  June 2019 until project closing (ICR, paragraph 72). In 2020, the final evaluation assessed the efficacy of
  the project to achieve its objectives with 1,100 project beneficiary households and 260 members of
  CODELs, CODEMs, and co-executing agencies participating in the survey. The study assessed the
  planning, decision-making, and implementation actions to address vulnerabilities in development
  processes and if these actions prevented or reduced the impact of a potentially destructive phenomenon
  from causing damage or severe disruptions to people's lives, livelihoods, and ecosystems territories
  (including counterfactuals). The studies included information about DRM's short and long-term effects on
  households' main assets (ICR, Annexes 4 and 5). M&E implementation and project evaluation focused
  on data integration using Microsoft Excel database.

  A detailed assessment quantifying risks reduced from the mitigation works could not be carried out
  because of a lack of a detailed risk assessment using before/after scenarios.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data generated by the M&E system eventually informed project progress, the MTR and the final
  evaluation. According to the ICR (paragraph 64), early reliance on the M&E data for project
  management proved inadequate and the limited ability to report in a timely fashion were noted. The
  project was approved in December 2012, however the M&E changes were made in 2019 (see above).
  After 2019, M&E data informed project management and decision-making. M&E reports
  informed agencies about DRM in the municipalities, communities, CODELS, and CODEMs. In the April
  2019 restructuring, the target values were increased to reflect the scaled-up activities.

  On balance the M&E quality is rated Substantial. Not all the indicators were rectified during
  implementation to better capture the progress on capacity strengthening for integrated disaster risk
  management, and some were simplified or weakened (i.e., the technical, economical, and
  environmental "soundness" of mitigation measures was replaced for "satisfactory or above'). However,




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



  several reports and assessments were carried out to understand and measure the achievement of the
  project development objectives, with an adequate level of detail and analytical findings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was categorized as "B" for environmental assessment purposes
   and triggered the following safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04),
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and Forests (OP 4.36). An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was disclosed in the country's and the Bank's websites on October 17, 2012. The
   structural mitigation measures or works completed before 2019 complied with the applicable national
   legislation but the reports did not include performance of the reported activities or compliance with the
   ESMF (ICR p. 82). The ESMF was updated in 2019 to include environmental and occupational safety
   aspects not originally considered and was redisclosed in January 2020. Following the MTR, closer
   supervision of the contractors was carried out and compliance with the ESMF requirements were
   documented more efficiently. The Bank's Operations Portal noted that the project complied with all
   safeguards.

   The ICR did not include any description of implementation of Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Forests (OP
   4.36). The Bank team confirmed on June 8, 2022 that the project complied with these safeguards.

   Social Safeguards: The exact locations of the project were to be determined during implementation. The
   project triggered social safeguards for Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared. A Grievance Redress Mechanism was
   specified in component 1 of the project. According to the Bank's Operations Portal, in the last virtual
   implementation mission of February 2021, the GRM results were disaggregated by year and cumulative, by
   gender, municipality, type of grievance (complaint, query, or request), means of communication (Website,
   Phone calls, messages from the WhatsApp application and onsite visits); and status (received, attended,
   and resolved) from 2013 to 2021. Most cases were entered through the WhatsApp application. The average
   resolution time per case is 1.5 days. From 2013 to 2021, 151 cases were received (41% from men and 59%
   from women), and all were resolved. After the MTR, COPECO implemented the social management
   system to improve community participation, ownership of mitigation works, and management of grievances
   by establishing dialogue with the national indigenous community's organization (CONPAH), conducting
   workshops with Indigenous Tolupan and Afro Descendant Garifuna communities to identify risks and
   systematize traditional practices and knowledge in risk prevention and response. The delays in
   implementing these activities between June 2017 and October 2018 rated compliance with the
   safeguards OP/BPs 4.10 and 4.12 as Moderately Satisfactory, leading to an overall safeguards rating of
   Moderately Satisfactory for that period. Evidence of progress upgraded this rating to Satisfactory until
   project closure (ICR, paragraph 85). The Resettlement Policy Framework was reviewed to ensure impacts,
   compensation, and documentation processes were in compliance. Training was provided to municipalities
   on international standards and tools for resettlement.



                                                                                                Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



   The CERC did not trigger additional safeguards. In both CERC cases, the preliminary environmental and
   social evaluation (FEASP) of the activities proposed in the Emergency Assistance Plans (EAPs) specified
   environmental control measures and safety standards for the activities in the EAP. However, there was no
   information of compliance with these measures (ICR, paragraph 86).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: Financial management (FM) system complied with overall FM arrangements
   (ICR, paragraph 87). The Project's bi-annual interim unaudited financial reports were submitted to the Bank
   with minor delays; were of acceptable quality and provided adequate financial monitoring. Audit reports
   were submitted in a timely fashion to the Bank, including unmodified (clean) opinions. However, as the
   project was closing, the government did not confirm that funds were available to cover costs of the project
   activities during the grace period. The Bank team sent the government three Management Letters (dated
   December 18, 2019, March 10, 2020, and October 30, 2020), and met with SEFIN and COPECO to
   ensure that the project had sufficient funds to deliver the final reports and cover the costs of the audits.

   Procurement: The ICR notes (para 88) that procurement was rated Satisfactory throughout project
   Implementation, except in December 2020, it was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory following a
   procurement post review that indicated noncompliance with the principles of the old procurement
   guidelines, which was eventually cleared . A close working relationship between the Bank and the PIU
   enhanced PIU procurement capacity. Each year, the Bank reviewed Annual Operations Plans (POA) and
   procurement plans prior to its implementation. The procurement plan was updated frequently. Information
   supporting changes to the procurement plan were updated in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement System (STEP).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Overall efficacy is rated
                                                                               substantial, due to minor
                                                                               shortcomings. With high
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                               relevance and substantial
                                                                               efficiency, the project outcome
                                                                               rating is Satisfactory.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were mostly derived from the ICR with minor modifications by IEG (ICR,
paragraphs 97-103):

      A successful operation benefits from a starting point of a strong institutional
       capacity, low project management staff turnover, responsiveness to self-identified
       needs, and transparency. In this project, the government committed to the participatory
       approach introduced by the preceding Bank-financed DRM project applying a participatory
       approach in the design of municipal level DRM plans (PMGRs) and emergency plans
       (PEMs). Residents from the municipalities and communities were enjoined to identify and
       implement structural and nonstructural DR mitigation measures. This approach, plus
       the steady presence of a qualified project implementation unit, contributed to the
       project's success. For future consideration, having permanent qualified staff at the municipal
       level may help ensure continuity and achieve more efficiency.

      Integrating DRM in territorial planning leads to risk-informed development plans and
       fosters a culture of prevention. In this project, a risk management approach formed part of
       the standardized methodology for territorial planning. The methodology helps other
       institutions frame their planning instruments. The PMGRs and PEMs planning instruments
       showed how these contributed to strengthening the local framework for resilience. However,
       territorial planning with DRM features require effective implementation. PMGRs and PEMs
       are "living" instruments, require periodic updating and would call for investments in human
       capital. Resources would be needed to keep the system operational, conduct
       continuous training, and compensation packages to attract and retain experts,
       e.g., meteorologists, hydrologists, and geologists.

      Engaging Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Honduran population
       facilitates inclusive DRM. In this project, the pilot participatory methodology enjoined
       indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples to help analyze risks, vulnerabilities, and
       design PMGRs, and PEMs. The mitigation works, supervision, and maintenance activities in
       these plans empowered the self-determination of these communities. Citizen engagement
       was the foundation for inclusive DRM & Gender Equality (https://www.gfdrr.org/en/inclusive-
       drm). This consultative participatory approach gave COPECO a better understanding of the
       needs and risks faced by these vulnerable communities while building their preparedness
       and DRM capacity.

      CERC effectiveness may benefit from a flexible approach to the approval process. In
       this project, CERC was activated twice - the first in June 2020 in response to COVID-19, and
       in May 2021 in response to the impact of the storms. The emergency procurement of limited
       goods in response to these emergencies amounted to about US$0.5 million. In both cases,
       funds were made readily available. However, the documents to trigger CERC took around 3
       months for the first emergency and 5 months for the second one. The overall period from the

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HN Disaster Risk Management Project (P131094)



         time the emergency was declared to implementation took 5-7 months and ran contrary to a
         rapid response. More features allowed under Bank policies need to be explored.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, consistent, and complete. The report was internally consistent and integrated the
various parts of the results. The results were mutually reinforcing highlighted by the expanded storylines offered
by the annexes to support the narrative in the main report. The annexes (e.g., Annexes 4, 5, and 6) were useful
in presenting details of the project interventions. The quality of the analysis is good with adequate focus on
evidence linked to the findings. Outcomes were highlighted throughout the report sourced from various
cited studies. Annex 4 supported the substantive efficiency from the structural mitigation works to overcome the
administrative and operational inefficiencies of the operation. Annex 5 provided a much more nuanced and
candid assessment of the project results and remaining issues than the main text. Lessons and
recommendations were derived from the project experience, including the recommendation to have a zero
allocation for CERC to avoid challenges posed by bureaucratic processes.

The link established between inputs, outputs, and outcomes, however, only served to highlight the design
shortcoming in M&E and the lack of sufficient indicators to strengthen the achievement of the objectives. Also,
the benchmarks or milestones between the prior capacity and improved capacity as a result of the project have
not been sufficiently explained and analyzed. The ICR incorrectly refers to the assessments and reports carried
out to consolidate the evidence in support of the PDO achievement as 'impact evaluation". Also, the main text is
twice the number of the recommended pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 20
