     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022826

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P145617                                  PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55840                                31-Aug-2020                                            47,381,512.18

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jan-2015                              28-Feb-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          50,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                       47,381,512.18                                                 0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof     Judyth L. Twigg                Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Sindh Public Sector Management Reform Project as set out
   in the Financing Agreement (p. 5) was to strengthen public sector performance in Sindh through improved
   revenue generation and expenditure management. The PDO in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) had
   substantively the same formulation.

   For purposes of this evaluation, the PDO will be assessed separately for (i) strengthening public sector
   performance through improved revenue generation and (ii) strengthening public sector performance through

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



   improved expenditure management. At a 2018 restructuring, the main outcome indicator and associated
   target for the second objective was changed from improved budget credibility to improved budget
   transparency. As this represented a reduction in the scope of that objective, a split rating is performed for this
   review. The project team confirmed this interpretation of credibility and transparency, defining the latter as a
   subset of the former, with budget credibility also encompassing clarity, accuracy, and trustworthiness of the
   budget.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had two components:

   Component 1: Results-based financing of eligible public sector management reforms (estimated cost
   at appraisal US$40.0 million; actual cost US$40.0 million). Eligible reforms included improvements in tax
   administration, public financial management, monitoring of development expenditures, and public
   procurement.

   The component was designed to provide incentives for achieving the eligible reforms by means of a results-
   based financing mechanism consisting of three PDO indicators supported by eight disbursement-linked
   indicators (DLIs) drawn from among the key performance indicators (PDO indicators and intermediate
   outcome indicators) included in the reform path of the project. Disbursements from the IDA credit were
   contingent on satisfactory achievement of DLIs.

   Component 2: Technical assistance to support capacity-building and institutional strengthening
   associated with achievement of the eligible public sector management reforms of Component 1,
   notably to mitigate implementation challenges and promote sustainability of project outcomes (estimated
   cost at appraisal US$10.0 million; actual cost US$10.0 million).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$282 million, including IDA financing of
   US$50 million and non-IDA (parallel) financing of US$232 million provided by the European Union (EU) and
   the government. Actual IDA cost at closing was US$47.38 million. No information on actual EU or
   government financing is included in the ICR.

   Financing. The project was financed by a US$50.0 million IDA Credit, of which US$47.38 million was
   disbursed. The difference was due to exchange rate fluctuations during the life of the project.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



                       Dates. The IDA Credit was approved on January 28, 2015 and became effective on April 28, 2015. The
                       original closing date August 31, 2020 was extended on May 21, 2020 to February 28, 2021, in large part
                       due to the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in a lockdown period during which the project made little
                       progress.

                       A Level 2 restructuring was carried out on March 28, 2018. At the time, the project was rated Moderately
                       Unsatisfactory (MU) on both implementation progress and progress towards achieving the PDO. The MU
                       ratings mainly reflected slow progress on strengthening public procurement processes and on several
                       actions related to budget credibility (for instance, capacity building in the eligible reform areas: tax
                       collection, public financial management, procurement, and development monitoring). At the restructuring,
                       one PDO indicator -- improved collection of sales tax on services -- was retained unchanged. Another PDO
                       indicator – improved credibility of the budget – was found to be an uncertain measure due to perennial
                       variations in the budget, and it was replaced by “transparency in budget formulation, allocation, and
                       execution." The third PDO indicator – reduced time taken to process procurement contracts – was dropped
                       due to delays in the implementation of a procurement management information system.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives aligned with Sindh government priorities in public sector management and with Bank
strategy in the sector. Sindh province is the second largest and the most industrialized of Pakistan’s four
provinces. It is comparatively wealthy, but at the time the project was developed it was facing uncertain
economic growth prospects and declining incomes, as well as weak delivery of public services and static
revenue collection. Financial resources were poorly managed. The project objectives addressed state-level
revenue and expenditure challenges that were limiting fiscal space and undermining the province’s ability to
finance its development needs. In doing so, they aligned with the Sindh government’s own roadmap for
fiscal and financial management reform, a Tax Revenue Mobilization Plan introduced in 2014 that drew on
the findings of a 2014 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment. The project was
also aligned with the Bank's Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) of 2015-2019 that prioritized
increasing revenues for delivery of public services, better financial management, and improving the
effectiveness of development expenditures. The project objectives also reflected constraints identified in the
2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic, in particular macroeconomic stability and public sector governance,
the former emphasizing fiscal management and the latter deepening devolution and strengthening of local
government systems. Finally, the project aligned with the technical assistance for public financial
management provided to Sindh by the EU and for building up a Sindh Public Procurement Regulatory
Authority by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen public sector performance in Sindh through improved revenue generation

               Rationale
               Improved revenue generation focused on improving the collection of sales tax on services (STS), which was
               the largest single source of tax revenue in the province. Improved collection was to be driven by the
               application of a Sindh Tax Revenue Mobilization Reform Plan, including elements of streamlining the tax
               collection process such as stronger coordination between provincial tax collection agencies (there were three,
               with Sindh’s Revenue Board, SRB, being the main one and responsible for collecting the STS); institutional
               development of SRB with enhanced staffing, increased automation, and improved auditing practices; and a
               broadening of the tax base.

               Outputs/intermediate outcomes/DLIs

                     The Sindh Revenue Mobilization Reform Plan was approved in February 2014 and is being
                      implemented (DLI 1), achieving the target

                     More than 90 percent of SRB staff were hired and trained according to a third-party validated staffing
                      plan (DLI2), achieving the target for enhanced human resource capacity for administration at the SRB.

                     An automation plan for tax collection and administration was implemented and more than 90 percent
                      of non-compliant registered taxpayers received notices from SRB in FY2018/19 (DLI3), achieving the
                      target for increased automation of systems in SRB.
                     Risk-based audits of taxpayers were implemented, aiming at specific hit rates or hit rate increases,
                      with an annual review to enhance risk-based criteria (DLI4). However, the newly created tax audit unit
                      had limited capacity (ICR, p. 10).
                     SRB reporting was regularized, with four quarterly reports and one annual report being released,
                      achieving the target for improved SRB performance transparency.
                     The tax base was increased from 4,800 to 31,000 taxpayers, exceeding the target of 9,500 by over
                      300 percent.

               Outcomes: At the time the operation was initiated, STS represented 42 percent of Singh’s provincial tax
               revenue, with the remainder derived from 16 other taxes and minor fees. By project closing, its share had
               risen to 57 percent. While expectations on relevant indicators were substantially met, this achievement should
               be tempered by the susceptibility of the main indicator to factors external to the project, notably economic
               fluctuations.



               Rating
               Substantial



                                                                                                                Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen public sector performance in Sindh through improved expenditure management (original outcome
indicators/targets)

Rationale
Improved expenditure management was initially to be achieved by improving the credibility of budget
execution, and by gains from reduced time taken to process procurement contracts. Activities toward these
outcomes were to include the adoption of better audit practices, introduction of a debt management system,
certification of procurement professionals, establishment of a procurement management information system
(MIS), and development of information and communication technology (ICT)-based Annual Development
Plans (ADPs).

Outputs/intermediate outcomes/DLIs

      An internal audit function was established (DLI5). The original aim was that at least seven government
         departments would conduct internal audits and submit them to the principal accounting office (PAO),
         and at least five PAOs taking appropriate action in response. At restructuring, the number of audits
         was reduced to four and PAO interventions to three, considering capacity constraints. The revised
         output targets were achieved.
        A budget strategy paper for FY2019/20 was submitted to the Cabinet (DLI6), and all four budget
         execution reports for FY2018/19 were submitted to the Provincial Assembly and published on the
         website of the Finance Department.
        696 procurement officials were certified against a target of 500 (DLI7), and a third party review of the
         certification process was carried out.
        17 quarterly departmental development plan monitoring reports were prepared and published (DLI8),
         achieving the original target of 12 reports published for at least four government departments, all
         carried out under a third party review, and the revised target of 17 quarterly progress reports covering
         six departments.
        Debt management was originally to include comprehensive loan by loan debt stock and flow details in
         the budget documents for FY2017/18. The target was revised downward during restructuring, to
         include only a debt database and a debt manual, and the publication of debt bulletins and a debt
         sustainability analysis; this was achieved.
        Six departments implemented geo-tagging of development schemes for spatial monitoring of
         implementation of development schemes; as well as publishing that information. The target was met.
        Community feedback mechanisms were introduced in five government departments, exceeding
         the target of four departments.

Due to delays in development of the procurement MIS, expected outputs related to contract data being
entered into that system and contracts being processed through the system's procurement modules were
dropped. The MIS was eventually launched "after considerable delays" (ICR, p. 22).

Outcomes

Credibility of budget execution could not be adequately measured due to an uncertain definition and baseline.
Procurement performance stalled due to delays in the introduction of the planned procurement MIS. Of the
two key outcome indicators, the procurement indicator was eliminated altogether at restructuring (although

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



                              the Bank team continued to provide technical assistance that subsequently resulted in improved processes),
                              credibility in budget execution was replaced by “transparency” while retaining the credibility targets.
                              Achievement of the objective as defined under the original outcome indicators and targets is therefore rated
                              Modest.



                              Rating
                              Modest


                              OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              Strengthen public sector performance in Sindh through improved expenditure management (revised outcome
                              indicators/targets)

                              Revised Rationale
                              After restructuring, improved expenditure management was to be achieved by increasing transparency in
                              budget formulation, allocation, and execution, and strengthening related oversight mechanisms. This outcome
                              was achieved through several of the outputs noted above, including the publication of development plan
                              monitoring reports and budget execution reports.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original outcome indicators/targets: Progress on improved revenue generation exceeded
                            targets that were set for STS collection. However, the performance is tempered by the likelihood of the STS
                            revenue generated being influenced by external, not project-related factors, on economic activity.
                            Achievement of the first objective is therefore rated substantial, with caveats. Achievement of improved
                            expenditure management, as defined under the original outcome indicators/targets, was modest, as budget
                            "credibility" was ill-defined and there was no progress on procurement due to delays in implementing the
                            planned MIS. Consequently, efficacy under the original outcome targets is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



  Under the revised outcome indicators/targets: The rating for the first objective, which was not revised,
  remains substantial. Efficacy for the second objective under the revised outcome indicators/targets is rated
  substantial, as there was evidence of improved transparency in budget formulation, allocation, and execution.
  With a substantial rating for both objectives under the revised project, efficacy is rated substantial.




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD and the ICR both undertook an economic analysis of the project, noting that its net present value,
albeit difficult to quantify, was nevertheless likely to be positive. The present value based on actual revenue data
was estimated at US$1.036 billion, substantially exceeding the equivalent PAD high estimate of US$56.3
million. The benefits mainly derived from improved capacity to collect revenues and enhanced management of
public finances. Implementation was favorably influenced by the commitment demonstrated by the government,
and a participatory process that drew together provincial government agencies as well as donors. Still, the
project faced implementation issues, including "severe bottlenecks which slowed the implementation of
activities" (ICR, p. 26), challenges related to the Sindh government's mandate, implementation capacity, and
commitment to adopting the proposed reforms (ICR, p. 26), uncertain demand for reform which, if assessed
during project preparation, could "have averted most of the implementation delays" (ICR, p. 27), and high
turnover of Bank and project staff (ICR, p. 27). These implementation challenges do not reflect the project
extension by six months, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, namely the inability of suppliers to
move equipment or complete final testing. The shortcomings noted were reflected in progress being rated
Moderately Unsatisfactory by several supervision missions. Further extensions were avoided by revising some
of the project's outcome and intermediate outcome targets.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome indicators/targets, relevance was rated high, while efficiency and efficacy were rated
modest, for an overall Outcome rating of moderately unsatisfactory.

Under the revised outcome indicators, relevance was rated high, efficacy was rated substantial, and efficiency
was rated modest, for an overall Outcome rating of moderately satisfactory.

According to OPCS/IEG guidelines for restructured projects, the final Outcome rating is determined by the
ratings for the original project and the restructured project, weighted by the percentage of the Credit that
disbursed before and after restructuring. In this case, US$30.08 million, or 63.5 percent of the total
disbursement of US$47.38 million, was disbursed under the original outcome indicators/targets.

The weighted value of the outcome under the original outcome indicators/targets is calculated as follows: 3 for
moderately unsatisfactory x 0..635 = 1.905.

The weighted value of the outcome under the revised outcome indicators/targets is: 4 for moderately
satisfactory x 0.365 = 1.46.

The weighted average is 1.905 + 1.46 = 3.365, which rounds to 3. Therefore, the combined overall Outcome
rating is moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the World Bank’s project team, the operation’s outcomes are rooted in strong sense of political
and administrative ownership, as policies underlying the PDO in terms of both revenue generation and
expenditure management have been internalized by the provincial government, mitigating the political risk
that outcomes achieved through the operation would not be maintained. Still, challenges may arise over
time despite the apparent broad support for the reforms, such as the risk of losing key champions, multi-
agency coordination, and eventual resistance to evolving reforms. Capacity risks were identified and
addressed by several of the institutional reforms introduced under the project, such as staff training, better
tax collection, and better information systems for public expenditure management.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



  The operation was strategically relevant and aligned with government and Bank priorities. It drew on the
  Sindh government’s tax revenue mobilization plan for introducing medium-term reforms in revenue
  mobilization, as well as public financial management reform plans using PEFA 2014 findings as a
  foundation. The introduction of a results-based financing modality drew on previous Bank experiences in
  applying that modality to reform programs (e.g. the Sindh Education Sector Project,
  P107300). Implementation arrangements built on existing government mechanisms, with a steering
  committee overseeing project management. Extensive consultations were carried out between
  government and Bank teams during preparation. The Bank teams also collaborated with the EU which
  was supporting PFM reform, focusing on aspects of budget credibility, budget execution and reporting,
  and accountability.

  While collaboration between the government and Bank teams may have been close, the Bank’s
  assessment of institutional capacity in Sindh to implement the operation would fall short. Capacity
  constraints had been identified by the Bank team during preparation, and precautionary measures taken,
  notably in recruitment and training of staff, but this would prove to be insufficient as limited capacity
  continued to make itself felt throughout implementation. Timelines for implementation might have
  received closer scrutiny, as might other challenges to implementation, such as building institutional
  mechanisms designed to manage stakeholder risk, and enrolling taxpayers and internal government
  stakeholders in the reform.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team extended necessary handholding and implementation support, granted by a
 multidisciplinary team. At mid-term, adjustments were made - with two out of three PDO-level indicators
 difficult to monitor (one dropped, one revised), and ten out of 15 intermediate results indicators either
 revised or dropped, the results framework was restructured to allow completion of the operation. This
 made it possible for the now-truncated project to stay on track, and it was upgraded from Moderately
 Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory by the Bank team, at which level it remained until project
 closing. While the project had Bank staff turnover, this neither caused any negative impact on the project
 implementation pace nor affected the engagement with the client; in fact, the proactivity and readiness of
 the Bank staff allow to provide technical advice and extend its support to the PIU on critical implementation
 matters.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original results framework did not define outcome indicators to measure achievement of improved
 expenditure management. Budget credibility was not well defined, which led to the need to restructure the
 project to clarify the expected outcome of budget transparency and to drop or revise intermediate outcome
 indicators and DLIs. The project team also explained that there was an implicit division of labor with the EU,
 with this project focusing on budget transparency, while the EU focused on budget execution and internal
 checks and controls; that division of labor was not reflected in the broader statement of the PDO. The
 results framework as presented in the ICR (p. 7) provided a logical sequence of activities that was
 consistent with key outcomes and the PDO.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring of implementation was conducted by Bank missions and by an M&E cell that was established
  within the Sindh Planning and Development Department (P&DD). The P&DD, which has overall
  responsibility for tracking and assessing development schemes, established a dashboard for tracking and
  reporting of implementation progress and deliverables. Third-party verification was also used to validate
  performance, including of intermediate outcome indicators and DLIs. The M&E system was strengthened
  with improved mechanisms to monitor implementation, compliance with procurement and financial
  management procedures, and achievement of performance indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  Information drawn from quarterly and annual reports was used by the Project Implementation Unit to
  improve project implementation and management, and findings were publicly shared. However, the ICR
  (pp. 22 and 23) notes that there is insufficient evidence to assess how and how effectively available data
  was used during project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was assessed as a Category C project. The project involved no construction or physical works,
   focusing on systemic reforms that had no environmental or social implications. No safeguard policies were
   triggered.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Financial management arrangements, which mainly supported the provincial
   government's expenditures through its recurrent budgeting, remained adequate during the life of the
   project. Disbursements were made upon the achievement of DLIs, which were verified by third party
   validation. All DLIs were met within the required timeframe, and related funds were disbursed. The project
   prepared regular financial reports with support provided by the Bank team. The Bank received the project’s
   audited Annual Financial Statements within six months of each financial year. The external audit was
   conducted in accordance with the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions, and the Auditor
   General of Pakistan expressed an unqualified opinion in the audit reports, which were submitted during
   each financial year. Financial management issues identified in the early phase of implementation were
   identified and addressed in a timely manner.

   Procurement. Originally, the procurement needs of the project were to be identified by relevant project
   agencies and coordinated by the Finance Department and the Sindh Revenue Board; non-SRB
   procurement was to be coordinated by the Finance Department. The procedures proved slow, and a new
   procurement plan was prepared under the project's second component to accelerate the allocation of funds
   and implementation of activities. The new plan better clarified timelines and procedures. Expected results
   in public procurement were adjusted because of the complexity of the proposed reform, as well as the
   limited results achieved prior to restructuring.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                The majority of project funds
                                                                                were disbursed under the
                                                                                original outcome
                                                                                indicators/targets, under which
                                                    Moderately                  achievement was modest.
Outcome                        Satisfactory
                                                    Unsatisfactory              Project efficiency was rated
                                                                                modest due to significant
                                                                                implementation inefficiencies
                                                                                that impacted project
                                                                                performance.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



                                                                                    Shortcomings in project design
                                                                                    impacted the pace of
                                                                                    implementation and
                                                                                    achievement of results under the
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    original outcome
                                                                                    indicators/targets, requiring
                                                                                    project restructuring, which was
                                                                                    carried out relatively late.
                                                                                    The project's original outcome
                                                                                    indicators and targets were not
                                                                                    clearly defined, requiring
                                                                                    restructuring, and according to
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Modest
                                                                                    the ICR, there is insufficient
                                                                                    evidence to determine how
                                                                                    available data were used during
                                                                                    implementation.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR.

Understanding the political context – risks and potential mitigating measures – is as
important at sub-national as national levels. Difficulties that arose during implementation of the
Sindh project – notably ones related to meeting targets – could not all have been forestalled, but
some might have been alleviated with a better understanding of the regional government’s mandate:
when it comes to adopting measures to enhance tax revenue mobilization, strengthen the
performance of PFM systems, the management of the development portfolio, and the strengthening
of the public procurement system, an understanding of the limits of sub-national autonomy is
critical. In the case of the Sindh project, the realism of at least some of the targets set for the project
might have been better achieved with a more thorough understanding of the constraints in the
political economy.

 Early project restructuring can turn around an initially non-performing project. Bank teams
often wait until the mid-term review to comprehensively assess project performance when an earlier
restructuring might avoid implementation difficulties and delays. It may not salvage non- or weakly
performing components, but it might nevertheless be meaningful in salvaging and allowing a refocus
on other better-performing components.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform (P145617)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR concisely summarizes the background factors that underpinned the relevance of project
design. However, it could have benefited from a more careful analysis of challenges that seem to have been
overlooked in preparing and implementing the project. These challenges are noted in the ICR's lessons and
recommendations (pp. 26-27), but they are not reflected in the main text of the document. There is therefore
insufficient information on the extent and manner in which capacity constraints, buy-in, etc., affected project
performance, and how such issues were addressed to ensure completion of the project. A more thoughtful
approach to the discussion around the intended outcomes of budget “credibility” vs “transparency” would also
have been helpful. Mostly, while the ICR presents the project's results framework and raises salient points, it
does not provide a clear understanding of the logic between activities, outputs, and outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
