     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022821

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P090990                                   Western Indonesia National Roads Improv.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                 Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80430                                31-Dec-2017                                         223,780,891.76

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2011                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           228,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       224,160,404.03                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman           Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement dated December 14,
   2011 (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4):

   " To increase the effective use of selected sections of national roads along the Western Sumatera
   corridor by reducing road user costs."



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



   Revised PDO (following earthquakes and tsunamis in the island of Sulawesi in December 2018):

   " To increase the effective use of selected sections of national roads along the Western Sumatera
   Corridor by reducing road user costs and to restore the functionality of selected sections of national
   and sub-national roads in disaster-affected areas in Central Sulawesi."

   This review is based on the following PDOs:

   1. To increase the effective use of selected sections of national roads along the Western Sumatera Corridor
   by reducing road user costs.

   2. To restore the functionality of selected sections of national and sub-national roads in disaster-affected
   areas in Central Sulawesi.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  12-Apr-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 4 - 5).

   1. Betterment and capacity expansion of national roads. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$314.9
   million. The actual cost was US$253.3 million. Activities in this component were: (i) Betterment of national
   roads (betterment in the Indonesian context typically involved base course strengthening, minor
   widening, new asphalt wearing course and improving drainage); and (ii) capacity expansion of about 715.6
   kilometers (km) of national roads and replacement of about 194 meters (m) of bridges.

   The scope of this component was reduced with the targets for roads to be improved reduced from 715.6 km
   to 578 km and that for bridges from 194 m to 160 m through the second project restructuring (discussed in
   section 2e).

   2. Implementation Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$16.0 million. The actual cost was
   US$14.2 million. This component planned to provide implementation support to the Ministry of Public
   Works (MPW). Activities in this component were: (i) financing the core team (design and supervision
   consultants) and road safety audits; and (ii) project management support and support for technical audits.

   3. Road Sector Institutional Development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.0 million. The
   actual cost was US$0.0 million. Activities in this component were: Technical assistance and capacity

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



  building support to strengthen disaster risk mitigation in the road sector, including support to the newly-
  formed environment risk mitigation and road safety unit of the Directorate General of Highways (DGH) in
  the MPW for conducting disaster risk assessments and planning, risk mapping of landslides, coastal
  erosion, earthquakes and floods, and analysis of alternate designs for road segments that passed through
  critical and vulnerable areas.

  This component was cancelled with the first project restructuring (discussed in section 2e).

  4. Contingency for Disaster Risk Response. A provisional zero dollar component was included under
  the project for rapid reallocations of loan proceeds in the event of an emergency, under streamlined
  procurement and disbursement procedures. In addition to reallocating funds from other components, the
  contingent component could serve as a conduit for additional funds to be channeled to the project. The
  component was triggered during implementation. The actual cost of this component was US$18.9 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$350.0 million (inclusive of physical and price
  contingencies). The actual cost was US$286.5 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$250.0 million. The actual amount
  disbursed was US$228.0 million. Unused loan proceeds of US$22.0 million (due to the depreciation of the
  Indonesian Rupiah (INR) since signing of the loan agreement), were cancelled. In addition, US$31,807 was
  refunded by the Government due to an ineligible expenditure observed by the Audit Board and the Financial
  and Development Supervisory Agency on December 13, 2021.

  Borrower contribution. The Borrower contribution was estimated at US$100.0 million at appraisal. Their
  actual contribution was US$62.6 million.

  Dates. The project approved on May 26, 2011, became effective on March 12, 2012, and was scheduled to
  close on December 31, 2017. However, the project closed three and half years behind schedule on June
  30, 2021 for reasons detailed below.

  Other changes. There were four project restructurings during the project lifetime.

  The Bank supported the following changes through the first project restructuring on February 23, 2016.

        The institutional strengthening activity was dropped. The Directorate General of Highways (DGH)
         Sub-directorate of Road Environmental and Safety was newly created when this project
         was prepared. Since its inception, that Unit was growing, receiving more visibility, and carrying out
         capacity building and technical assistance on disaster risk management (DRM). Since they had local
         resources for their work, it took DGH until the end of 2014 to come up with the terms of reference
         for activities under component three, which were a continuation of the work they had been
         doing. When the procurement started, a new Minister questioned the rationale for using the loan
         proceeds for activities they had been financing on their own. Consequently DGH cancelled
         the component three activity.
        An additional activity of slope protection management was added as the DGH had limited
         experience in this area.

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



         Funds were reallocated between categories.

   The following changes were made with the second project restructuring on November 23, 2017.

         The target for rehabilitation of roads and bridges was reduced, as these road links were resurfaced
          with local funds and reported to be in good condition.
         The closing date was extended by a year from December 31, 2017, to December 31, 2018 for
          completing the delayed project activities.

   The following major changes were made with the third project restructuring on December 21, 2018.

         Following the devastating earthquakes and tsunamis that struct the Sulawesi island in September
          2018, the Bank, at government request, activated the component four activity (contingency for
          disaster risk). This enabled the rapid allocation of unused loan proceeds to rehabilitate and
          reconstruct the damaged road sections in Sulawesi island.
         The closing date was extended by twenty six months from December 31, 2018, to February 28,
          2021, for completing the activities in Sulawesi island.

   The following changes were made with the fourth project restructuring on February 21, 2021.

         The closing date was extended by four months from February 28, 2021, to June 30, 2021, for
          completing the activities in Central Sulawesi that had been delayed due to the restrictions in the
          wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
         Unused loan proceeds of US$22.0 million due to the depreciation of the INR were cancelled.

   Split rating. This review is not based on a split rating of objectives. The first PDO remained
   unchanged, and the original design had provisions for contingency for disaster risk management (although
   no funding had been allocated to this component at appraisal). This component was triggered in the wake
   of the earthquakes and tsunamis that stuck Central Sulawesi. Although the km of roads to be improved
   were significantly reduced, additional activities were added in the wake of the earthquakes and tsunamis
   that stuck Central Sulawesi, and part of the unused loan was diverted for undertaking the additional
   activities. Given that the additional PDO was a reflection of the activities that were added during
   implementation, a split rating was not deemed to be necessary.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The road mode accounts for about 70% of domestic freight and 82% of
interurban passenger land travel in Indonesia. Although the overall density of the road network in
Indonesia, at 14.95/10,000 population, ranked well against other Asian countries, the spatial road density
at 0.185 km per square km was low due to the regional disparities in population density and other
characteristics that existed among the main island groups. Analysis at appraisal suggested that when
viewed against economic activity, although the road network was adequate in sparsely populated areas,
it was inadequate in areas of high economic activity, such as Java and Western Sumatera. Further, road

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



travel speeds were low, averaging 42 Km/hour on the national road network. The low speeds were a
reflection of poor geometric road standards, poor traffic management, and other land use issues along the
roads right of way. To keep pace with the rising demand, road capacity, traffic management and land use
management were required in areas of high economic activity.

The West Coast corridor that traverses through Sumaetra, was undergoing an agricultural and industrial
transformation in the years before appraisal. A number of its road sections were relatively narrow, 4.5
meters wide and had reached their capacity. The provinces on the West Coast of Sumaetra,
including Northern Sumetra were also vulnerable to earthquakes. The September 2009 earthquake in
Western Sumaetra caused significant damage to infrastructure. More importantly, the collective damage to
national, provincial and district roads interrupted connectivity and isolated many areas for several days. The
PDO of increasing the capacity of the road on the West Coast of Sumaetra and adopting disaster risk
management measures was important to the Government strategy.

Government strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with two priorities of the Government's Medium-Term
Development Plan for 2020 - 2024, namely: (i) Strengthening Infrastructure to support economic
development and basic services; and (ii) Developing regions to reduce inequality. The
Government included disaster management in the Medium-Term Development Plan for 2010 - 2014, and
subsequently launched the National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction.

Bank strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the core engagement area
two of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009 - 2012 specifically referenced infrastructure
development, and articulated the need for supporting institutions, both public and private, in finding ways to
bridge the infrastructure financing gap, and strengthening the accountability and capacity of institutions to
deliver better outcomes. For the road sector, the CPS highlighted the need for strengthening
the institutional framework at the national and regional levels in the areas of fiduciary, operational
and technical management systems. The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2021 -
2025 recognized that the road infrastructure was "uneven and that accessibility to some remote areas
remained low, leading to high poverty and unemployment in those regions". The engagement pillar two of
the CPF articulated the need for " improving infrastructure for easing regional disparities and promoting
inclusion".

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has financed several roads projects in Indonesia, including through
the Infrastructure Development Policy Loan (IDPL) series, phase one and two of the Eastern Indonesia
National Roads Improvement Project (EINRIP), and when this project was prepared was financing the
ongoing Strategic Roads Infrastructure Project (SRIP). The design of this project was similar to those of the
ongoing projects.

However, considering a continuous engagement of the Bank in the road sector in Indonesia, the PDO was
output-oriented and not pitched to address a specific development challenge. The PDO does not
mention the institutional dimension of the project. Although the PDO was well-aligned with the Government
priorities and the Bank's current CPF, the relevance of the PDO is assessed as substantial, in view of the
relatively low ambition of the PDO.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase the effective use of selected sections of national roads along the Western Sumatera Corridor by
               reducing road user costs.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The outputs such as base course strengthening, minor widening, expanding capacity of
               national roads and bridges were aimed at improving the quality of the national road network on the Western
               Sumatera corridor. These activities along with the institutional strengthening of the MPW and the DGH for
               disaster risk mitigation were aimed at improving the condition of roads in the corridor. These activities were
               likely to aid in the long-term development outcome of improving connectivity and integration of the economy.
               The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended
               outcomes were monitorable. The theory of change however does not clearly define the "effective use of
               selected sections of national roads".

               The theory of change is based on the following assumptions: (i) Contractors show an interest in bidding for
               road packages; (ii) procurement is done in a timely fashion; (iii) Technical assistance is provided to the DGH
               for disaster risk mitigation in the road sector; (iv) The technical design is of high-quality; and (v) The project
               management unit is established with sufficient capacity.

               Outputs (ICR, pages 29 - 32).

                     578 km of national roads in Western Sumatra in the project region were improved as per the revised
                        target (short of the original target of 715 km).
                       160 m of bridges were improved as per the revised target (short of the original target of 194 m).
                       Five slope protection designs were completed, exceeding the target of three.
                       68 Technical and Financial Audit Consultant inspections were carried out in Western Sumatera. It is
                        not clear if there were initially planned or carried out to responce to the issues during implementation.
                       Road safety measures were adopted in the road sections. These measures included; (i) enhancement
                        of road alignment, especially in curve sections; (ii) adoption of additional road marking, traffic signs,
                        guardrails and other road safety furniture; and (iii) construction of concrete shoulders. Technical and
                        road safety audits for all the road packages were completed as targeted.
                       4,000 temporary jobs were provided on the road sites during implementation.

               Outcomes (ICR, pages 8 - 9).

               The outputs described above were expected to lead to the outcomes of: (i) increasing the Annual Average
               Daily Traffic (AADT) on the project roads (AADT defined as the simple average of the AADT on the nineteen
               project road sections); (ii) travel time changes for three types of vehicles (light vehicles, large buses and



                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



heavy trucks); (iii) reduction in road user costs for selected vehicle categories (light vehicles, large buses and
heavy trucks).

      The AADT on the selected sections of national roads on the Western Sumatra corridor increased from
       7,505 at the baseline in May 26, 2011, to 14,490, slightly short of the revised target of 14,544. While
       the AADT on the selected road sections cannot be fully attributable to the project activities given the
       robust economic growth in Indonesia from 2010 to 2020, it is reasonable to assume that the project
       contributed to this outcome.
      The average vehicle operating cost (VOC) for a typical car along the corridor reduced by eight
       percent, as compared to the target of five percent. The average VOC for a typical bus reduced by
       18 percent, as compared to the target of eight percent. The average VOC for a typical heavy truck
       reduced by fourteen percent, as compared to the target of ten percent.
      The average passenger travel time for light vehicles reduced by 21.11%, exceeding the target of 20%.
       The average passenger travel time for large buses reduced by 20.72%, exceeding the target of 20%.
       The average passenger travel time for heavy trucks reduced by 20% as targeted.
      About 4.2 million of people, people living in the vicinity of the four provinces in the island of Sumatra
       (North Sumatra, West Sumatra, Bengkulu and Lampung) are reported to have benefitted from project
       activities, exceeding the target of approximately four million people estimated at appraisal.

In sum, given that the outcomes were realized for the most part, efficacy of this objective is assessed as
substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To restore the functionality of selected sections of national and sub-national roads in disaster-affected areas
in Central Sulawesi

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs such as rehabilitation/reconstruction and maintenance of national and sub-
national roads in the disaster-affected areas of the Central Sulawesi region were likely to restore their
functionality. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the
intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 32 - 34).

      48.39 km of national roads in the disaster-affected areas of Central Sulawesi were rehabilitated as per
       the revised target (short of the original target of 54.20 km).
      23.57 of sub-national roads in Central Sulawesi were rehabilitated as per the revised target (short of
       the original target of 26.80 km).
      31.67 km of roads in Central Sulawesi were provided with maintenance as targeted.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)




                                  863 m of bridges were provided with maintenance in Central Sulawesi, slightly short of the original
                                   target of 899.5 m.
                                  Capacity building actions (such as trainings and workshops) and Technical and Financial Audit
                                   Consultant inspections were carried out in Central Sulawesi as targeted.

                            Outcomes (ICR, page 9).

                            The outputs described above were expected to restore the damaged roads to pre-disaster good road
                            condition in Central Sulawesi.

                                  Twelve road infrastructure sections in the damaged areas of Central Sulawesi were restored to pre-
                                    disaster good road condition, as per the revised target. This exceeded the original target of five road
                                    infrastructure sections in the damaged areas of Central Sulawesi.

                            Given that the revised targets were met, efficacy of this PDO is assessed as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is assessed as substantial, given that the revised PDOs were realized for the most part.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted using the Highway Development and Management
   Model (Version 2.1) for component one activities. This component accounted for about 88% of the appraisal
   estimate and 85% of the actual cost. The methodology entailed comparing the situation predicted to occur with
   the project improvements (project case), and the situation if the project were not implemented (base case).
   The project benefits were assumed to come from the higher speeds on the improved roads. The total Net
   Present Value (NPV) at project closure was INR 6.036.15 billion, as compared to the NPV of 285.16 million at
   appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 36.90%, as compared to the ex-ante EIRR
   of 29.90%.




                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



Administrative and operational issues during implementation. There were several operational
shortcomings. First, the project had slow start for a combination of factors including, delays in commencing the
civil works activities due to the delays in hiring the project management support. coordination issues between
the entities involved in project implementation, inadequate project ownership at all levels, land acquisition and
preparation of Involuntary Resettlement Action Plans, delays with counterpart funding, and lengthy discussions
on procurement aspects. Second, there were cost overruns, with the cost per km of the road packages 28%
higher than the appraisal estimate. While the cost overruns were partly due to the adoption of new pavement
design standards (which increased the pavement design life from ten to twenty years), other factors such as
delays in the completion of bidding process and the low-quality of the original cost estimates played a part in
contributing to the cost-overruns. Despite the cost escalation, some important activities (such as the institutional
strengthening activities) were dropped; (iii) There were quality shortcomings in some road packages due to
factors, such as sub-standard stone masonry, poor drainage systems, asphalt segregation, cracks and potholes.
The ICR (paragraph 25) acknowledges that while most of the observed deficiencies were addressed during the
defect liability period, some of them may persist. This raises questions about the sustainability of the
outcomes; (iv) It is not clear if there was value for money for the US$14.2 million spent for implementation
support (component two activity); and (v) There were time over-runs, with the project closing three and half
years behind schedule. While some of the delays were beyond the project control (such as due to the physical
restrictions on movements due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the final year of the project), it is likely that the time
overruns were partly due to the delays in the initial years of the project.

In sum, efficiency is assessed as modest, given the administrative and operational shortcomings during
implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      88.00
 Appraisal                                                  29.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      85.00
 ICR Estimate                                               36.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies and efficacy of the two PDOs is assessed as
substantial. Efficiency is modest, given the administrative and operational shortcomings during implementation.
Taking these ratings into account, the overall outcome is assessed as moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is substantial risk to the sustainability of the development outcome, as it
is unclear whether there would be sufficient budgetary allocation for preserving the roads improved under
this project (preservation refers to routine and periodic maintenance, minor and major rehabilitation and
reconstruction works). The ICR (paragraph 62) observes that the 2020 World Bank Public Expenditure
Review (PER) noted that although funding for road preservation has received a greater proportion of
government spending in recent years, budgetary allocation was still insufficient when compared to the needs.

As noted in section five, the quality of some road packages of this project was sub-optimal. There is the risk
that this may lead to relatively low life cycles and hence necessitate implementation treatments sooner than
expected. Nevertheless, the decision to increase the pavement design life from 10 to 20 years will prolong
the life cycles and mitigate the lower level of maintenance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from Bank-financed previous and ongoing road
  sector projects (discussed in section three). The major lessons incorporated at design: (i) Since the
  previous Bank-financed infrastructure-projects faced implementation delays due to the slow procurement
  process, the design aimed at timely engagement of the consulting services to confirm to the readiness of
  implementation (However, as discussed in section five, the issues were not fully resolved and there were
  procurement delays in the initial years of the project); and (ii) Since corruption was identified as an issue
  in the country context, implementing monitoring aspects of the Anti-Corruption Plan would mitigate the
  procurement-related corruption risk by using computerized reporting and tracking systems, e-
  procurement and a complaints handling mechanism.

  The implementation arrangements proved to be more appropriate. This included: (i) the Directorate
  General of Highways (DGH) in the Ministry of Public Works (MPW) in charge of
  overall implementation; (ii) The Directorate of Planning (DOP) which had recently established a sub-
  directorate dedicated to the implementation of Foreign Loan projects, as the Project Management Unit
  (PMU) in charge of implementing the day-to-day project activities.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including high risks with the weak implementation capacity of
  the PMU and corruption risk. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included establishing
  Procurement Services Unit at the national, provincial and district levels, and developing an Anti-
  Corruption Plan. With mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as moderate at appraisal


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



  (PAD, page 34). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance led to a
  moderately satisfactory performance of these aspects (discussed in sections 9 and 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings in quality-at-entry, including insufficient risk mitigation and road
  works design issues that led to numerous inefficiencies during the project implementation. There were
  also M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paragraph 60) notes that supervision missions were held twice a year and twenty-two
 Implementation Status Results (ISR) Reports were prepared during the project lifetime. The supervision
 team effectively addressed most of the challenges during implementation. This included, restructuring the
 project in the wake of the devastating earthquakes that impacted the island of Sulawesi in September
 2018, rectifying the deficiencies in M&E design (discussed in section 9b), mobilizing additional experts
 (road safety and gender specialists), mobilizing additional Trust Fund resources to bridge the knowledge
 gaps, building Government capacity for project management, and providing timely and comprehensive
 measures to address the fatal accident that occurred in 2019 (discussed in Section 10a).

 There were moderate shortcomings in supervision. It is not clear from the ICR if the Bank was
 proactive enough in pushing for retaining the institutional strengthening component of the project or work
 around Operation and Maintenance (O&M) issues. Also, it is also not clear if the Bank did enough to
 address delays in the provision of counterpart funding.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is assessed as moderately satisfactory for the shortcomings at Quality-
 at-Entry and at Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was logical and the key outcome indicators - the Average Annual Daily Traffic
 (AADT), changes in vehicle operating costs for selected vehicle categories (cars, buses and heavy trucks),
 travel time changes for three types of vehicles (cars, buses and trucks) and the direct project beneficiaries


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



 were appropriate for monitoring PDO 1, which was output-oriented and pitched at a low level of the results
 chain. The selected indicators were largely standard variables used in the economic analysis.

 There were some shortcomings in M&E framework. One, the methodology for collecting data for AADT was
 not clearly specified at appraisal and two, there were no appropriate indicators for monitoring the
 institutional dimension, the quality of the road network or the road safety aspects of the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The methodology for collecting data on AADT was specified during implementation. Following the
  triggering of the disaster risk management component of the project, indicators were specified for
  monitoring the quality of roads. The ICR (paragraph 46) notes that the Project Management Unit (PMU),
  which was responsible for collecting data on travel times, updated the data on a semi-annual basis. The
  data for monitoring AADT were monitored by the DGH regional offices through traffic surveys. It was
  envisioned at design that this project would be one of the projects to pilot an Information Technology (IT)-
  based National Road Project Monitoring System (SIPP) being developed by the MPW at appraisal. The
  ICR notes, however, that while the SIPP was adopted and active, it was not used for this project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 48) observes that the M&E findings were regularly shared with stakeholders. The
  ICR also notes that since the M&E arrangements under the project were specific to the project and were
  not institutionalized, it is unlikely that their use will persist beyond the project completion.

  While some of the M&E shortcomings in design were corrected during implementation, the new
  indicators were output-oriented, and did not provide sufficient value in understanding what development
  outcomes were realized.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, Data Sheet).
   No other safeguard policies were triggered during implementation.

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (paragraphs 51 and 52)
   observed that the environmental impacts of the civil works activities were expected to be related to
   construction-related impacts. These were expected to occur mostly along the alignment of the selected road
   segments, with some impacts potentially occurring at offsite locations (such as quarry sites and spoiled

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



  material disposal sites). The safeguards for physical cultural resources was triggered as graves and
  cemeteries could be affected. An Economic and Social Management Framework (ESFF) was prepared and
  publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address these issues.

  Compliance with environmental safeguards was moderately satisfactory during implementation (ICR,
  paragraph 51). The Directorate General of Highways (DGH) prepared Environmental Impact Assessments
  and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), that were disclosed on the project website. The ICR notes
  that the application of environmental and safety practice requirements varied among road packages.
  Though there was environmental compliance for some packages, there were recurrent environmental
  shortcomings during implementation in some road packages (such as, poor house-keeping practices in the
  basecamps, oil/fuel spills in the asphalt mixing plant and deficiencies using personal protective equipment
  during work). Although the base camps were demobilized and returned relatively clean to the respective
  landowners, few environmental issues needed to be addressed (limited soil contamination due to fuel and
  lubricant leakages). The ICR does not mention of any issues with the safeguards on Physical Cultural
  Resources.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 46) observed that the sub-projects will require land
  acquisition and resettlement. A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF)
  was prepared and publicly-disclosed after consultations.

  The project complied with the involuntary resettlement safeguards (ICR, paragraph 52). The affected people
  were duly compensated with the replacement cost based on the appraisal conducted by qualified external
  personnel. The final monitoring reports submitted by the DGH were deemed to be satisfactory. The ICR
  notes that Human Immunodeficiency/Autoimmune Disease/Sexually Transmitted Diseases (HIV/AIDS/STD)
  prevention workshops were conducted for all the road packages. The ICR (paragraph 53) notes that the
  Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) was operational throughout the project life, and that a total of
  twenty four complaints were received and resolved during the project lifetime.

  The ICR (paragraph 54) notes that a fatal traffic accident occurred on July 27, in which a site engineer was
  killed. The cause of the accident was a human error that could have been prevented if adequate traffic
  management provisions had been deployed. The accident was properly handled according to the World
  Bank Environmental and Social Response Toolkit (ESIRT). The deceased family received the entire
  compensation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial assessment of the Department Of Planning
  (DOP) at appraisal. The DOP had experience in managing Bank projects. A Financial Management Plan
  was developed at appraisal. The assessment concluded that implementing the actions of the Action Plan
  would satisfy the Bank's financial requirements (PAD, page 40).

  The ICR (paragraph 55) notes that the financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory during
  implementation. The ICR notes that during implementation several overpayments and questionable
  expenditures were noted. However, most of these findings were followed up and actions taken properly by
  the implementing agents. Audit reports and Interim Financial Reports were submitted in a timely fashion
  and the audit reports were unqualified. The final audit report was due on June 30, 2022. A sum of

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



   US$31,807 was refunded by the Government due to an ineligible expenditure observed by the Audit Board
   and the Financial and Development Supervisory Agency on December 13, 2021.

   Procurement management. The Directorate General of Highways (DGH) was in charge of procurement.
   The Bank conducted an assessment of DGH at appraisal. The assessment concluded that the DGH had
   the capacity to carry out the procurement activities (PAD, page 43).

   The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that procurement management was rated as moderately satisfactory during
   implementation. Although there were delays in the initial years of the project, issues regarding procurement
   were gradually rectified. The ICR does not report any case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest                    Shortcomings in M&E design.

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following major lessons with some adaptation of language.

1. Inter-agency coordination issues and advancing procurement at preparation can help in
reducing downstream delays during implementation. This is especially important in countries
where such delays have occurred repeatedly in the past. The late coordination of the main project
stakeholders and engagement of implementation support consulting services in this project led to
significant downstream delays during implementation. Proactive actions to enable early inter-agency
coordination and engagement of implementation support to prepare designs prior to the physical
works implementation would have helped in preventing such delays.

2. Poor or inadequate engineering designs at preparation can critically affect the
sustainability of project outcomes. Ineffective pavement designs in this project led to premature

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)



failings (cracks and potholes) in some road sections, as the original engineering designs did not
reflect reality on the ground. Road safety and resilience aspects were not systematically addressed
in the engineering designs and a number of deficiencies were observed on the completed road
packages. This led to contract variations orders and price escalation.

3. In countries which are vulnerable to natural disasters, a Contingent Emergency
Component can provide the needed flexibility to adapt to unforeseen events. Activation of the
Contingency for Disaster Risk Response in this project proved to be effective in responding to the
disaster that occurred in September 2018.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  There were quality shortcomings in some road packages due to factors, such as sub-standard
  stone masonry, poor drainage systems, asphalt segregation, cracks and potholes. The ICR (paragraph 25)
  acknowledges that while most of the observed deficiencies were addressed during the defect liability period,
  some of them may persist. Given this, it would be useful to have an assessment of the quality and
  sustainability of road works undertaken under this project.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, thorough and candidly discusses the procurement issues that arose in the early years
of the project. The theory of change provided in the text is logical and clearly shows the links between the
project activities, outputs and expected outcomes. The ICR effectively uses photographs to show the project
activities. The ICR does not provide adequate detail on why there were so many financial and technical audits
during the project execution period.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Western Indonesia National Roads Improv. (P090990)




                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
