     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022828

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P133045                                   NG-State & Local Governance Reform

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18335                                  31-Mar-2017                                          54,068,903.04

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Oct-2014                               31-Mar-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,461,156.03                                    70,461,156.03

 Revised Commitment                            56,558,076.76                                    61,960,563.79

 Actual                                        54,068,903.04                                    54,068,903.04




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Vandana Chandra            Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (p. 5) and Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 10), the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) was “to improve transparency, accountability, and quality in public financial
   management in the participating states.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components.

   Component A: Public Financial Management (PFM) Reforms (Original cost $43.00 million; Actual
   cost $56.55 million). This component was to develop and modernize the PFM systems of the six
   participating states. Its activities included:

        1. Review of existing financial management legislation and regulations, drafting of new legislation and
             regulations where necessary, and organization of sensitization seminars on public finance reforms.
        2. Review and strengthening of systems of control and functionality in PFM with support to the State
             Integrated Financial Management Information System (SIFMIS) in states that were assessed to be
             capable of implementing SIFMIS.
        3.   Strengthening budget execution processes and institutions in the public service, particularly as they
             interfaced with the SIFMIS.
        4.   Review and modernization of accounting and financial reporting.
        5.   Strengthening the state external audit function, including capacity building for members of the public
             accounts committees of the states’ legislatures.
        6.   Strengthening of state tax and internally generated revenue (IGR) administration in participating
             states.
        7.   Support for the development of social accountability mechanisms in key areas such as planning,
             budgeting, and public procurement, which would involve the public in the oversight of the use of
             public resources.
        8.   Review and strengthening of public procurement processes, practices, and institutions, and
             engagement with civil society.
        9.   Capacity building in PFM, including a thorough assessment of the existing skills and training needs
             of ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) responsible for state PFM functions.

   Component B: Support to Local Governance (Original cost $5.50 million; Actual cost $2.68
   million). Activities under this component were to include:

        1. Support for each state to carry out studies on the devolution of authority to Local Governments
           (LGs) or groups of LGs, and dissemination and validation of the outcomes of these studies in
           workshops organized across each state.
        2. Provision of technical assistance to each state government to develop and implement a road map
           for the devolution of authority by the state government to selected agencies responsible for local
           governance.
        3. Strengthening in each state of the selected LGs, the Office of the Auditor General for Local
           Governments, and the Ministry of Local Governments in the areas of accounting, auditing,
           budgeting, procurement, tax administration, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



  Component C: Project Coordination (Original cost $14.50 million; Actual cost $9.06 million). This
  component was to provide technical and logistical support required for the coordination of the project at
  both the federal and state levels.

      1. At the federal level, a National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) was to be located within the
         National Planning Commission (NPC) with responsibility for overall coordination.
      2. At the state level, a State Project Coordination Unit (SPCU) was to be established, responsible for
         day-to-day project management, monitoring, and implementation.

  Performance Challenge Fund and Contingency (Original cost $10.50 million; Actual cost
  $5.21million). An amount equivalent to 14.3 % of the total project cost was unallocated at the beginning of
  the project. According to the PAD (p. 13), the unallocated funds were set aside for Contingencies (7.2 %)
  and a Performance Challenge Fund (7.1%) to provide additional support to states that performed well in
  project implementation results/outcomes and disbursement performance at the time of the mid-term review.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The original project cost was Euro 54,990,000 (PAD, p. 13 and Grant Agreement p. 2). At
  project closing in October 2021, the amount disbursed was Euro 47.8 million. The remaining amount of
  Euro 7.2 million was cancelled (Closure of Grant Account statement, October 25, 2021).

  Financing: This investment project was 100% funded by a Single Donor Trust Fund from the European
  Union (EU) and managed by the Bank, in the form of a grant of EURO 54,990,000.

  Borrower Contribution: None was planned or made.

  Dates: The project was approved on October 17, 2014 and became effective on January 21, 2015. The
  original closing date was March 31, 2017. The project underwent three restructurings.

  The first restructuring was in March 2017 and included an extension of the Grant closing date and end
  target dates in the Results Framework. The project was originally conceived in December 2012 and was to
  be implemented over a five-year period, but due to delays first in the signing of the Administration
  Agreement between the Bank and the EU, followed by disagreements within the Nigerian government over
  which of its agencies would be the Grant recipient, the project’s preparation was delayed for about 22
  months. Following an agreement between the EU and the Bank, the project closing date was extended by
  30 months to September 30, 2019.

  The second restructuring took place in August 2019 and included an extension of twelve additional months
  to the Grant closing and end target dates, from September 30, 2019, to September 30, 2020. The
  restructuring also included a reallocation of funds between the project’s components, as there were savings
  on costs needed to achieve targets for component 2, and a corresponding need related to component 1 due
  to emerging national priorities.[1]

  The third restructuring took place in August 2020 and included a further extension to the Grant closing date
  due to delays caused by COVID-19-related lockdowns. The project’s closing date was extended by six
  additional months from September 30, 2020 to March 31, 2021.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



   During the project restructurings, the PDO and project components remained unchanged.

   [1] For example, a fiscal crisis across the states at that time required most states to receive bailouts from
   the federal government and necessitated increased support to tax administrations across the states for
   improved internal revenue generation. Similarly, the practice of competitive bids across the states required
   additional funds to cover the cost of implementing integrated financial management information
   systems across the states.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was fully aligned to the Bank's country strategy at appraisal and closure. The Nigeria Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2014-2017[1] emphasized: (a) strengthening institutions for PFM; (b) enhancing
transparency and accountability; (c) greater participation through the involvement of civil society (budget
monitoring); and (d) capacity development for PFM. The PDO would also contribute to the Bank's twin
goals of reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, as the state and local tiers of
government are responsible for key areas of service delivery most closely associated with poverty reduction
in their respective jurisdictions. The PDO was consistent with the development objectives of the federal
government as recorded in Vision 2020 and the medium-term strategy for its delivery (Transformation
Agenda 2011-2015). The latter emphasized structural reforms, governance, systems, and institutions at the
federal and the state levels to improve management and transparency in the use of public funds and to
mobilize non-oil revenues.

The PDO remains at the core of the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY21-FY25, which notes
that strengthening governance and institutions is at the foundation of Nigeria’s public sector (p. 15). During
the CPF period, the Bank is to provide support for macroeconomic sustainability; marshaling fiscal
resources; and building the transparency, accountability, and effectiveness of public institutions to deliver
quality public services at the federal and state levels.

The objectives were also highly relevant to country context. PFM systems were generally weak in Nigeria,
but especially so at the sub-national levels of government. Some of the procurement, fiscal responsibility,
and budgetary reforms legislated at the federal level did not automatically apply to sub-national
governments; in some areas, states had to institute their own reforms, and most states were lagging in this
process. A 2011 Public Expenditure Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment for 2008-2010 showed
many challenges across the six PFM dimensions[2] in all six participating states. No state scored higher
than a C on any dimension, and there were as many D scores as C scores (PAD, p. 6).

There was a strategic rationale for the Bank to engage in PFM reforms at the state and local government
levels. As the Bank was already engaged in similar projects in fifteen other Nigerian states, it made sense
to extend the PFM agenda to the six participating states in this project. The federal government also
requested the Bank to support state capacity for PFM reform. Considering the six participating states as
"focal states," the EU committed financing from the European Development Fund 10 (Trust Fund) program
for their PFM reforms. The availability of the EU’s Trust Fund was an opportunity for the Bank to scale up its
PFM reform agenda. Following the completion of Public Expenditure Review/Financial Accountability
Review (PEMFAR) analytical work in the six states, their state governments confirmed their commitment to

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



               the PFM reforms by agreeing to the recommended action plans. The Bank’s engagement would bring in
               wide-ranging international experience to support the participating states in their reform efforts.

               [1] The WBG country program between July 2013 and June 2019 was guided by the FY14-FY17 CPS
               which was approved in March 2014. With disruptions due to elections and a transition in government in
               2019, the life of the CPS was extended to 2019. The new CPS was initially scheduled for FY20 but
               extended to FY21 because of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was approved by the Board in December 2020.

               [2] Credibility of the budget process; comprehensiveness and transparency of budget process; policy-based
               budgeting; predictability and control in budget execution; accounting, recording, and reporting; and external
               scrutiny and audit.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve transparency, accountability, and quality in public financial management in the participating states.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change is applied to assessment of four measurable outcomes that directly contributed
                             to improvements in transparency and quality, and indirectly to improved accountability, in the six participating
                             states (Anambra, Cross River, Jigawa, Kano, Osun, and Yobe).

                             The four main measurable outcomes were:
                             1) State government audited accounts submitted within six months from the end of the financial year to their
                             respective legislatures.
                             2) State governments implement three key modules of the SIFMIS.
                             3) Substantial growth in actual collection of IGR.
                             4) Procurement reform enacted in the states.

                             Theory of change

                             The project would support the long overdue preparation and enactment of Audit Laws in states where none
                             existed and support revisions and updating in states with outdated audit laws. Combined with capacity
                             building and information technology (IT)-based modernization of accounting and reporting, these outputs
                             would facilitate the regular and timely production of annual audits to enhance the state legislatures' oversight
                             function, and allow civil society organizations (CSOs) and citizens to better hold state and local governments



                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



accountable. While directly improving the transparency and quality of PFM, the timely availability of audits for
the state legislatures and the public has the potential to increase the accountability of the PFM system.

The project would directly support transparency and quality improvements in the public procurement process
by facilitating modern procurement legislation where none existed or updating it in states where it was
outdated. The appropriate training of officials, updated documentation and IT tools, and passage of new
public procurement laws would contribute to greater competition in the public procurement process,
potentially resulting in a larger share of public contracts being competitively awarded. The increased use of
competitive procedures and the publication of public contracts awarded would boost the transparency of
public procurement. By empowering the public to monitor the awarding of contracts, this process would also
increase accountability in public procurement.

Considering the wide range and number of PFM problems in the states, the project sought to support fiscal
legislation necessary to implement modern PFM practices as well as build capacity for modern budget
preparation, execution, and reporting systems to improve the quality of PFM. The adoption of three modules
of the SIFMIS system (General Ledger, Budgeting and HRMIS) was a critical outcome that would align the
state’s budgeting system with other tiers of government, and bring greater preparation, execution,
management, and reporting discipline into the system, including coverage of personnel records and payroll
administration. Increased oversight of expenditure management and control would lead to the improved
execution of state expenditures.

The project would support the states to update their revenue laws, modernize tax collection and reporting,
and expand their local tax payer bases, thereby increasing the share of IGR in total budgetary revenues.
These processes would foster predictability in budget preparation and execution, improving the quality of
PFM. The automation and expansion of taxpayer databases would also accelerate detection of nonpayment
of taxes, improving accountability.

To link public expenditures to the state’s priorities, and build predictability and stability in expenditure
planning, execution, and reporting, the project would support the development of the Medium-Term Sector
Strategy (MTSS) and Multi-Year Budget Framework (MYBF) in all six states. Similarly, the introduction of
modern expenditure classification systems such as the Government Financial Statistics (GFS)/Classification
of the Functions of Government (COFOG) would help the states to align their budget and expenditure
reporting systems with the national system, directly improving the quality of PFM.

Including LGs in the project was important, as the Nigerian Constitution (1999) assigns them responsibility for
service delivery. However, given the number of LGs in each state (from 8 in Yobe to 40 in Kano) and they
lacked uniformity in tenure and operational structures, it was only feasible for the project to include LGs on a
pilot basis. This project would initiate the process of strengthening PFM collaboration between the states and
LGs by supporting LG reforms for the transfer of the service delivery function from the states to the LGs. This
would directly improve the quality of PFM, and indirectly through publicly accessible audits, also enhance
transparency and accountability.



Outputs




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



Depending upon the need, capacity and nature of the reform, each state decided the extent of its participation
in the project.

Project support (consultants, IT support, and staff training) led to the preparation and enactment of long
overdue Audit Laws in Jigawa, Kano, Osun and Yobe states. In Cross River State where a modern Audit Law
previously existed, the project supported the development of an Audit Operations Manual.

With project support, procurement laws were updated in Anambra and Cross River, enacted in Jigawa, Osun
and Yobe, and passed though legislative processes during project implementation, but formally enacted
(received Governor’s assent) in Kano shortly after project closing. Through the development and adoption of
modern tools including manuals, regulations, and standard bidding documents, and training on how to use
them, the project supported all the participating states to increase transparency and value for money in public
expenditures. The project also supported strengthening of regulatory agencies and professionalization of
procurement cadres in Anambra, Cross River, Jigawa, Osun, and Yobe.

Project support facilitated the drafting of modern legal frameworks for the enactment of Organic Public
Finance Laws in all six states. The passage and operationalization of these laws institutionalized the
operating procedures and processes for budgeting, accounting, controls, reporting, and external scrutiny for
failure to adhere to established procedures for PFM functions. The laws also reduced the chances of a
reversal of the reforms.

 The operationalization of the SIFMIS system in five of the six states (Anambra opted out) played a key role in
enabling the preparation and execution of budgets (using National Chart of Accounts, NCoA), and
accounting, timely reporting, and proper management of personnel records and payroll administration.

Project support also enabled organizational restructuring, enactment of a new revenue law, and initiatives like
taxpayer registration surveys that expanded the taxpayer bases in the beneficiary states. Over 2000 officers
of the tax authorities were trained. The establishment of modern electronic taxpayer database management
systems in five of the six states improved the integrity of taxpayer records and management. Project support
facilitated the development and adoption of MTSS in key sectors and MYBF in all 6 states,
replacing incremental approaches, enabling budget provisions to be based on state priorities, and
improving the quality of budgeting.

The project supported the development and adoption of road maps for collaboration between the state and
local tiers of government for the delivery of basic services in five states. In Kano, the road map was awaiting
adoption by the state’s Executive Council at the time of project closing. On a pilot basis, the project also
supported the adoption of the NCoA in Cross River, Jigawa, Osun, and Yobe states, and strengthened the
capacity of the LGs to improve their budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, and M&E.

Outcomes

From a baseline of a 12 month delay between closing of the financial year and submission of Audited
Financial Statements (AFSs), the project contributed to the submission of AFSs in an average of 4.67 months
for all six participating states, surpassing the target of four out of six states submitting AFSs within six months.
All six states submitted 2019 AFSs to their states' assemblies before June 2020. The production of AFSs
directly improved the transparency and quality of PFM in all six states. Furthermore, by publishing budgets (in
simplified citizen formats) and the AFS in a timely manner, the project empowered state legislatures and the
public to provide greater oversight of public expenditures, thus providing the potential for improving

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



                            accountability. While concrete evidence is unavailable, the ICR (p. 14) notes that “the AFS was presented
                            and discussed at sessions with the public and stakeholders, including civil society organizations on an annual
                            basis.” (ICR, p. 14, para 30)

                            The percentage of the number of public contracts above threshold awarded through open competition
                            increased from a baseline of 20% to 88% across four of the six states (Jigawa: 97%; Osun: 85%; Yobe: 85%;
                            Cross River: 85%), exceeding the target of four of the six states publishing 80% of awarded contracts.

                            The number of participating states implementing at least three key modules of the SIFMIS (the technical
                            consultants of the SIFMIS system recommended the General Ledger, Budgeting and HRMIS) increased from
                            a baseline of one state to four states, achieving the target. Cross River, Jigawa, Kano, and Yobe produced
                            financial reports using SIFMIS in 2020 and 2021.

                            All six states increased actual collection of IGR (based on 2019 audited full year performance). The average
                            increase of the best-performing four states was 197%, surpassing the target of four of the six states
                            improving by more than 40%. The increases in IGR collection over individual state baselines were:
                            Anambra:191%; Cross River: 88%; Kano: 76.52%; Jigawa: 327%; Osun: 74%; and Yobe: 181%. The enacted
                            reforms enabled the states to recover and benefit from higher IGR collections after the COVID-19-related
                            2020 decline in IGR receipts.

                            All six states adopted the GFS and COFOG-compliant NCoA for budget preparation, thus enabling easier
                            aggregation of national budgets and better intergovernmental collaboration, contributing to improved quality of
                            PFM. Use of the NCoA for financial reporting also enhanced accountability in budget execution.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy was Substantial. Outcomes contributing to the compound PDO
                            were achieved. Improved transparency and quality were directly achieved through the enactment of critical
                            PFM legislation for the timely audit of state expenditures and public procurement reform. As these processes
                            also potentially empowered state legislatures and citizens to hold state governments accountable, they paved
                            the way to greater accountability in PFM. Quality and accountability of PFM were potentially
                            enhanced through a series of public expenditure and tax administration reforms resulting in significant
                            revenue growth across the states. Institutional reforms to introduce medium-term budgeting and expenditure
                            systems, and initiation of state-local government collaboration, also contributed to achievement of the PDO in
                            all 6 states. Collectively, by improving the transparency and quality of PFM, the project's measurable
                            outcomes also enhanced accountability.




                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 18
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The project’s benefits are mostly intangible and cannot be quantified and compared with the project’s costs in
the conventional sense, because the core of the project focused on long overdue institutional reforms and
capacity building/training of state and local government officials that cannot be priced. The audit, procurement,
and other institutional reforms of PFM systems in the participating states are expected to produce significant and
long-lasting monetary/fiscal benefits by stemming financial corruption and generating fiscal savings. They could
enable the financing of more and better social services that directly reduce poverty. The economic benefits
could be substantial and accrue in the medium to longer term but cannot be attributed to any particular outcome
of the project.

Nevertheless, the efficiency of some aspects of the project can be gauged (though imperfectly) through the
following:

    1. Implementation efficiency: Delivering training and capacity building activities locally led to significant
         savings in travel and boarding costs and enabled more persons to benefit from the training. The skills
         generated for PFM are public goods that will have spillover effects and efficiency gains in the medium
         term as they contribute to better PFM and social service delivery.
    2.   Input costs: The single largest cost incurred on any activity under the project was the implementation of
         SIFMIS across the states. The cost for deploying SIFMIS in each of the five states that implemented the
         activity was about $3.8 million. This amount is much lower than the sum of $6.6 million estimated by IEG
         as the average cost for the implementation of 87 IFMIS systems across 51 countries (48 of which are
         IDA countries).[1]
    3.   Project management costs, including capacity building under the first component[2], were reasonable
         given the context. At project closure, project management costs were under 12% of total project costs
         compared to a projection of 19% at inception. At 12%, the project's management costs were within
         generally accepted levels to be considered efficient, especially in Nigeria’s partially fragile and conflict
         country context.
    4.   The cost/return ratio was favorable. The total project financing was EURO 54.9 million, of which EURO
         47.8 million was disbursed. During the implementation period (2014 – 2020), about US$5.65 million was
         expended on the tax administration reform sub-component. During the same period, the total [3]
         additional revenue collection across the six states was about US$601 million. While the project's
         investments in tax administration reforms may not have been the only intervention or factor that led to
         this progress, they did make an important contribution.
    5.   The project's investments in tax administration reform were generally well targeted. Additional revenue
         yield surpassed the total project investment in tax systems and overall project investments by over
         10,000% and 1000% respectively.
    6.   The project benefited from a consistent and largely field-based team throughout implementation. This
         facilitated continuity in implementation support, consistency in institutional memory, and quick decision
         making during the long project cycle. While the project did not perform well on timeliness, the three
         restructurings did not escalate the total cost. Most of the extensions compensated for the time lost
         between project initiation in 2012 and approval in 2014. The first two restructurings aimed to


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



       accommodate the five-year term that was deemed essential originally to implement the project. The last
       restructuring was necessitated by COVID-19.

Overall, project efficiency was Substantial. The intangible benefits of the institutional PFM reforms and skills and
PFM capacity building in the states will be invaluable for an efficient PFM system that delivers more and better
public services in the medium to longer term. While proof of better service delivery is not available for five states,
one concrete example in the ICR (p. 19) suggests that at least one state invested in new social services:
"Improved IGR receipts enabled the Kano State government over the same period (2014-2021) to successfully
upgrade to world class status several health care facilities, including the Giginyu Specialist Hospital and
Pediatrics Hospital, Zoo Road, as well as investing in the rehabilitation of several schools and teacher
professional enhancement programs." Moreover, the costs of delivering critical infrastructure like the SIFMIS
were below average, the cost of project management was below budget, and the increase in IGR in the states
was significant.

[1] World Bank. 2021. World Bank Support for Public Financial and Debt Management in IDA-Eligible Countries.
Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank, Chapter 5.

[2] As a cost saving measure, the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) adopted direct sourcing and provision of
training and workshop venues and logistics, rather than out-sourcing to consultants.

[3] US$601 million is the total of the variance from year to year across the six states between calendar years
2014 and 2020.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall relevance of the project’s PDO is High, and its efficacy and efficiency are Substantial. The outcome
rating is Satisfactory. There were minor shortcomings in the achievement of outcomes due to the large number
of participating states. As the states were at different levels of development, those with better capacity and
experience with Bank or donor projects made more progress and achieved or exceeded the target/goals, while
those with weaker capacity did not do as well. Some of the states were engaged in similar projects earlier and

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



had relatively better PFM systems when the project started. The relevance of the project’s objective continues to
be high for the government, as evidenced from the series of related follow-on projects in the other states.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional: Before the project, PFM reforms in several states had been reversed due to the absence of a
legal framework or valid legislation. By focusing on the preparation, development, and enactment of various
pieces of PFM legislation, the project fostered the institutionalization of the reforms into laws governing the
PFM systems of the six states. However, to sustain these reforms, the state governments will need to ensure
adequate annual budgets for their implementation.

Technical: High staff attrition or turnover might erode the sustainability of the PFM reforms supported by the
project. Through training, study tours, train-the-trainer approaches, and other peer learning initiatives, the
project trained and invested in large-scale capacity building of technical staff in various state and LG MDAs
to ensure an adequate supply of skills to implement the PFM reforms. Nevertheless, high attrition remains a
concern.

Financial constraints to fund essential reforms could stymie or lead to the abandonment of the overall PFM
reforms. The project has made provisions to avoid the roll-back of some of these reforms including, for
example, opting for the perpetual licensing model for the SIFMIS which reduces financial pressure on the
states for annual payment for license renewal after project closure. However, the states will need to invest in
further training and skills updating in the future, as the IT sector is very dynamic.

The social risks to the project's outcomes are low and likely to remain so. However, degradation of the
security situation could cause destruction of government’s assets, inhibiting the continuation of the PFM
reform process.

Governmental/stakeholders’ ownership and commitment: Although the project was implemented using
regular government systems and personnel, and complemented with stakeholder sensitization conducted on
new reforms, there is a risk that new officials may not be interested in sustaining the reform efforts.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At the time of project inception, Nigeria’s PFM system was weak but the PFM systems in the states and
  LGs were even weaker. The project’s design was informed by two critical analytic inputs: the 2011 PEFA
  and 2011 PEMFARs that were conducted in each of the six participating states. Their recommendations
  were later adapted to the realities of the individual states’ PFM systems. The project’s design benefited
  from lessons learned from: (i) the EU’s Support to the Reforming Institutions Programme (EU-SRIP), (ii)

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



similar Bank interventions in Nigeria including the State Governance and Capacity Building Project
(SGCBP/P074447), Economic Reform and Governance Project (ERGP/P088150), Public Sector
Governance Reform and Development Project (PSGRDP/P097026), and State Employment and
Expenditure for Results Project (SEEFOR/P121455); and (iii) IEG’s Nigeria country portfolio review.
Some of the salient lessons incorporated in the project’s design are as follows:

      Government ownership requires working in close collaboration with key stakeholders from the
         government and non-government sides in the participating states, and vetting the project’s
         diagnostic, identification, and design studies to ensure that the selected components, activities,
         and outcomes reflect key priorities relevant to the development agenda of the participating states
         (EU-SRIP).
        PIUs that are well integrated within government are more effective in building ownership and
         capacity within a state’s PFM system compared to independent Program Management Units
         (PMUs) that operate in parallel to state structures and are perceived as an imposition (EU-SRIP
         and SGCBP).
        As governance support at the state and LG levels is constrained by weak capacity, a Bank-
         implemented Trust Fund is appropriate for donor support at the sub-national level in Nigeria (EU-
         SRIP and SGCBP).
        As the pace of PFM reforms varies widely among the states and depends on the political
         commitment of the highest authority in each state, a flexible, responsive, participatory, and
         championed approach to governance projects is appropriate (EU-SRIP).
        Strengthening demand-side governance is critical. Involving the State House of Assembly in the
         implementation of key components (budget reform and external audits) is essential (SGCBP).
         Supporting CSOs strengthens accountability (EU-SRIP). The SRIP project-supported network of
         CSOs in each state constructively engaged state governments in budget preparation and
         monitoring, rendering the budget process participatory, transparent, and accountable (SGCBP,
         EU-SRIP).
        For sustainable PFM-specific skills development, a well thought-through training policy is needed.
         It should include training of trainers in priority areas, offer training locally (more cost effective),
         and support the rehabilitation of training institutions and development of curricula in key PFM
         areas in the participating states’ training institutions for sustainability (ERGP, SGCBP).
        To ensure ownership, leadership, and coordination for the implementation of a modern PFM
         system like SIFMIS, a project should have a clear champion and focal officers in Activity
         Executing Agencies to be responsible for the coordination and execution of activities (SGCBP).
        As LG is a missing link between state-level projects and community-driven development (CDD)
         projects, involvement of LGs is important. If including all[1] the LGs in the project is infeasible, on
         a pilot basis the project should support capacity building in planning, budget tracking, and
         expenditure reporting (IEG review).

The project’s design included the pragmatic mitigation of identified risks for smooth implementation.
Three examples are noteworthy.

      First, the risk of delays caused by political instability, elections, and new policy makers and
         political office holders was high. The establishment of project technical committees in the states
         comprised of technical heads of the implementing agencies, as well as embedding the project
         within existing structures in government, ensured that significant implementation decisions were
         taken by public servants who were unaffected by the politicking in the states. The task team also

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



         reached an agreement with the EU, participating states, and the National Planning Commission
         (both Grant Recipient and National Authorizing Office of all the donor funding to Nigeria) to
         reallocate funds indicatively earmarked for any state if project implementation was disrupted in the
         state due to political turmoil.
        Second, the security risk due to the fragile status of three of the six participating states was high
         and posed challenges for project implementation, especially travel by the task team to the
         affected states. To help mitigate this risk, the Bank team explored using credible third-party
         monitors for project supervision. During negotiations, an agreement was reached with all key
         actors that if the security situation deteriorated in a state, the Bank, in consultation with the
         government, would make the necessary project adjustments, including reallocation of funds.
        Third, to prevent election-related delays in project implementation, the project team ensured that
         the following institutional and implementation arrangements were in place by project appraisal: the
         constitution of the PIUs, Technical Committees, and the preparation of the Project Implementation
         Manual. This preparation enabled implementation to commence while the post-election transitions
         were ongoing in the states.

  An experienced and committed field-based task team was constituted from the beginning to provide
  technical support to the multiple implementing agencies.

  [1] There are 774 local governments in Nigeria; the number of LGs in the participating states ranges from
  8 in Yobe to 40 in Kano state. There is also a lack of uniformity in the tenure and operational structures
  of LGs across Nigerian states.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The task team included specialists in a wide range of PFM fields with international experience in supporting
 PFM reform projects. To increase the project's development impact, the Bank’s technical and fiduciary
 teams provided regular support, including a revision of the costs/budget for the reform activities across the
 project’s components. In the early years when there was a risk that election-related delays might reduce
 the motivation of new project teams, the task team ensured their continued engagement and interest by
 facilitating their participation in the mission workshops of the ongoing PSGRD and SEEFOR projects.

 During 2014–2020, there were eleven implementation support missions to monitor progress and provide
 support. In addition, there were several technical missions to the beneficiary states to address specific
 issues. The task team was proactive in project supervision, and reports to management and feedback to
 counterparts were candid. The task team regularly highlighted issues for Bank management’s attention.The
 continuity in team composition, especially the same task team leader from preparation to closure, and the
 availability of most team members in-country enabled timely hands-on implementation support. During
 the mid-term review in December 2017, restructuring was recommended to ensure that the project
 achieved its objective. Due to COVID-19, the final support mission was virtual.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s design provided a clear pathway from the initial inputs (consultants, IT, and training) to the
 planned interventions/outputs and their attendant outcomes. The M&E design of the project could have
 been clearer in either defining at least one distinct and independent outcome indicator for assessing the
 accountability element of the PDO or excluding that element. As also noted in Section 8a, while
 transparency can be assessed with the audit and procurement outcome indicators (which also enhance
 quality and accountability), and quality was gauged effectively with the SIFMIS and IGR outcome
 indicators, there was no corresponding indicator for accountability.

 On balance, M&E design had several strengths that outweigh the challenge of assessing accountability
 alone:

       The four formal outcome indicators had measurable baselines and targets and were useful
        for assessing the achievement of outcomes as well as the compound PDO reasonably well. They
        were also suitable for assessing the achievement of the transparency and quality elements of the
        PDO.
       M&E was designed with flexibility to accommodate the heterogeneity of the six participating states,
        which were at different stages of development with their PFM systems and had staff capacity of
        varying quality. Three of the six were fragile states. Progress was to be measured from the baseline
        of each state.
       A monetary reward from the Performance Challenge Fund for the states that made good progress
        on performance at the mid-term review served as an incentive for the states to focus on results in
        project implementation. Allowing the states to allocate the proceeds of the Challenge Fund to
        project components 1 and 2, based on the needs of each component, allowed for additional
        flexibility in the project design.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project had two levels of M&E arrangements: at the national level for the overall project, and at the
  individual state levels. The NPCU was responsible for overall project coordination, consolidating the
  quarterly M&E reports generated by the states, and developing a template for reporting M&E activities
  quarterly in a consolidated report to the Bank. The M&E Officer in each state’s PCU (SPCU) was
  responsible for all M&E activities, including data gathering and reporting. The SPCUs prepared the
  annual and quarterly implementation reports and submitted them to the NPCU for validation and onward
  submission to the Bank. The SPCUs also submitted progress reports each semester to the State



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



  Steering Committee for review, policy advice, and mainstreaming of outcomes into the states’ agendas.
  The project's mid-term review was carried out jointly in December 2017.

  The SPCUs also gathered data on all outcome and project component-related indicators. Its staff
  received continuous guidance on data collection and reporting on outcome indicators. The Bank’s
  financial and procurement teams conducted periodic reviews to gauge project performance against
  expected outcomes and used continuous internal audits and annual external audits to monitor progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  All the participating states used the M&E framework to assess progress towards the achievement of the
  PDO and to detect implementation challenges. The SPCUs maintained websites on which they posted
  periodic project implementation reports to inform stakeholders. Similarly, the project supported the
  development of communication strategies to help build ownership at strategic levels of the state
  bureaucracies.

  Based on the detailed reports and data collected from the mission reports, including the mid-term
  review, the Bank and the government restructured the project three times. Over the course of the
  project’s implementation, as the capacity of the states improved in data collection and analysis in line
  with the Results Framework, the application of the M&E framework also improved.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Overall, the task team assessed the project's environmental and social risks as low. The project triggered
   the World Bank OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment safeguard policy and was assigned category B, as
   the potential environmental and social impacts of proposed minor civil work activities were likely to be small
   in scope, site specific, and easy to remediate. During the project, when minor renovation on an existing
   office in one participating state (Kano) was implemented, the required Environmental and Social
   Management Plan was implemented by the client. The project had also established a Grievance Redress
   Mechanism that is linked to all participating state auditor’s offices and the Bank's Grievance Redress
   System. During project implementation, complaints related to non-payment/reimbursement of expenses
   incurred during field visits were recorded and resolved (ICR, p. 25).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): Adequate FM arrangements were established and maintained across all
   participating states as well as at the NPCU and included standard reporting and control procedures. The
   last FM review conducted between February and April 2021 in the respective implementing agencies and

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



   NPCU confirmed that annual budgets were prepared from approved work plans and implemented
   accordingly. Computerized accounting systems were deployed and were fully in use in all six implementing
   agencies and the NPCU. Bank reconciliation statements and fixed asset registers were noted to be up to
   date. The financial reports -- unaudited interim financial reports and the annual audit report -- were
   consolidated and submitted by the NPCU in a timely manner. At the time of project closure, the overall FM
   performance was considered Satisfactory, while the FM risk rating remains Moderate.

   Procurement: The overall performance with regard to internal controls, record keeping, and contract
   management occurred as discussed in the PAD. To redress the procurement risks identified at the project
   design stage, the states engaged short-term procurement consultants at the start of the project to
   strengthen procurement capacity in the SPCUs. These experienced consultants supported the SPCUs in
   day-to-day procurement activities and capacity building as a stopgap measure before the project teams
   assumed full responsibility for procurement activities. Based on recent post procurement reviews including
   transactional desk reviews, overall procurement capacity remains Satisfactory. The Bank team provided
   regular capacity building and procurement implementation support to key procurement staff. At project
   closure, the overall procurement performance rating was considered Satisfactory, while the procurement
   risk rating was assessed as Moderate.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-30) presents a series of lessons and recommendations emerging from the project’s
experience. IEG summarizes the most persuasive lesson below:

The experience of creating a fund to incentivize performance when several states or local
governments at varying stages of development and with widely different capacity are participating in

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)



a single project can accelerate project implementation. In this project, the Performance Challenge
Fund was established to encourage the participating states to accelerate implementation, and it did.
Mindful of the heterogeneity between states, progress was measured from the baseline of each
state. A monetary reward from the Performance Challenge Fund for the states that made good
progress on performance at the mid-term review served as an incentive for the states to focus on
results in project implementation. Allowing the states to allocate the proceeds of the Challenge Fund
to project components 1 and 2, based on the needs of each component, allowed for flexibility in the
project’s design. While putting in place such incentives, care needs to be taken to recognize
inherent/initial disparities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a reasonable overview of the program. It is candid and makes a commendable effort to
construct a theory of change, as this was not required when the PAD was prepared in 2014. The quality of
evidence and analysis related to the project’s outcome indicators is strong. However, several critical details are
missing. For example, the project cost and disbursement data reported in various parts of the ICR differs
without explanation. The ICR does not document the cancellation of EUR 7.2 million of the grant.[1] The
narrative generally supports the ratings, but it could have presented better evidence or even examples of how
the outcome indicators improved accountability, what role the state legislatures and CSOs actually played once
audited accounts and public procurement reports were available, and how many the states used the large
increase in tax revenues for productive investment in service delivery. Except for Kano state, the ICR does not
provide additional evidence. It is difficult to get a sense of how the project’s achievements made a difference on
the ground. In the section on Bank Performance – Quality at Entry, the ICR asserts that the project reflects
lessons from several earlier and ongoing projects but does not provide any examples to substantiate the claim.
The section on M&E design is similarly sparse.

[1] The total grant disbursed and cancelled amounts can be found only in a grant closing letter of October 5,
2021.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NG-State & Local Governance Reform (P133045)




                                                                            Page 18 of 18
