     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0022074

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Program Name
 P127435                                     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R)

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)            Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-51760,TF-13061                         31-Jul-2018                                       178,624,019.27

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Nov-2012                                31-Jul-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                   8,319,208.01

 Revised Commitment                            204,787,900.53                                   7,065,108.54

 Actual                                        175,684,102.71                                   4,945,000.89




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 20),
   the Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Third Phase of the National Target Program for Rural
   Water Supply and Sanitation was "to increase sustained access to water supply and sanitation services and
   improve sector planning, monitoring and evaluation in the Participating Provinces."

   This review will assess the following objectives:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



         To increase sustained access to water supply services in the Participating Provinces
         To increase sustained access to sanitation services in the Participating Provinces
         To improve sector planning and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) in the Participating Provinces



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Increase access to water supply services: (US$56.8 million at appraisal, US$56.2 million actual) This
   component would finance the construction of commune-level water supply schemes such as treatment
   plants, distribution networks, and household connections.

   2. Increase access to sanitation services: (US$21.4 million at appraisal, US$20.6 million actual) This
   component would finance the construction of hygienic latrines in commune households, schools, and health
   centers.

   3. Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) and Behavior Change Campaigns
   (BCC) (US$9.9 million at appraisal, US$8.7 million actual) This component would finance campaigns to
   disseminate information about the program, raise awareness to program benefits, and facilitate the
   modification of rural residents' attitudes and behavior toward connecting, using, and maintaining their water
   and sanitation systems.

   4. Capacity Building: (US$6.0 million at appraisal, revised to US$4.8 million, US$4.9 million actual). This
   component financed activities outlined in the the Program Action Plan (PAP), provided implementation
   support, and developed a results-based verification and disbursement process. The PAP identified the
   following actions: (i) transparency and citizen engagement, (ii) procurement, (iii) financial management and
   auditing, (iv) land acquisition, and (v) ethnic minorities. Implementation support financed Bank supervision,
   capacity building, technical expertise, and communication support to implementing entities at both the
   national and provincial levels. Results-based verification and disbursement process financed the baseline
   survey and verification protocol. After implementing agencies reported annual achievements against the six
   Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), these were verified by an independent verification agent
   through document and physical audits. Annual disbursements were then made against the verified results.

   In addition to Bank financing, a parallel grant financing from the Australian Agency for International
   Development (AusAID) also supported technical assistance activities to address capacity gaps in the
   following areas: (i) strengthening the planning and monitoring capacity of implementing agencies, including
   transparency and social accountability; (ii) improving financial management, operations and maintenance
   (O&M), and water quality management practices of implementing agencies that contribute to the
   sustainability of water supply systems and services; (iii) improving the capacity of implementing agencies for
   managing sustainable hygienic sanitation, developing sanitation actions plans, and a community rewards
   mechanism; (iv) improving governance such as fiduciary, environmental, and social practices; (v)
   strengthening the capacity of the State Audit of Vietnam (SAV) to conduct annual verification of program
   results reported by the provinces and external audits; and (vii) support the Rural Water Supply and

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



   Sanitation Partnership by financing workshops and sessions to share lessons learned and emerging best
   practices from the program. Annex 5 of the ICR reported on the outcomes of this parallel financing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program Cost: The original program cost reached US$206.04 million, consisting of US$200.0 million
   (equivalent to Special Drawing Rights credit of 131.5 million) and a grant of US$6.04 million. The project
   disbursed US$175.68 at closing. The difference of US$30.36 million was reported as savings because the
   private sector injected resources during implementation.

   Financing: The program was financed by a credit from the International Development Association
   (IDA) through its Program for Results (P4R) financing mechanism. The Government of Australia's Agency
   for International Development (AusAID) provided additional parallel grant financing.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government committed to contribute US$60.0 million and disbursed US$27.0
   million at closing.

   Dates: The program was approved on November 1, 2012 and became effective on April 24, 2013. The Mid
   Term Review (MTR) was conducted on September 15, 2015. The program was originally scheduled to
   close on July 31, 2018 but was extended by 12 more months to close on July 31, 2019. There was one
   restructuring on June 16, 2016 to introduce changes to the Results Framework and extend the project
   closing date. The Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI) matrix and Bank disbursement arrangements were
   modified as a result. The main changes to the Results Framework were (see Section 4 Efficacy below):

         Adding a Key Outcome Indicator - number of direct project beneficiaries, of which percent were
          female
         Adding an Intermediate Results Indicator - (iv) number of communes where schools and health
          clinics have maintained hygienic status
         Separating the (DLIs) to better match sector specific targets with the achievements for water and for
          sanitation
         Adding a new sanitation sustainability DLI - number of communes where schools and health clinics
          have maintained hygienic status




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  This program's objectives were highly relevant to the government's Rural Water and Sanitation System
  (RWSS) sector strategy. In 2000, the government set the overall vision and goals for its 2020 National Rural
  Clean Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy and established the National Target Program (NTP) for Rural
  Water Supply and Sanitation across all 63 provinces of Vietnam. By 2011, the government designed the
  Third Phase (2010-2020) of the NTP for the New Rural Development (NRD) consisting of: (i) an increase in

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



                       demand driven investments; (ii) making operations and maintenance (O&M) more sustainable; and (iii)
                       building the capacity of provincial agencies and service providers.

                       In 2014, in collaboration with the World Bank, Australia, and the United Kingdom's Department for
                       International Development (DfID), the government initiated Vietnam 2035 as a supplemental road map for
                       economic, political, and social reform called Vietnam 2035. The objectives were also relevant to four of the
                       six areas in that road map: (i) enable economic modernization where the private sector is in the lead; (ii) build
                       technological and innovative capacity; (iii) chart an environmentally sustainable development path and
                       enhance climate resilience; and (iv) promote equality and inclusion of marginalized groups, and develop
                       policies to promote a harmonious middle-class society.

                       The objectives were also highly relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
                       Vietnam for the period 2018-2022. This PforR program contributed to meeting the following three CPF
                       objectives -- CPF Objective 5 -- Broaden economic participation of ethnic minorities, women, and vulnerable
                       groups; CPF Objective 10 -- Increase climate resilience and strengthen disaster risk management; and CPF
                       Objective 11 - Strengthen natural resource management and improve water security.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI 1 referred to the number of newly constructed improved household sanitary latrines


                Rationale
                According to the FA (p.9), the program's results framework provided five disbursement periods using three
                original DLIs. The first two DLIs were scalable, meaning, disbursements were authorized in proportion to
                verified achievements. The third DLI was not scalable. This meant that all indicators needed to be achieved to
                authorize disbursements. All results were independently verified by the State Audit of Vietnam (SAV). The
                ICR reported program closing figures for amounts (in US$ converted from SDR as of January 20, 2020)
                allocated and disbursed.

                The original DLI1 would be triggered after achieving the following targets:

                                DLI 1.1 - Number of new Functioning Water Supply Connections (target at least 100,000)
                                DLI 1.2 - Number of newly constructed Improved Household Sanitary Latrines or IHSLs (target at least
                                 15,000)

                Originally, the water and sanitation targets were linked to one DLI because the NTP/NRD sanitation
                investments lagged those of water supply investments. By the time of the 2015 MTR, investments in

                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



the sanitation sector surpassed those of water supply. Disbursement for sanitation had to wait for the later
achievement of water supply indicators. The 2016 restructuring separated the original DLI1 to two to resolve
the delays. At the end of 2015, there were 141,541 new functioning water supply connections reported,
exceeding the target, and 59,234 newly constructed improved household latrines, also exceeding the target.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 1 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
DLI1 referred to the number of new Functioning Water Supply Connections (FWSC) (target 340,000).

Revised Rationale
The revised DLI 1 referred to the number of new functioning water supply connections, which delivered water
under rigorous criteria for continuity, water quality, and low failure rates. The Program's Operations
Manual (POM) outlined these criteria to ensure that beneficiaries received high-quality, reliable access to
water supply services to trigger disbursements.

This indicator achieved 399,964 new FWSCs or 118 percent of its target value. SAV independently verified all
results achieved.The allocated amount was US$56.8 million and the amount disbursed was US$55.2 million.

The ICR reported aggregated DLI allocations and disbursements at project closing using the currency
exchange rate for SDR and US$ as of January 20, 2020. In the 2016 restructuring, the DLI schedule became
fully scalable. The DLI annual ceilings were removed to give implementing agencies more flexibility in
reporting and requesting disbursements from year to year. Disbursements were released in proportion
to the verified targets achieved by for the period.



Revised Rating
High

DLI 1 REVISION 2
Revised DLI
The revised DLI2 referred to the number of newly constructed improved households sanitary latrines or IHSLs
(target 130,000).


Revised Rationale
The new DLI2 was the second component of the original DLI1. Disbursements were triggered by
achieving 142,280 ISHLs, exceeding the target value by 109 percent. The amount allocated for this DLI2 was
US$21.4 million and disbursed US$20.6 million at closing.

The ICR reported aggregated DLI allocations and disbursements at project closing using the currency
exchange rate for SDR and US$ as of January 20, 2020. In the 2016 restructuring, the DLI schedule became

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



fully scalable. The DLI annual ceilings were removed to give implementing agencies more flexibility in
reporting and requesting disbursements from year to year. Disbursements were released in proportion
to the verified targets achieved by for the period.



Revised Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
DLI2 referred to two indicators:
 DLI 2.1 - Number of people with water supply connections from Sustainable Water Systems (target 425,000,
according to the FA, p.9)
 DLI 2.2 -Number of people with access to Commune-Wide Sanitation (target 750,000)

Rationale
Disbursement would be triggered based on progress achieved in both sustainable water supply connections
and commune wide sanitation indicators. Similar to the rationale provided in separating the original DLI1
above, at the 2016 restructuring, these indicators were assigned to two DLIs (see DLI3 and DLI4 below).
Originally, the water and sanitation targets were linked into one DLI because the NTP/NRD sanitation
investments lagged those of water supply investments. By the time of the 2015 MTR, investments in
the sanitation sector surpassed those of the water supply. As a result, disbursement for sanitation had to wait
for the later achievement of water supply indicators The 2016 restructuring separated the original DLI2 to
DLI3 and DLI4 to address delays. At the end of 2015, there were no reported people with water supply
connections from sustainable water systems. There were 729,980 with access to commune wide sanitation,
almost achieving the target. There were no figures available for the annualized allocation and disbursement
for the original DLI2.



Rating
Modest

DLI 2 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
The original DLI2 was divided into two new DLIs. The new DLI3 focused on benefiting the number of people
with water supply connections from Sustainable Water System (target 850,000)

Revised Rationale
The new DLI3 indicator benefited 1,054,575, exceeding the target by 124 percent. This indicator was
allocated US$12.8 million and disbursed US$9.9 million at closing.

The ICR reported aggregated DLI allocations and disbursements at project closing using the currency
exchange rate for SDR and US$ as of January 20, 2020. In the 2016 restructuring, the DLI schedule became
fully scalable. The DLI annual ceilings were removed to give implementing agencies more flexibility in


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



reporting and requesting disbursements from year to year. Disbursements were released in proportion
to the verified targets achieved for the period.



Revised Rating
High

DLI 2 REVISION 2
Revised DLI
This revised DLI4 referred to the number of people with access to commune wide sanitation (target 1,275,000).

Revised Rationale
The original DLI2 was divided into two new indicators, one for sustainable water connections (DLI3) and the
other for commune wide sanitation (DLI4). The new DLI4 was allocated US$26.0 million and disbursed
US$21.4 million. This indicator benefited 1,407,669 or 110 percent of its target value.

The ICR reported aggregated DLI allocations and disbursements at project closing using the currency
exchange rate for SDR and US$ as of January 20, 2020. In the 2016 restructuring, the DLI schedule became
fully scalable. The DLI annual ceilings were removed to give implementing agencies more flexibility in
reporting and requesting disbursements from year to year. Disbursements were released in proportion
to the verified targets achieved by for the period.



Revised Rating
High

DLI 2 REVISION 3
Revised DLI
DLI2 was further revised to introduce a new indicator for sanitation - the new DLI5 indicator referred to the
number of communes where schools and health clinics maintained hygienic status (target 150).

Revised Rationale
This new DLI was added after the MTR to address concerns about the sustainability of the sanitation facilities
in the schools and health centers. Schools and health centers were given incentives to maintain the facilities
adequately.This new DLI5 was allocated US$4.7 million and disbursed US$3.1 million after achieving 179 or
119 percent of its target value.

The ICR reported aggregated DLI allocations and disbursements at project closing using the currency
exchange rate for SDR and US$ as of January 20, 2020. In the 2016 restructuring, the DLI schedule became
fully scalable. The DLI annual ceilings were removed to give implementing agencies more flexibility in
reporting and requesting disbursements from year to year. Disbursements were released in proportion
to the verified targets achieved by for the period.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)




                  Revised Rating
                  High

                  DLI 3
                  DLI
                  DLI3 renumbered as DLI6 measured effective oversight, management, and transparency of the program at the
                  provincial and national level (target 102 reports).

                  Rationale
                  Disbursement would be triggered based on achieving both sub-indicators: (i) provincial annual plan for each
                  province, and (ii) set of 9 program reports (8 provincial plus 1 consolidated report) providing implementation
                  progress. As a result of the 2016 restructuring and separating water and sanitation indicators under the
                  original DLI1 and DLI2, this DLI was renumbered DLI6. This DLI remained non-scalable throughout the
                  Program period.

                  This DLI6 achieved had an allocation of US$9.9 million and disbursed US$8.7 million after achieving its
                  target.



                  Rating
                  Substantial


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The program was highly relevant to the government's strategy, based on its support to NTP3/NRD. The
                  objectives were also relevant to the World Bank's CPF for Vietnam for the period 2018-2022. At the 2016
                  restructuring, the objectives remained the same, the DLI indicators were disassembled to separate indicators
                  for sanitation and water supply, a new DLI was added to address the sustainability of CWS efforts, and these
                  were made fully scalable. A new Bank required core indicator was added. SAV independently verified results
                  reported by the provincial implementing entities to trigger disbursements. Targets for one DLI was achieved
                  while those of the remaining 5 DLIs exceeded their target values. All disbursements were very close to the
                  value of the allocations made by the program. The relevance of the objectives and of the disbursement-linked
                  indicators was rated high.



                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
•To increase sustained access to water supply services

Rationale
The Theory of Change: The program supported investments in rural water supply services using best
practices to generate sustainable water supply by constructing commune level water supply schemes. These
schemes included treatment plants, distribution networks, and households connections. Achieving targets
triggered disbursements against the allocations for this objective. Disbursements then led to achieving the
increase in access to water services and supported the sustainability of water supply schemes.

The key outcome indicators were:

      Number of people with water supply connections from sustainable water systems
      Number of new functioning water supply connections

OUTPUTS:

      399,964 new functioning water supply connections were made (original target 340,000, target
       exceeded)
      1,559 new water supply and sanitation facilities in schools, and health centers were constructed and in
       use (original target, 1,440, target exceeded)
      179 communes (original target 150, target exceeded) where schools and health centers have
       maintained hygienic status

OUTCOMES:

      1,054,575 beneficiaries have water supply connections from sustainable water system (original target
       850,000 target exceeded). The DLI for new functioning water supply connections outcome was
       US$55.2 million against an allocation US$56.8 million. The DLI for the number of people with water
       supply connections from sustainable water system was US$9.9 million against an allocation of
       US$12.8 million. The evidence for the increased access to water supply system was provided by
       the number of new beneficiaries and new connections built (399,964 against a target of 340,000,
       target exceeded)
      1,759,842 beneficiaries from the rural areas have access to improved water sources (original target
       1,496,000, target exceeded)
      2,149,765 direct beneficiaries, 51 percent were women (original target 1,861,000 target exceeded, of
       which 51 percent were female, target exceeded).

SAV independently verified the sustainability of 80 water supply schemes by confirming that:

      the schemes complied with the Ministry of Health (MOH) clean water standards;
      at least 70 percent of the planned water connections were working 24/7, with a monthly average of 10
       percent failure rate, using bills issued and paid as evidence;
      tariff revenues covered the cost of operations and maintenance (O&M);

                                                                                                Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)




        non-revenue water (NRW) was less than 25 percent; and
        the water scheme used was an approved management model (public utility, private enterprise,
           or cooperative).
        DLI1 was achieved with 144 functioning water service connection (FWSC) schemes and 359,581 new
           connections .
        DLI3 (people with connections to sustainable systems) was achieved with 105 water schemes
           operating for at least 2 years. A sampling of 80 schemes representing 318,275 new connections were
           sustainable.

With the above outcomes, achieving this objective was rated high.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
•To increase sustained access to sanitation services

Rationale
The Theory of Change: The program supported investments to support increased access to rural water
sanitation such as construction of hygienic latrines in commune households, schools, and health centers and
behavioral change campaigns. These investments used best practices to ensure sustainability. Achieving
targets triggered disbursements against the allocations for this objective. This action achieved the objective to
increase access to sanitation services and support the sustainability of community wide sanitation schemes.

The key outcome indicators were:

          Number of people with access to commune-wide sanitation services, disaggregated by gender
          Number of newly constructed improved household sanitary latrines
          New of new latrines constructed and in use in schools and health centers
          Number of communes where schools and clinics maintained hygienic status

OUTPUTS:

        142,280 of newly constructed improved household sanitary latrines (original target, 130,00, target
           exceeded). The DLI for this indicator was US$20.6 million against an allocation of US$21.4 million.
        1,492 new latrines were constructed and in use in schools and health centers (original target, 1,440,
           target exceeded)
        179 communes (original target 150, target exceeded) where schools and health centers have
         maintained hygienic status. The DLI for this output indicator was US$3.1 million against an allocation
         of US$4.7 million.
        600 training events were conducted in 238 communes, with over 2 million participants. Training
         covered latrine maintenance and positive WASH messages. In schools, students participated in start

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



         of the year lessons on WASH benefits and practices, training on how to use latrine facilities in schools
         and at home. The Vietnam Health Environment Management Agency (VIHEMA) coordinated with the
         commune, district level health agencies, social organizations like the Women's Union, to educate
         commune residents, assign maintenance responsibilities, conduct the campaigns, monitor the
         communes for compliance, and coordinate verification of achieving CWS status.
        Over 300,000 leaflets, 500 posters, and regular loudspeaker announcements were produced annually
         to promote clean water, sanitation, and improved behavior in "Water Access, Sanitation, and Hygiene"
         (WASH).

OUTCOMES:

        1,407,669 beneficiaries from the rural areas had access to community wide sanitation (original target
           1,275,000, target exceeded). DLI4 (the number of people with access to commune-wide sanitation)
           disbursed US$21.4 million against an allocation of US$26.0 million.
          203 communes participated with 191 meeting Commune Wide Sanitation (CWS) status. A
           CWS status met the following conditions: (i) 100 percent of public kindergarten, primary, and
           secondary schools and 100 percent of commune health centers met MOH standards for clean water
           and hygienic sanitation facilities (clean water and soap for hand washing); (ii) at least 70 percent of
           households met MOH standards for hygienic sanitation: (iii) 100 percent of households use latrines;
           and (iv) the commune was free of open defecation
          89 percent of households in the communes had hygienic sanitary latrines
          100 percent of schools had hygienic sanitation facilities, achieving target
          100 percent of health centers had hygienic sanitation facilities, achieving target

CWS covered households, schools, and health centers and was used to achieve higher rates of sanitation
(DLI4) over a wider area. DLI5 targets required the use and maintenance of sanitation facilities in schools and
health centers to contribute to long-term sustainability. Long-term sustainability factors differed
between households and schools and health centers. Communes were given financial incentives to assign
responsibility and accountability for maintaining latrines. There were no sustainability concerns for latrines of
commune households because a Bank-funded 2015 study (Sanitation and Hygiene in the Northern Mountains
and Central Highlands of Vietnam by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine) indicated that
household latrines in rural Vietnam were properly used and maintained. In addition, design of household
latrines were sized to be emptied after more than 5 years. Households contracted private sludge operators to
empty their septic tanks. Families used savings or accessed short-term subsidized loans to construct
household sanitary latrines. Informal interviews with households from five communes in five provinces
confirmed their familiarity with septage management and cleaning to support positive trends in maintenance
of sanitation services (ICR, paragraph 34). As a result, achieving this objective was rated high.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
•To improve water supply and sanitation services sector planning, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)




Rationale
The Theory of Change: The program introduced a previously non-existent planning process for water supply
and sanitation services in the participating provinces. The activities strengthened the planning skills of
provincial implementing entities, and improved their monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems to
produce higher quality planning documents. The jointly developed Program Action Plan (PAP) identified these
activities based on best practices to ensure that the country systems complied with fiduciary and social
development policies: (i) transparency and citizen engagement, (ii) procurement, (iii) financial management
and auditing, (iv) land acquisition, and (v) ethnic minorities. The Bank provided Implementation support,
supervision, capacity building, technical expertise, and communication support to the national and provincial
implementing agencies. In addition, the program supported raising awareness of the benefits from the
program through information and education campaigns and modified the behavior of beneficiaries through
behavioral change campaigns. These activities were designed to influence the behavior of the rural
beneficiaries to connect, use, and maintain the delivered rural water supply and sanitation services.

The key outcome indicators were:

      Number of provincial annual plans and program reports from participating provinces
      Number of disclosed Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) program reports

OUTPUTS:

      102 provincial annual plans and program reports from participating provinces (original target 85,
         revised target 102, target achieved).
      6 MARD program reports were disclosed to the public (original target 5, revised target 6, target
         achieved)

OUTCOMES associated with the Program Action Plan:

      The DLI for the number of provincial annual plans approved by participating provinces and the number
         of program reports disclosed to the public was US$8.7 million against an allocation of US$9.9 million.
        Achieved the installation of the regularly updated transparency platform, except for Hung Yen
         province. Call centers were fully operational and served as the beneficiary feedback system.
         Participating provinces enhanced transparency with public consultation, corruption, fiduciary,
         procurement, program databases on implementation complaints and responses.
        MARD and provinces prepared procurement reports where
              o there were no bid or proposal that was rejected due to offered price exceeding the cost
                 estimate.
              o no state owned enterprises (SOEs) participated in the works that generated results for the
                 Program, meeting target.
              o no debarred firms on the local/national/Bank debarment list participated in the works that
                 generated results for the Program, meeting the target.
              o at least 50 percent of consultancy contracts and 50 percent of works contracts for water supply
                 sub-projects were competitively bid, increasing to 80 percent by project closing.
        Audit reports were delivered on time and of satisfactory quality, achieving the target.
        Land acquisition, compensation, and resettlement were successfully completed in all project provinces
         with no issues reported.

                                                                                                Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)




         The Ethnic Minorities Development Plan was prepared and implemented by PCERWASS in the two
          provinces that had ethnic minority people.

  All participating provinces prepared annual investment plans. MARD and all provinces prepared an annual
  report and disclosed these to public. Reporting served as an incentive for provinces to plan for budgeting,
  procurement, and implementation. Strengthened capacity at the provincial level was evident from the reduced
  works implementation time from 4 to 2 years. Independent verification offered incentives to comply with
  higher technical standards and improve construction quality. This objective achieved substantial outcomes.



  Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The results-based approach of this program addressed the weaknesses identified in the NTP3. The
 PforR expanded water supply services; expanded sanitation services for household and institutions;
 and strengthened capacity of institutions to plan and conduct monitoring and evaluation (M&E). A process
 evaluation under the PforR indicated that 8.8 percent of people in PforR provinces gained access to a
 hygienic latrine against an 8.1 percent in comparison provinces. Constructed water schemes increased the
 number of households with water connection. The key outcome indicators were mostly exceeded with one
 indicator achieved. All targets linked to all DLIs were verified independently. Efficacy is thus rated high.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

The relevance of objective was rated high. The efficacy of all the first two objectives was rated high while the
efficacy of the third objective was rated substantial. The overall efficacy was rated high. There is no rating for
efficiency in a PforR financed program. Program efficiency is embedded in the Program Operations Manual and
the implemented Program Action Plan that provides evidence in achieving targets to meet Disbursement Linked
Indicators. According to the guidelines, the project outcome is rated highly satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Highly Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)




The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Technical Risks: Delivering rural water supply at the commune level was assessed to be sustainable
         after operating for a period of only two years. Sustainability was reflected in meeting the operations
         and maintenance (O&M) needs of the rural water supply schemes. With over 60 percent of the water
         schemes now operated by private enterprises who would presumably focus on cost recovery, there is
         a risk that O&M costs may not remain stable to be fully covered by revenues in the long term. At
         closing, program supported water schemes had an average cost recovery rate of 1.18 (ICR,
         paragraph 72). This risk was mitigated by the M&E system that had adopted sustainability factors in
         the rural water and sanitation sector and the strong foundation provided by the experience in the use
         of disbursement linked indicators to trigger financial flows.
        Financial Risk: Keeping rural water tariff rates low may not not keep up with the costs of producing
         piped water supply. This tendency posed risks to the overall financial sustainability of water supply
         schemes. Provincial People's Committees establish tariffs at the provincial level and may not be
         sensitive to market forces. To mitigate this risk, schemes supported under the program promoted
         higher connection rates, increased consumption, and resulting increase in revenues. In addition,
         behavioral campaigns and outreach on benefits are expected to raise awareness to paying for
         services.T here may be need to explore a framework of subsidies for poorer residents.
        Government Ownership and Commitment Risk: There is risk that government commitment
         to sustaining the program outcomes may not be retained over the long term. This risk would be
         mitigated by continuing dialogue between regulators at the provincial level, local rural water agencies,
         and water system operators.
        Environmental and Legal and Regulatory Risks: Remaining gaps in the access to
         sustainable rural water supply and sanitation pose a risk to the outcomes of this program. In addition,
         the acknowledged weak regulatory framework that covers fecal sludge management needs to be
         addressed. These risks were mitigated by the plan of the government to expand the applicability of
         the sustainability factors in the nationwide M&E system to the rest of the country and pursuing other
         similar results-based programs in the future.
        Macroeconomic Risk. The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 indicate bleak health, economic, and social
         consequences worldwide, and poses high risks to sustaining the outcome achieved by the program.
         Severe impact on the economy is expected. There would be pressure on prioritizing the spending for
         health rather than other sectors. Disruptions to employment and income earnings in rural areas may
         pose risks to the willingness to pay water and sanitation tariff rates. Uncertainty with maintenance
         needs would negatively affect long term sustainability in improvements introduced under the
         program. The difficult and uncertain global and national macroeconomic environment in the near- to
         probably medium-term pose high risks to sustaining outcomes achieved in this program as well as in
         the wider public investment needs.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank used the PforR financing mechanism for the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project as a
  strategic approach to support the implementation of the Third Phase of the National Targeted Program

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



  (NTP3) for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation in Vietnam. The approach effectively tackled the
  weaknesses of the NTP3. The technical, financial, economic, and safeguards aspects of the PforR
  approach assessed the use of the country's own systems and adequately identified capacity and
  institutional gaps. The Bank team obtained grant financing to strengthen the program's TA. The M&E
  arrangements were well structured, using the national M&E system and identified indicators for
  improvement.The disbursement linked indicators were well defined. An independent body verified targets
  achieved. This was the first PforR financing instrument used by Bank in the water sector and the first time
  to be implemented in Vietnam. All program elements were reflected in the Results Framework. The
  program was aligned with key government priorities.The Bank team used the PforR approach anchored
  on the NTP3/NRD

  Bank performance was highly satisfactory at entry. Using country systems, the capacity gaps were well
  identified and adequately supported by the parallel TA program. Program preparation included clear and
  concise PAD and PAP documents that adequately addressed the sector and institutional challenges and
  risks.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted regular supervision missions and communicated program progress, identified
 emerging technical issues issues, and recommended corrective measures in a timely manner. Supervision
 focused on building the implementing agencies' capacities and meeting all DLI targets. The Bank
 proactively monitored environmental and social safeguards compliance issues. In the first years of
 implementation, when the TA was delayed because of slower than expected procurement, the Bank team
 provided capacity building to help provincial agencies to prepare the annual investment plans and other
 activities. In particular, the Bank provided timely and relevant analyses during the MTR and restructuring.
 Implementation bottlenecks were identified with recommended corrective measures. When progress in the
 sanitation DLIs were lagging in some provinces because latrine costs were too high, the Bank promoted
 new low-cost technologies for rural household latrines, as an evidence of the results focus.

 The performance of the Bank was highly satisfactory. The Bank team provided high quality support and
 proactive, strategic advice to technical and management issues. Following the government's satisfaction
 with the flexibility and fast disbursement features of this program, the government pursued four additional
 PforR operations.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The program provided clear objectives built on the existing National Target Program (NTP) for Rural Water
 and Sanitation Program. The theory of change documented how the existing NTP M&E system of 14
 indicators for rural water supply and sanitation system would also be used for the program M&E. The
 Program introduced six new DLIs, four PDO Indicators, and a number of intermediate outcome indicators to
 be tracked and reported annually closely following the program's Results Framework. All of the RF
 indicators and DLIs were well-defined, linked to the PDO, and offered implementing agencies meaningful
 metrics to monitor outputs and impacts. The indicators and DLIs had clear baselines and realistic
 targets; clearly defined in the POM with detailed sustainability and community wide
 sanitation requirements. Data was collected at the local level, processed at the provincial level for use in
 their annual investment planning and tracking purposes. Summary investments and progress reports of the
 indicators were assembled by the National Center for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (NCERWASS), in
 cooperation with the NTP Standing Office for Rural Water and Sanitation Services. The system used a
 geographical information system (GIS)-based M&E platform, which mapped data on investments,
 coverage, service delivery to the commune level for the entire country. The parallel grant financed TA
 provided training on improving data collection, and using the existing M&E system as foundation of
 provincial plans (PAD, paragraphs 48-50). The M&E system was well embedded in the provincial and
 national institutions.



b. M&E Implementation
  The program M&E was implemented by MARD, through NCERWASS. They consolidated DLI results,
  prepared annual Comprehensive Results Reports (CRR). Weaknesses in design were addressed during
  implementation. Specific indicators were added. For example, MARD introduced new indicators for water
  supply service provision. The Vietnam Health Environment Agency (VIHEMA) also approved a new set of
  sanitation performance indicators for all 63 province. The Ministry of Education and Training (MOET)
  joined VIHEMA’s initiative and developed a new set of school sanitation indicators. MOET reported on
  sanitation in schools, The Provincial Centers for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (PCERWASS)
  implemented the program M&E at the provincial level. Data was collected at the local level (commune
  and district), compiled and processed by PCERWASS at the provincial level (with support from the
  Department of Health (DoH), and summarized at the national level by NCERWASS. According to the
  ICR, program M&E was generally complete, timely, and efficient. There were no compliance or quality
  issues. Data reported were independently verified and used for disbursement.

  SAV conducted the DLI verification process through document review and physical inspections for a
  sample of reporting communes. Verified achievements were documented in Annual Verification Reports.
  The verification protocol used rigorous statistical methods. SAV and the implementing agencies received
  regular training on verification and M&E



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to various stakeholders, from the communes to the provincial
  entities to the national agencies. The impact of the reports made following the M&E system were


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



  reflected in the DLI verification proces of independent verification and resulting disbursements. M&E
  data reported on program outcomes. The National Target Program's own M&E system for water supply
  and sanitation system integrated DLI3 (conditions defining sustainability) and DLI4 (community wide
  sanitation requirements) into its M&E system. MARD, NCERWASS, MOH and VIHEMA adopted and
  scaling up sector specific monitoring systems used under this program for the rest of the country. MARD
  approved including key sustainability elements in water supply service indicators while VIHEMA
  established and piloted a new data platform in all 8 provinces to monitor sanitation in households, health
  stations and schools, scaled up to 21 provinces, with plans to cover all 63 provinces.

  The overall quality of the Program M&E was rated substantial. Annual data collection cycle by provinces
  improved the link to the national planning and budgeting processes. Sustainability features of program
  indicators were integrated into the revised national M&E system for rural water supply and sanitation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The program was assigned OP/BP 9.00, which established the policy and planning elements necessary to
   achieve outcomes consistent with PforR objectives. The policy, OP 9.00, Program-for-Results Financing,
   was first issued in February 2012, revised in April 2013, and further updated in April 2015. The elements of
   the policy guided Bank implementation support and assessed the government's systems and their capacity
   to plan and implement effective measures for environmental and social risk management.

   Program investments supported safer and more reliable water supply and improved sanitation and were
   expected to have positive environmental and public health impacts (PAD, paragraph 78). The
   Environmental and Social Systems Assessment required for PforRs concluded that no significant, adverse
   environmental or social impacts were anticipated. Any environmental and social issues (e.g., land
   acquisition, ethnic minority issues) were satisfactorily addressed in the PAP and POM (ICR, paragraph 65).
   The MARD Inspectorate created a hotline for beneficiary feedback where the project affected people can
   report their complaints as part of the Grievance Redress System. The parallel AusAID grant financed a
   capacity building program to address compliance shortcomings in institutional capacity and financial
   resources. The grant financed oversight of the environmental assessment system, technical design of water
   supply systems, screening of environmental effects, and public consultation, among others.

   Planning and monitoring of environmental and social aspects were satisfactorily implemented with some
   initial delays. Institutional arrangements for environmental management were mandated and established at
   all levels of government. The Environmental Protection Plan and applicable regulations for community
   based water schemes and sanitation facilities were submitted as planned. All required environmental and
   social reports were submitted and approved, indicating satisfactory compliance. The Grievance Redress
   System worked. Land-acquisition-affected households were fully compensated following government
   regulations. Among Program provinces, only Quang Ninh had beneficiaries who were both ethnic minorities
   (EM) and land-acquisition-affected people. Guidelines in the PAP and POM for consultation and
   participation of EM beneficiaries were followed. The ICR indicated that the environmental risk

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



   regarding the proper disposal of fecal sludge in participating communes was outside the scope of the
   program.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management : At preparation, the Bank and the government jointly conducted a Fiduciary
   Systems Assessment. This review identified improvements in auditing, competitive procurement,
   transparency, and anti-corruption as part of the PAP and POM. Technical assistance activities addressed
   capacity building needs. At implementation, the PAP was successfully carried out with minor delays. The
   Bank was satisfied with Program fiduciary management.

   Procurement: Procurement was part of the Fiduciary Systems Assessment. Technical Assistance
   addressed capacity building gaps. The Bank reported no procurement problems encountered.
   MARD/PCERWASS informed contractors and operators of sustainability factors to be met by infrastructure
   investments.The PAP actions improved procurement methods, strengthened competition, and encouraged
   private sector participation. Procurement was reported satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


11. Lessons

This was the first PforR program in Vietnam, in the East Asia region of the World Bank, and in the
Water & Sanitation sector. Four additional PforR operations in Vietnam followed this operation. The
ICR offered six lessons and recommendations, four of these are below:




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



        PforRs as a financing mechanism allow for adopting procedures that optimize the
         flexibility offered by results-based financing. In this Program, processes were adjusted to
         address the challenges of the systems in place. These included timely releases of budgets
         and transfers from the central to the provincial governments, coordinating annual investment
         planning at the local level, allocating achievable targets, and improving results verification to
         justify disbursements. Another example was separating the DLIs for the water sector from
         the sanitation sector. Making the DLIs sector specific allowed one sector to disburse
         accordingly while the other sector experienced delays. The lesson learned from this
         operation call for carefully analyzing government systems and procedures to be used under
         the program, simulating recommended improvements to ensure that effective funding flows
         or pre-financing arrangements would be seamless inserted into existing
         processes. Confirmed effective improvements could be included into the Program financing
         agreement, the PAP, or POM.
        Strong implementation support is critical for success. This program was founded on an
         existing NTP/NRD program. This PforR operations provided budget support to provincial
         government investment programs based on achieved periodically verified results. Institutional
         capacity limitations at the Provincial level were acknowledged, hence, the program included
         capacity building TA. This component was addressed by an additional parallel grant
         financing. Components of that TA program responded to the capacity gaps in implementing
         the program. By program closing, with effective Bank supervision, technical assistance
         offered, a jointly established strong verification protocol, and a PAP that was informed by
         best practices, all of the DLI’s were achieved. The PforR instrument helped address long-
         term institutional barriers, and reshaped sector incentives with the help of the capacity
         building TA that targeted the provincial implementation agencies in conjunction with the
         program. The lesson learned from this operation for future PforR operations was that
         sufficient scope and funding should be included for institutional and capacity building tapping
         into resources such as other Bank instruments (e.g., an Investment Project Financing), or
         grants from other donor partners.
        The Program could be used to encourage the private sector to participate in
         delivering rural water supply and sanitation services. In this program, private sector
         providers financed and operated sustainable water schemes in the 8 participating provinces.
         Private sector entities were convinced by clear, time bound investment plans and predictable
         availability of financing based on transparent results-based indicators. The lesson from this
         operation was that the private sector entities were likely to invest in a sector governed by a
         legal and transparent regulatory framework.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a concise and detailed overview of the program. The theory of change showed how the
program supported the Third Phase of the National Target Program for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P4R) (P127435)



Services in 8 of the 63 provinces in Vietnam. The evidence supporting the results of the operations was
synchronized with the independently verified indicators that triggered the disbursements. The narrative
supported the ratings using the results framework. The justifications for the ratings were summarized under
each section of the report. The analysis based on the evidence reported under the disbursement linked
indicators triangulated the conclusions reached. The lessons for consideration in future PforR programs were
informed by this operation. The annexes further clarified the results of the operations. The results of the parallel
technical assistance found in Annex 5 strengthened the evidence on the outcome of this operation. The
summary of the Borrower's comments on the ICR in Annex 6 provided an understanding of the program
requirements, and a candid assessment of early staffing challenges, the poor quality of provincial reports to
verify initial results, and confusion in coordinating financial management early on that negatively affected
implementation. While there was no explicit statement of compliance regarding OP/BP 9.00 for PforR-financed
programs, the ICR provided evidence of compliance and implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 20
