     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0022839

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P145578                                  MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83860                               31-Dec-2019                                         15,054,441.60

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jun-2014                              31-Jan-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          55,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           55,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       15,054,441.60                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dileep M. Wagle            Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was to (i) “support the improvement of the institutional
   framework of the WSS sector of the Operation Implementing Entity; and (ii) improve the quality and
   sustainability of water supply service in Selected Urban Areas" (Loan Agreement, June 13, 2014, Schedule
   1, p.6). This was identical to the wording of the PDO in the Program Appraisal Document, p.vii, with the
   exception that the “Operation Implementing Entity” was originally stated as “State of Oaxaca”. The PDO did
   not change in essence, with this modification.
   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed into the following objectives:


                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



   Objective 1 (PDO1): To support the improvement of the institutional framework of the WSS sector of
   the State of Oaxaca.
   Objective 2 (PDO2): To improve (a) the quality and (b) the sustainability of water supply service in selected
   urban areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No


c. Components
   The program scope, activities, and classification into Results Areas, as defined in the PAD, are given
   below.
   Results Area 1: Modernization of the legal and regulatory framework of the WSS sector in the State:
   (estimated cost at appraisal US$4.5 million; actual cost at completion - not reported in the ICR).
   The indicative list of activities consisted of preparing revised versions of key legal and regulatory tools of
   the WSS sector’s legal and regulatory framework, to align them with the Government of Oaxaca (GoO)’s
   vision for modernizing the sector, including (a) a WSS sector law and related regulations, (b) standard
   regulations for municipal or inter-municipal WSS service provision, (c) amendment of law creating the
   metropolitan water utility, SAPAO, submitted to Congress, and (d) CEA (the State Water Commission) and
   SAPAO organizational manuals and internal regulations. The activities under Results Area 1 were
   however not a prerequisite for the achievement of objectives under other results areas.
   Results Area 2: Improvement of water services in Oaxaca Metropolitan Area: (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$17 million, of which US$8.5 million financed through the National Water Commission (CONAGUA)’s
   APAZU program for water supply and sanitation in urban areas; actual cost at completion - not reported in
   the ICR).
   Program activities financed through CONAGUA’s APAZU program were aimed at improving the quality and
   efficiency of water supply services in a selected service area (San Juan Chapultepec) of Oaxaca
   Metropolitan Area’s water utility (SAPAO), covering 20 percent of SAPAO’s total number of connections,
   serving 50,000 people through inter alia: (a) the rehabilitation of boreholes supplying the sector, (b)
   construction of interconnection between the boreholes and water treatment facility, and with main
   distribution lines, (c) construction of water treatment facility, (d) construction of transmission line from
   pumping station to storage tanks, (d) rehabilitation and construction of storage tanks, and (e) carrying out
   of WSS studies, preparation of bidding documents and works supervision.
   Results Area 3: Improvement of water services in secondary towns: (estimated cost at appraisal US$60
   million, of which US$30 million financed through CONAGUA’s APAZU program; actual cost at completion -
   not reported in the ICR).
   Program activities aimed at improving the quality of water supply services and the financial sustainability of
   the water utilities operating in 18 selected secondary towns located outside the Oaxaca Metropolitan
   Area. These selected secondary towns were made up of those with a population above 15,000 inhabitants
   and/or where CEA currently operated the systems. Participating water utilities accounted for about 50
   percent of the total State urban population outside of the Oaxaca Metropolitan Area, and totalled some
   600,000 beneficiaries. Activities would include (a) rehabilitation and extension of production, storage and

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



  pumping systems, (b) rehabilitation, hydraulic optimization and sectorization of the water network, (c)
  rehabilitation of water connections, (d) installation of metering and pressure gauges, (e) update of network
  mapping and commercial systems, (f) improvement of accounting systems, and (g) undertaking WSS
  studies, preparation of bidding documents and works supervision.
  Results Area 4: Improvement of WSS information in rural areas: (estimated cost at appraisal US$2 million;
  actual cost at completion - not reported in the ICR).
  Program activities consisted of establishing an information system designed to capture the status and
  sustainability of rural WSS services in the 1,130 localities with populations of between 500 and 2,500
  inhabitants throughout the State, through (a) provision of information technology infrastructure and
  equipment, and carrying out training in the use of their systems, and (b) carrying out of data survey
  activities.
  Technical Assistance (TA) Component:
  A TA component, at a cost of US$10 million, had been included in the program at appraisal. However, this
  was subsequently cancelled, as it was deemed ineligible for financing due to the Law on Financial
  Discipline of the Federated Entities and Municipalities. This resulted in a reclassification of the funds of
  this component to Result Areas 2 & 3.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

   Program cost: The estimated program cost at appraisal was US$93.5 million.
   Financing: IBRD financing for the program amounted to US$55 million. At completion, actual
   disbursement was US$15.05 million.
   Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution from the APAZU program of CONAGUA, was
   planned at US$38.5 million. At completion, the actual contribution from the borrower was
   US$22.37 million.
   Dates: The project was approved on June 6, 2014. It failed to become effective on schedule, on
   account of inconsistencies with existing Mexican legislation. This required a Level 2 restructuring, with
   changes in the Subsidiary Agreement between BANOBRAS (the Borrower) and the GoO (the Operation
   Implementing Entity), which was delayed on account of a change in administration of the State (the new
   administration taking more than a year to review the operation). The Subsidiary Agreement became
   effective in April 28, 2017, and the Amended Loan Agreement on May 9, 2017. The planned closing
   date of December 31, 2019 was extended to January 31, 2021. Actual closing took place on that date.
   MId-Term Review (MTR): A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried out in September 29, 2020.
   Restructurings: The project underwent a Level 2 restructuring, resulting in changes being made to
   meet operational and fiduciary requirements in the Subsidiary Agreement between the National Bank of
   Public Works and Services (BANOBRAS) and GoO, to be consistent with the Mexican legislation. The
   changes included the following:
   (i) Cancellation of the TA component (IPF) of the Program, on grounds that it was not deemed eligible
   for financing by SHCP due to the Law on Financial Discipline of the Federative Entities and
   Municipalities. Funds in this component were reallocated to Results Areas 2 & 3 of the PforR.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



    (ii) A 13-month extension in closing date of the operation, to January 31, 2021, to make up for delays in
    effectiveness and implementation.
    (iii) Revisions/updates to the operation’s Results Framework, DLI Matrix, Program Action Plan and legal
    covenants.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Country and Sector Context: Mexico’s economic growth remained flat throughout the two decades prior
  to appraisal, and significant regional disparities in poverty persisted. Notwithstanding a slight improvement
  in the GDP growth rate during 2010-12, progress towards poverty reduction remained moderate, so that an
  estimated 45 percent of the Mexican population lived below the poverty line. The poverty and economic
  gap between the best and worst performing states had widened during the prior two decades, with extreme
  poverty ranging from 2 percent in Nuevo Leon and the Federal District (Mexico City) to 32 percent in
  Chiapas and 23 percent in Oaxaca. As such, reduction of these disparities represented a key development
  priority for the country, reflected in Mexico’s National Development Plan (2013-19), which prioritized the
  need to achieve greater inclusiveness through reduction in regional income disparities and greater shared
  prosperity via economic productivity, employment and infrastructure development.
  At appraisal, Oaxaca ranked among the poorest states in Mexico, with a per capita income of around
  US$2,750 in 2012 – the second lowest among the country’s 32 States. Around 62 percent of its 3.8 million
  inhabitants lived below the national poverty line. In terms of WSS services, Oaxaca also ranked second
  lowest in the country in terms of drinking water coverage (79 percent) and last in terms of sanitation
  coverage (71 percent). Water quality was also a problem as only 15 of Oaxaca’s 139 treatment plants were
  considered fully operational. The lack of potable water treatment, plus the intermittent nature of supply,
  meant that systems in Oaxaca were unable to deliver safe potable water, forcing users to purchase water
  from trucks, at higher cost.
  The WSS institutional framework in the state was characterized by fragmentation, overlapping functions
  and a lack of policy direction and stewardship for service improvement. WSS service operations were
  largely subsidized and characterized by inefficiency and poor service. In the area of SAPAO’s jurisdiction,
  tariffs covered only 25 percent of operating costs, and 75 percent in systems in secondary
  towns. Financing for WSS sector investments was unpredictable, depending mostly on federal programs
  that did not incentivize improvements in service.
  Modernizing the WSS sector was a priority for the Government of Oaxaca (GoO). The state administration,
  staring a new 6-year term in 2011, had made institutional strengthening and modernization of the sector a
  priority, as embodied in State Development Plan (2011-16). In 2012, GoO adopted a Strategic Plan for the
  WSS sector, which set out an investment plan and objectives for the development of the sector. The
  current Program for Results (PfR) project aims at supporting the GoM to achieve its goals.
  Alignment with National/state-level priorities and Country Partnership Strategy/Framework:


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



The development objectives of the program were aligned with the Federal Government’s priorities and the
World Bank Group (WBG)’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), 2014-19. The operation supported the
priorities of the Government of Mexico (GoM), as reflected in the 2019-24 National Development Plan
(NDP), which emphasized reduction of poverty and income inequality by reactivating the economy,
including development of regional infrastructure programs in the south and south-east. The NDP also
prioritized access to safe drinking water and sanitation, especially in States with the most vulnerable
populations.
The objectives of the program were also fully consistent with the CPS, which prominently featured water
and subnational engagement as one way to address the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The program remained consistent with the WBG’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Mexico for FY20-25: in particular with Focus Area C, on “Enabling Sustainable
Infrastructure and Climate Action”, Objective 6 of which aimed to provide more inclusive and sustainable
infrastructure services. It was also consistent with Focus Area B, “Strengthening Institutions for Public
Finance, Service Delivery, and Economic Inclusion”, which aimed at improving the management of public
resources and strengthening institutions to deliver high quality, inclusive social services via the institutional
strengthening of WSS services and efficiency in public spending.
Relevance of the PDO: Given the country and sector context, the PDO continues to be relevant in regard
to the currently prevailing national/state level and CPF priorities. Oaxaca State ranked third in the country
in terms of extreme poverty levels, with nearly 12 percent of the total national population living in extreme
poverty, mainly in rural areas. The objectives were pitched at the right level to address the priorities of the
GoO, in implementing WSS sector reforms.
Rationale for PfR Support: The PforR was considered an appropriate financial instrument to support the
State’s WSS sector program, as GoO was strongly interested in (a) improving the efficiency of its WSS
program from the technical, fiduciary, environmental and social perspective in one of the poorest-
performing sectors in the country at the time, (b) creating financial incentives for results achievement,
thereby shifting the focus from expending resources to output/outcome achievement, (c) leveraging
CONAGUA financing, using part of the proceeds of the loan as the State counterpart funds required to
access CONAGUA financing. The Program design explicitly recognized certain institutional capacity
constraints in Oaxaca to implement a results-based approach, as well as BANOBRAS’s lack of experience
with the PforR financing instrument. However, the instrument was seen as an opportunity to support a
comprehensive WSS Stare reform program spearheaded by a committed State government, making use of
an innovative approach which would help the State achieve the needed reforms whilst circumventing the
various restrictions on external debt imposed at the Federal level.
Prior Bank involvement in the sector: Since 2011, the Bank had been engaged in supporting the GoO’s
reform agenda for inclusive growth through a strategic partnership. The GoO and the Bank signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in June 2011, which included multi-year, multi-sectoral support to
the State, combining a package of knowledge, convening and financial services, to support a reform
agenda for inclusive growth in the State and for modernizing its public institutions and policies. In 2013, the
MoU was renewed for another two years.
Based on the above, and taking into account the institutional capacity constraints to implement the
program, relevance of the PDO is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)




       Rating
       Substantial

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     “To support the improvement of the institutional framework of the State of Oaxaca”

    Rationale
    The Program was intended to support implementation of the GoO’s Strategic Plan for the WSS sector, with
    emphasis on improving the quality and sustainability of water utilities in the Oaxaca Metropolitan Area and
    selected urban areas across the State. The expected outcome of the PforR was the creation of a
    demonstration effect of modernization of the WSS sector and sustainable water services to further develop
    the sector and scale-up the approach and results.
    Theory of Change (ToR)
    The objective of modernizing the sector institutional framework would be achieved through the following
    activities: (i) Submission of the revised State Water & Sanitation Law to State Congress, which was a
    prerequisite for the revision of the key legal and regulatory tools that needed to be developed (based on the
    approved law); (ii) Operational tools for measuring performance indicators in the selected sectors of SAPAO
    and secondary towns; (iii) Establishment of a Rural WSS Information System; and (iv) Successful completion
    of a Rural & Urban Strategy, and a Public Expenditure Review (PER) for the WSS sector – which was to
    have been supported under the (subsequently cancelled) TA component.
    Towards this end, the following DLRs were identified under Results Area 1, in the context of PDO1:
       DLR 1-1(a) New State Water & Sanitation Law submitted to Congress.
       DLR 1-2(a) Regulation of State Water and Sanitation Law prepared and published in the Official Gazette
    of the State of Oaxaca.
       DLR 1-2(b) Standard regulation for provision of municipal water and sanitation services prepared.
       DLR 1-2(c) Amendment of Law creating SAPAO submitted to Congress.
       DLR 1-2(d) CEA’s internal regulation and organizational manual adopted and published in the Official
    Gazette of the State of Oaxaca.
       DLR 1-2(e) SAPAO’s internal regulation and organizational manual adopted and published in the Official
    Gazette of the State of Oaxaca.
    The key assumptions underlying the ToR included: (i) the institutional capacity of the GoO for coordinating
    program activities, monitoring results, and inter-institutional co-ordination (between SEFIN, CEA and
    SAPAO) (ii) planning & execution capacity of CEA and SAPAO, (iii) prompt implementation of activities to be
    financed by APAZU, and (iv) operational/commercial management of SAPAO and other utilities to achieve
    the service quality and sustainability goals of the Program. As a PforR, the Program also included a
    Program Action Plan (PAP), and Environmental and Social Management Manual, an Operations Manual,
    implementation and program management support, and Results-based Verification Protocols & Processes.
    Outputs and Outcomes:



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



The outcome under PDO1 consisted of the implementation of a modernized sector institutional framework to
support a comprehensive strategy, and the development of planning tools to consolidate a platform for the
GoO to scale up the quality and sustainability of WSS services. Progress towards this goal was measured
by three outcome indicators: (i) Key legal and regulatory tools prepared; (ii) Number of utilities decentralized
(target set at 7); and (iii) Tools for the WSS sector in place and being used.
In terms of outcomes, PDO1 achieved most of its targets: (i) Key legal and regulatory tools were almost fully
achieved and a New State Water and Sanitation Law was submitted to Congress. (ii) Only 1 out of the
targeted 7 utilities was decentralized, though 18 out of 18 towns succeeded in developing programs of
intervention of immediate impact for the WSS sector, along with mechanisms to measure performance
indicators (which however – though developed – were not implemented by the time of Program closing). The
Rural and Urban WSS Information System and the Rural and Urban Strategy and Public Expenditure
Review for the WSS sector (both, intermediate indicators), which were among the tools to improve the
performance of the WSS sector, were not actually put in place. However, as seen from the ToC, these were
activities that were to have been funded by the TA component that was cancelled, and can be considered to
be non-DLI Program activities.
Table 1 shows the achievement of specific Program results for PDO1 under the relevant Results Areas:

               Table 1 – Achievement of Program Results for PDO1
  Indicator Name                                   Target      Achieved   Achieved    DLR#
                                                   Value       Value      (%)
  Improvement of the institutional framework       Yes         No                     -
  of the WSS sector
  Results Area 1: Modernization of the legal and regulatory framework of the WSS sector in the
  State
  New State Water & Sanitation Law submitted to Yes            Yes        100%        DLR 1-1(a)
  Congress
  (a) Regulation of State Water and Sanitation     Yes         No         0%          DLR 1-2(a)
  Law prepared and published in the Official
  Gazette of the State of Oaxaca
  (b) Standard regulation for provision of         Yes         Yes        100%        DLR 1-2(b)
  municipal water and sanitation services
  prepared
  I Amendment of Law creating SAPAO submitted Yes              Yes        100%        DLR 1-2I
  to Congress
  (d) CEA’s internal regulation and organizational Yes         No         40%         DLR 1-2(d)
  manual adopted and published in the Official
  Gazette of the State of Oaxaca
  (e) SAPAO’s internal regulation and              Yes         Yes        100%        DLR 1-2(e)
  organizational manual adopted and published in
  the Official Gazette of the State of Oaxaca
  Results Area 3: Improvement of Water Services in secondary towns




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)




        Improvement of information:                       18      18                   100%           DLI 3-1
        Number of selected water utilities with an
        approved program of interventions of immediate
        impact
        Results Area 4: Improvement of WSS information in rural areas
        Improvement of information:                       100%    11.7%                11.7%          DLI 4-1
        Percentage of localities in priority segment with
        information integrated in Rural WSS System

    As seen from the table, the institutional reforms achieved under PDO1 were significant, these instruments
    increasing the capacity of CEA and SAPAO to manage the sector and provide improved WSS services. Key
    among these was the development of a set of WSS laws and related regulations for municipal and related
    WSS service provision, as well as the organizational manuals and internal regulations of these institutions –
    all of these contributing to the goal of modernizing the State’s institutional framework. Mainstreaming of
    these legal and regulatory instruments into the WSS sector framework provided an important foundation for
    longer-term sustainability and strengthening of the governance systems of these institutions.
    Based on the above, the efficacy of PDO1 is rated Substantial.




    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     "To improve (a) the quality and (b) the sustainability of water supply service in selected urban areas".

    Rationale

          Criteria for assessing improvements in water service quality under the Program included: (i) The
          provision of continuous water service from SAPAO in the San Juan Chapultepec sector of the Oaxaca
          Metropolitan Area (representing 20 percent of SAPAO’s total number of connections) and (ii) the
          provision of services with improved continuity in the secondary towns. As regards the sustainability of
          water supply services under the Program, in Oaxaca Metropolitan Area, this related to utilities providing
          service whose commercial efficiency equaled or exceeded 90 percent, and - in secondary towns -
          utilities whose revenues were greater than their operating expenses.
          Improvements in quality and sustainability under PDO2 would be assessed through a combination of
          DLIs (for Results Areas 2 and 3), as listed in Section 3 (b), and DLRs – as listed below (under Results
          Area 2):



                                                                                                          Page 8 of 17
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



  DLR 2-1 (i) (a) Preparation of the technical dossiers (Expendientes Tecnicos) for the rehabilitation
and/or construction of the selected sector’s macro and micro distribution systems.
  DLR 2-1 (ii) (b) Construction of the selected sector’s macro distribution
  DLR 2-1 (iii) (c) Percentage of active users with continuous service in the selected sector
  DLR 2-2 (a) Commercial efficiency in the selected sector
Outputs and Outcomes:
Outcomes achieved under Objective 2 fell short of targets. As regards improvements in the quality of
water services, the Program reached some 331,564 direct beneficiaries, or slightly over half the target
number of 650,000 people receiving improved services. Inhabitants of Oaxaca Metropolitan Area
accounted for 56,279 of these beneficiaries, while the 18 selected secondary towns accounted for
275,285. As regards sustainable services, the Program did not reach commercial efficiency in the
selected San Juan Chupultepec sector, and only two water utilities in the selected secondary towns met
the target of achieving service revenue greater than their operating expenses.
Table 2 shows the achievement of specific Program results for PDO2 under Results Areas 2 and 3:

          Table 2 – Achievement of Program Results for PDO2
  Indicator Name                           Target Value Achieved     Achieved               DLR#
                                                        Value        (%)
  People in urban areas provided with      650,000      331,564      51%
  sustainable and improved water service
  quality under the Program
  Results Area 2: Improvement of Water Services in Oaxaca Metropolitan Area
  Improvement of service quality           Yes          No           60%                    DLI 2-1
    a . Preparation of the technical       Yes          Yes          100%                   DLR 2-1
    dossiers (Expendientes Tecnicos) for                                                    (i)
    the rehabilitation and/or construction
    of the selected sector’s macro and
    micro distribution systems
    a . Construction of the selected       Yes          Yes          100%                   DLR 2-1
    sector’s macro distribution                                                             (ii)
    a . Percentage of active users with    100%         33%          33%                    DLI 2-1
    continuous service in the selected                                                      (iii)
    sector
  Commercial efficiency in the selected    90%          0%           0%                     DLR 2-2
  sector                                                                                    (a)
  Percentage of samples tested             100%         0%           0%
  complying with bacteriological, residual
  chlorine, iron, manganese, color
  parameters of the drinking water norm in
  the selected sector
  Results Area 2: Improvement of water services in secondary towns


                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)




                    Number of selected water utilities with      18              1                 5.56%           DLI 3-2
                    improved service continuity
                    Number of selected water utilities whose     18              2                 11%             DLI 3-3
                    service revenue is greater than their
                    operating expenses

                  Results Area 2 saw partial achievements, contributing to the achievement of PDO2 (a). According to
                  IVA verification cycles, all technical design documents were prepared, and construction of all three
                  components of the macro-sector distribution of San Juan Chapultepec were built and became
                  operational. SAPAO carried out the construction, rehabilitation and modernization of the distribution
                  system, with extensions of the system to the highest parts of macro-sector area, where only tanker
                  trucks were able to distribute water to meet demand from the residents. The pressure in the networks
                  for delivery of the service also increased with greater efficiency. Substitution of household taps also
                  took place – which was one of the main components of the network where non-revenue water was
                  found. These actions together did substantially benefit the 56,279 inhabitants of the San Martin
                  Mexicapam, Montoya and San Juan Chapultepec agencies, of the Municipality of Oaxaca de Juárez.
                  As regards PDO2 (b), only a third of active users were receiving continuous service. It was moreover
                  not possible to measure commercial efficiency (i.e. income by amount of service billed) at Program
                  closing, on account of the fact that services had just commenced at the time (which also affected the
                  testing of water quality) – hence, this indicator was not met.
                  As regards the goal of achieving improvement of water services in secondary towns, the number of
                  utilities that achieved improved service was negligible (1 utility out of 18). The goal of improving service
                  sustainability (measured in terms of utility service revenues in excess of operating expenses) was also
                  negligible (2 out of 18).
                  Based on this, the efficacy of PDO2 is rated Modest.




             Rating
      Modest
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)




     ---



Efficiency Rating
---


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                        Rate
                                                           Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                        Available?
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

With efficacy rated Modest, but Relevance rated Substantial, the overall outcome rating is assessed as
Moderately Unsatisfactory. The Program did make some important contributions to the Improvement of the
WSS sector, despite several shortcomings.


a.         Outcome Rating
           Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risks: This risk is assessed as Low. As a marginalized State in Mexico, Oaxaca is a priority region for
the Federal Government, which has been providing substantial financial resources to the water sector
there. The multi-year Strategic Plan adopted by the State in 2012 continues to be relevant today, and the PforR
operation has supported strategic interventions from that Plan. Water will almost certainly be a continuing
priority for the State and Federal governments, and the new National Water Plan (2019-24), highlighting access
to water and sanitation as a human right, suggests that support to this sector in the most marginalized States
will continue in the foreseeable future.
Institutional risks: This risk is assessed as Moderate. Under the PforR, CEA and SAPAO have been
strengthened and their technical and managerial capacity to implement provision of service in an efficient and
sustainable manner has improved. If a reluctance to embrace the modernization process of the WSS sector
does arise in the future, this could affect the development outcome. Participating institutions (not only CEA and

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



SAPAO, but also relevant municipalities and water utilities) are being encouraged to change the way in which
they deliver and regulate services – shifting the focus from the mere construction of infrastructure to service
delivery – and this momentum needs to continue in future. In addition, the legal autonomy of service providers
will also need to be extended, and water tariffs may need to be increased in due course.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

   The strategic relevance of approach was sound and the Program was well aligned with the priorities of
   the State government and of CONAGUA for the modernization of the WSS sector in Oaxaca. The
   design of the Program incorporated financial incentives necessary to link infrastructure outcomes, plus
   financial and service performance to disbursements, and to expand access to WSS services across the
   State. The M&E systems and verification protocols were designed at appraisal to incorporate the
   measurement tools and to strengthen the institutional capacity needed to monitor Program results.
   However, the Program design did not foresee the legal and fiduciary complications that would arise on
   account of an inconsistency between the disbursement mechanisms and the Mexican Federal Laws and
   its regulations, which led to a delay in the effectiveness of the sub-national loan between Oaxaca State
   and BANOBRAS, and a suspension of activities for nearly two years to process a restructuring of the
   operation. In this sense, the quality-at-entry fell short of ensuring that the legal and fiduciary framework
   for the PforR was in place to accommodate the approach at the sub-national level. This eventually
   impacted the Program’s performance, not only on account of the delay but also because the cancelled
   TA component was important to providing the necessary strategic and oversight support to SAPAO and
   CEA (and other water utilities) in intermediate cities, ultimately impacting the achievement of planned
   development outcomes.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank team conducted 13 supervision missions between 2014 and 2021. The ICR reports (p.27) that
  the team had a good rapport with counterparts, and had a good understanding of the sector issues and
  conditions surrounding the operation. Additionally, there were no changes in team leadership during the
  initial four years of the operation and the team made efforts to maintain a good sector dialogue, pressing for
  action on lagging activities and while simultaneously showing flexibility and adaptability given the
  implementation challenges faced. During implementation, the Bank provided quality support and strategic
  advice on the most challenging technical, management issues, along with good coordination with
  counterparts.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



  That said, a key shortcoming of the Bank’s approach was the failure to restructure the Program earlier, to
  reflect the institutional weaknesses and political economy constraints that arose in the initial years of
  implementation. Also, during restructuring, a re-evaluation of the targets for the proposed for DLRs would
  have been appropriate. This would been especially helpful for targets relating to PDO2 (improvement of
  quality and sustainability of WSS services), in particular for those relating to improvements in commercial
  efficiency – which many of the service providers found difficult to attain.
  Although advances were made under the various results areas, overall, the full set of results underpinning
  progress under the Program was substantially delayed. The absence of the TA component impacted the
  overall performance of the PDO and DLIs dependent on TA support.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  Strengthening of the GoO's M&E system for the WSS sector was a key objective under the project. The quality
  of M&E systems was originally significantly deficient, especially in the rural areas, where no consistent
  mechanisms existed to monitor service access and sustainability. The Program helped set up measurement
  tools to monitor the improvement in service quality and sustainability data in both urban and rural areas. This
  was accompanied by steps to strengthen the institutional capacity to monitor results and consolidate data at
  municipal and State level, and for the purposes of the PforR, prepare the proper reporting and monitoring of
  results-based indicators to request disbursements.
  For the PforR, the various DLIs, two PDO indicators and four intermediate indicators had to tracked and
  reported annually, providing meaningful metrics for implementing agencies to monitor relevant Program
  outputs. The verification protocols for the objectives were consistent with Bank procedures, and DLIs were
  clearly defined, measurable and defined in the Project Operations Manual with detailed sustainability
  requirements.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Program’s results verification was intended to review and validate the fulfillment of disbursement linked
  indicators. The IVA, a firm specializing in in technical audits, hired by the Secretary of Finance, carried out
  the verification and accreditation of results (ICR, p.24).



c. M&E Utilization

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)




     a. M&E Utilization
    The verification of results carried out by the IVA provided the basis of which pre-determined
    disbursements in the matrix of DLIs could take place. The IVA undertook the technical audit of
    compliance with the DLIs during the four years of Program execution, to qualify CEA and SAPAO
    access to Program resources. Although the disbursement process suffered significant delays related to
    the restructuring, the IVA nevertheless performed the verifications from 2017 to 2021, following the
    protocol established in the Project Operations Manual. On account of the Covid-19 pandemic, and the
    disruptions resulting, the final verification cycle took place in December 2020.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  Environmental and Social Safeguards
  An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared, according to OP 9.00, during
  program preparation (PAD, p.18). The draft ESSA was disclosed to the public in December, 2013, and a
  public consultation held in January, 2014. The final version of the ESSA was disclosed on the GoO and
  World Bank websites.
  The potential negative environmental impacts associated with the Program ranged from low to moderate at
  appraisal, being limited to the civil works sites and would be mitigated with standard measures (PAD,
  p.19). The Program did not contain activities that would involve severe adverse impacts considered to be
  permanent or cumulative, as defined in OP 9.00, and Program sub-projects would be screened by CEA and
  SAPAO to ensure compliance. The ICR reports (p.25) that during implementation, CEA Operators, the
  Program Management Company (PM) and SAPAO successfully implemented the social management
  strategies that were duly embedded in the Program Action Plan (PAP) and Program Operational Manual
  (POM). A variety of measures were adopted, including the institutionalization of Social Management and
  Citizen Engagement activities in SAPAO’s operations, social management schemes implemented by CEAS
  in 8 projects in 6 municipalities, and the hiring by the PM of a Regional Coordinator and a social specialist in
  each of the five regions covered by the operation. SAPAO and CEA both had a Grievance Redress
  Mechanism (GRM) in place, with slight differences according to their institutional arrangements.
  The Program’s environmental risk was raised from Moderate to Substantial at the time of closing, on
  account of CEA’s lack of technical capacity for EHS management. In 2019, CEA hired a company
  specialized in environmental management to carry out this part of its Program works (implementation of the
  ESM Framework, training of personnel at all levels in CEA, preparation of environmental compliance
  reports, etc.). In 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic brought along some previously unforeseen obstacles to
  supervision and development of activities, affecting suppliers and service providers, whose non-compliance

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



  caused further delays in works and deficiencies in some aspects of EHS. Minor non-compliances were
  detected but resolved promptly by contractors through implementation of specific action plans.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (p. 26) that FM compliance was generally moderately
  satisfactory throughout the implementation period. Moderate shortcomings were observed, mostly in relation to
  delays in Program budget allocation during the early stages of program implementation.
  The Program’s interim unaudited financial reports were submitted with minor delays, though deemed
  acceptable by the Bank. The external financial audits conducted for the Program were generally submitted to
  the Bank on time and were deemed acceptable. The audit reports as on December 31, 2018 and January 31,
  2021, did include qualified opinions, as the independent auditors found constant delays in execution of works
  under the Program, as well as several incomplete works. These findings were consistent with the low
  execution and disbursement progress achieved by the Program.
  Procurement: The ICR reports (p. 26) that the PforR’s procurement design was consistent with the results and
  selected instruments. During implementation, all procurement processes followed competitive methods, and
  there were no significant delays in implementation of contracts. Three procurement complaints were resolved
  per applicable regulation, while no complaints of fraud and corruption were received.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
  Gender: The ICR reports (p. 20) that the operation supported the inclusion – both in the legal and institutional
  frameworks – of incentives for increased female participation in decision-making. This approach was
  reflected in the POM, the GRM, as well as in the on-going gender strategies put into place by SAPAO and
  CEA. Additionally, as part of the Program’s institutional modernization, activities included mechanisms to
  increase public participation and civil society engagement in the oversight of WSS operations. This included
  incentives provided to increase women’s participation in water works committees, which – being intended to
  be fully representative of beneficiaries, successfully achieved 50 percent representation for women.
  Poverty Reduction and Shared Responsibility: Given that Oaxaca was the State with the second-lowest GDP
  per capita in the country, the State was of high priority for Federal Government investment, with access to
  water being highlighted as a human right. The Program was similarly aligned with the WBG’s twin goals of
  ending extreme poverty by 2030, and promoting shared prosperity among the poorest
  Mexicans. Operationally, the Program targeted 18 secondary municipalities, where 58 percent of the
  population lived below the national poverty line, who – for the most part – suffered disproportionately from
  the lack of quality in the supply of water. The progress made by the Program in improving the quality and

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



  sustainability of water from public networks was likely to confer multiple benefits to this segment of the
  population.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome                                                                            ---
                               Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   ---
                               Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   The M&E system put in place
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Substantial                was adequate to measure
                                                                                   Program results
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

 The ICR (pgs. 29 to 30) lists a number of lessons from which IEG derives the following lessons that are
relevant for similar projects implemented in comparable environments:
1. Program design needs to be closely aligned with the client's implementation capacity and
readiness: This was the first PforR to be implemented in Mexico, and only the third in the Latin America (LAC)
region. Given the capacity level available to implement such an instrument at the subnational level, as well as
the inherent complexity of the institutional arrangements needed to coordinate the fiduciary and financial
mechanisms at State and financial levels, the Program would have benefited from a more thorough financial
and fiduciary viability assessment to ensure that FM mechanisms and institutional frameworks were in place at
appraisal. The key lesson arising is that, for PforR operations, the Bank needs to conduct a more rigorous due
diligence process for operations where State-level capacity is uncertain or limited, and secondly, to ensure that
on-lending arrangements and policy frameworks are conducive to the proposed instrument, confirmed by
appraisal and possibly through a requirement framed as a condition of effectiveness.
2. In countries and/or States with limited implementation capacity, inclusion of a Technical Assistance
component can play an instrumental role in ensuring the success of the PforR: The multi-annual TA
component originally included in the Oaxaca WSS PforR was important to ensuring strategic and oversight
support. The cancellation of the component impacted the achievement of the Program’s objectives, especially
for those activities designed to support capacity-building and knowledge transfer within beneficiary institutions,
such as the Rural WSS Strategy and the WSS Public Expenditure Review.
3. For PforR Programs, hiring of an IVA Verification Agent should be an effectiveness condition: The
hiring of the IVA Verification Agent was delayed by two years, on account of the initial delays in signing of
operational documents and the need for amendments of the Subsidiary Agreement and the Operational
Manual. This impacted the disbursement rate of the Program as no disbursement was able to process without
going through a verification cycle by the IVA. Given that disbursements under PforRs are normally linked to the
achievement of specific results, which call for independent verification, it would make sense to ensure that the


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization (P145578)



hiring of an independent agent for this task is made an effectiveness condition, so that delays in disbursement
do not take place on this account.
4. A strong commitment of the State and Federal agencies is critical for the successful implementation
of a subnational PforR operation. In the case of the Oaxaca WSS PforR operation, the GoO was able to
mobilize some funds to meet a portion of the requirements of the cancelled TA component. Likewise,
CONAGUA worked closely with the GoO to co-finance sub-projects and infrastructure investments, and to
provide critical technical support. Despite facing the negative impacts of natural emergencies, such as
earthquakes and the Covid-19 pandemic, the GoO and CONAGUA demonstrated a solid commitment to
expedite implementation and meet the DLI targets on time.




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain
The project represents the Bank's first PforR operation in the WSS sector in Mexico. A review of the
experience of the Oaxaca WSS Program could provide useful lessons that could guide subsequent PforR
operations in the country, in the WSS or other sectors.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, clear, and candid, and generally complies with the relevant OPCS guidelines (except
in regard to length, which may however be justified to some extent by the complexity of the operation). The
ICR presents a clear theory of change with a good diagrammatic representation of the results chain from
activities to outcomes. The analysis and conclusions are generally supported by evidence. One would
however have liked to have seen a proper summary of cost allocations to the various results areas, as well as
a summation of these costs at project closing - which would have been relatively easy to provide, since
disbursements were clearly linked to results achieved for each of the results areas.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
