     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022863

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P133018                                     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84240                                  31-Dec-2020                                       198,877,827.22

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2014                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            198,877,827.22                                              0.00

 Actual                                        198,877,827.22                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ebru Karamete               Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The same Project Development Objective were used in the Loan Agreement (page 5) and Project Appraisal
   Document (page 4), which were: “to improve access to sustainable water supply and sanitation services
   in selected villages and towns in rural areas of Zhejiang Province”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   1. Improving Water Supply and Sanitation (Appraisal amount: US$355.87 million, of which IBRD loan
   is US$193.50 million; Actual amount: US$316.08 million, of which IBRD loan is US$195.71 million).
   This component supported construction and rehabilitation of water supply and wastewater collection and
   treatment facilities in the project counties.

   2. Training and Capacity Building (Appraisal amount: US$2.50 million, fully funded by IBRD loan;
   Actual amount: US$0.87 million). This component included training for staff of Project Management
   Offices (PMOs), Project Implementation Unit (PIU), institutions involved in project implementation, and staff
   and operators of water companies participating in the project to enhance their O&M competency;
   institutional strengthening and capacity building for water companies participating in the project; and
   implementation of a program to monitor and evaluate the performance of wastewater treatment stations in
   the participating villages.

   3. Project Management and Supervision (Appraisal amount: US$3.50 million fully funded by IBRD
   loan; Actual amount: US$1.80 million). This component included support for review of technical reports
   for subprojects eligible for project financing, as well as support for project management and supervision.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: Project cost planned at appraisal was US$400 million, and actual cost at closing was US$327.5
   million (82 percent of the planned amount). The reduction of the total project cost was primarily because of
   savings from competitive bidding during implementation.

   Financing: The project was financed by IBRD that planned to provide US$200 million at appraisal. At
   closing, US$ 198.9 million was spent.

   Borrower Contribution: The borrower contribution planned at appraisal was US$200 million and the actual
   amount was US$128.6 million. Borrower contribution was adjusted based on the cost savings to fully utilize
   the IBRD loan.

   Dates: The project was approved by the Board on 25 Sept 2014 and became effective about four months
   later on 2 February 2015. Original closing date of 31 December 2020 was extended for six months to 30
   June 2021, to complete the unfinished works.

   Restructuring: During the mid-term review, according to the framework approach, the indicator targets
   were updated without a formal restructuring since this was already anticipated in the PAD. The project went

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



   through one Level II restructuring that was approved on July 8, 2020. The restructuring further revised the
   outcome targets upwards as follows: (a) The target for number of people in rural areas provided with access
   to improved water sources under the project, was revised from 220,000 to 450,000. The target for people
   provided with access to improved sanitation facilities, was revised from 290,000 to 630,000 by closing. In
   addition, the loan closing date was extended by six months from December 31, 2020, to June 30, 2021 due
   to impact of Covid-19 pandemic, to complete construction works.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: While in the 2000s China had made significant progress in increasing water
supply sanitation (WSS) coverage in general, there were significant urban and rural disparities, and some
parts of the rural population still lacked access to improved WSS services, for particularly the most
vulnerable groups. As of 2012, over 290 million of the rural population were without improved sanitation and
about 100 million were without improved water supply (ICR page 1). In addition, China lacked appropriate
technical standards for rural wastewater treatment. Only a small portion of rural sewage was collected this
led to environment pollution issues. There was poor or inadequate O&M and water companies needed
increased revenues, thus adequate O&M budget and improved operational efficiency including reducing
non-revenue water. Many water companies were in need of equipment, effective managerial tools, and
experienced staff.

Relevance to Government Priorities and Strategies: Improving equitable and sustainable access to safe
and improved WSS in the rural areas was a national priority, highlighted in both the 11th and 12th National
Five-Year Plans (FYPs, 2006–2010, 2011–2015). The New Countryside Development (NCD) program was
developed under the 11th FYP and aimed to improve rural WSS service coverage, reduce rural and urban
disparities, and enhance the sustainability of WSS services. promoted development of infrastructure to
address safety, adequacy, and sustainability aspects of drinking water; waste management services; and
environmental pollution reduction in rural areas. Zhejiang Province, which had all the issues described
above, was selected as the pilot province of the NCD program. In 2011, Zhejiang Province submitted the
proposal to the World Bank, requesting the World Bank’s support to overcome the remaining institutional
barriers to scaling up rural water services in a financially sustainable way. Four counties/districts (or county-
level cities), representative of different rural realities in Zhejiang and eastern China, were selected to
participate in the project.

Relevance to World Bank Strategies: The project development objectives were highly relevant to the World
Bank’s strategies at appraisal and at closing. The project supported key themes under two engagement
areas of the Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013–2016): (a) WSS under the engagement area of
Supporting Greener Growth and (b) policies and delivery systems to promote rural-urban integration under
the engagement area of Promoting More Inclusive Development. The project directly supported the two
engagement areas of the Country Partnership Framework for China for FY2020 to 2025: (a) achieving more
effective and sustainable infrastructure financing and revenue mobilization under the engagement area of
‘Advancing Market and Fiscal Reforms’ and (b) reducing water pollution and strengthening sustainable
natural resource management under the engagement area of ‘Promoting Greener Development’. The



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



               project also supported the CPF’s cross-cutting theme of ‘Cooperating on Global Knowledge and
               Development’ by promoting South-South cooperation and knowledge exchange.

               However, while there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and
               WB strategies, the objective is pitched rather narrowly, i.e. only the access dimension of service delivery
               outcomes are included. However, other key outcomes such as quality, reliability and /or affordability could
               also have been articulated as part of the objectives to be able to assess the complete picture for the project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access to sustainable water supply services in selected villages and towns in rural areas of Zhejiang
                             Province.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC):

                             The ICR prepared a logical TOC that clearly showed how inputs and outputs and outcomes were linked.
                             Water supply infrastructure (construction and rehabilitation of raw water mains, water distribution networks,
                             and water treatment plants) were to contribute to the outcome of improving access to sustainable water
                             supply services in the rural areas of Zhejiang Province. In addition, the rehabilitation of water distribution
                             networks was further expected to reduce the non-revenue water (NRW) and therefore would increase water
                             company revenues and improve operational efficiency.

                             Sustainability considerations were included as part of the results framework in terms of financial and
                             environmental aspects. Parallel institutional support and capacity building would contribute to the long-term
                             sustainability of the investments. The project would adopt appropriate water and wastewater treatment
                             processes and technology that were low cost, low energy, simple, and affordable to operate and maintain,
                             which would improve operational and financial sustainability. From the managerial perspective, the project
                             would establish O&M management systems for the infrastructure investments and would strengthen the
                             institutional capacity of local water companies. From the environmental perspective, the project would
                             increase rural sewage collection and improve sewage treatment, which would further reduce water pollution
                             and contribute to environmental sustainability.

                             Outputs:

                                        At project closing 153,389 households with piped water connections benefited from infrastructural
                                          improvements, which exceeded the revised target of 130,000, target exceeded.

                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)




      .All of the water companies except one (Longquan Rural Water Supply Station) did meet the
       compliance criterion for financial sustainability by the time the project closed (ICR, Table 4.7, p.68),
       target met. To assess the financial sustainability of the water companies, an Intermediate Indicator
       was established to monitor the cost recovery of water supply at the water treatment plants and all
       water companies except one- Longquan Rural Water Supply Station- achieved the indicator (Ratio of
       production cost of water supply per cubic meter over the tariff charge per cubic meter <1). In addition,
       an overall cost recovery legal covenant of “total revenues equivalent to and not less than its total
       operating expenses, excluding depreciation” was included in the Project Agreement to make sure the
       project would be financially sustainable.
      2,865 staff were trained as against a revised target of 2,800 staff, target achieved. Tailored trainings
       were provided to enhance the technical capacity of staff to utilize the smart water systems and model
       equipment (). (No indicator measured the outcome of these trainings).
      The project supported preparation and implementation of six O&M plans, achieving the revised target
       of six plans.

The ICR reported on the following additional output achievements not covered in the Results Framework and
therefore lacking target values:

      Regarding tariff rate increases, three counties and one district of the project made a series of
         adjustments to the water supply and sewage tariff since 2015. The project team informed IEG that the
         growth rate of total tariff including water tariff and wastewater tariff from appraisal stage to ICR stage
         is 12% for Anji, 16% for Fuyang, 40% for Longquan, and 63% for Tiantai.
        The ICR reported that (page 16) the non-revenue water (NRW) of project water companies in Anji and
         Fuyang was reduced by 11.7 percent and 3.5 percent, respectively, from 2018 to 2021. Other
         company figures and other years on NRW was not reported.
        The local governments decided to transfer the O&M of the small water supply facilities invested by
         local governments under other projects to these water companies as a result of the improved
         capabilities of the water companies. The O&M of 933 small water supply stations were thus
         transferred. A total of 320,575 people indirectly benefit from these O&M services.
        The companies developed smart water systems under this project, which enabled automatic
         monitoring and regulation of flow and pressure in the water supply networks. The companies were
         also equipped with modern O&M equipment, such as leakage detection equipment and emergency
         management vehicles. No data on flow, continuity and leakage levels were provided by the ICR.
        The project constructed and rehabilitated water mains, distribution networks, and pumping stations,
         and financed the construction of eight wastewater treatment plants (WTPs
        Spring water sources, which were unsafe raw water sources, were replaced by dam water in the
         project counties, and regional treatment plants were also built to supply safe drinking water to the
         nearby villages.

Outcomes:

      A total of 550,408 people directly benefited from the improved water sources (including 273,844
         female population), which exceeded the revised target of 450,000 (including 225,000 female
         population target).

The project achieved its first objective, to improve access to sustainable water supply services in selected
villages and towns in rural areas of Zhejiang Province to a high degree. The project exceeded its indicator

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



targets on piped household connections, number of beneficiaries, O&M plans and financial sustainability.
While the project indicators in the Results Framework did not cover all aspects sufficiently, the ICR included
additional results on financial sustainability, O&M and NRW. The ICR could also report on reliability, quality
and affordability of water supply services to buttress the discussion of the project’s achievements. Thus,
achievement of this objective is rated high.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve access to sustainable sanitation services, in selected villages and towns in rural areas of Zhejiang
Province.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

Similar to the first objective, the sanitation infrastructure (rehabilitation of septic tanks, construction of
sewerage collection networks and end-of-pipe small-scale domestic wastewater treatment facilities in villages,
and municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the four project counties) were to contribute to the
outcome of improved access to sustainable sanitation services in the rural areas of Zhejiang Province. From
a technical perspective, the project would propose new standards for rural sanitation facilities.

Outputs:

The following outputs were completed:

        The project achieved 92,072 household sewer connections. This was 108 percent of the revised target
         of 85,000 connections. The revised target was 95,000 at MTR, but this was later reduced to 85.000.
         The ICR noted that (page 17): the reduction in the end target was due to an adjustment of the number
         of households connected to the sewer systems to fit local geographical conditions at the design stage
         to ensure more cost-effective investments. In Fuyang City, some villages located alongside
         Fuchunjiang River, supposed to be connected to the sewer system, were taken out of the project
         scope as the land use master plan for the areas was revised by the government.
        In terms of environmental sustainability, the project reduced pollution levels on water resources
         evidenced by the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) load reduction (BOD load reduction = volume of
         wastewater treated × (inflow BOD concentration – outflow BOD concentration)). The BOD reduction
         was 4,299.8 tons/year compared to the revised target of 2,796 tons/year. The target was revised due
         to a correction in calculation of BOD load reduction.
        Staff from the county water companies and PIUs participated in various national and international
         trainings and workshops, totaling 2,865 person-days, exceeding the target of 1,200 person-days. The
         trainings and workshops covered various project management aspects as well as the technical
         capacity enhancement to strengthen the staff capacity to effectively operate wastewater treatment



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



                                     stations, utilize the smart water systems, and conduct better O&M. No indicator measured the
                                     outcome of these trainings.

                            The ICR reported on the following additional output achievements not covered in the Results Framework and
                            therefore lacking target values:

                                    Sustainable O&M processes were established. The water companies and the communities signed
                                     O&M agreements that defined the scope and level of services to ensure the sustainability of
                                     O&M. The villagers were responsible for simple maintenance of small facilities (septic tanks, kitchen
                                     oil separators, and sewers) within the villagers’ yards, while the companies would respond to service
                                     requests for a fee which was affordable by the villagers. For the other facilities (for example, sewer
                                     networks, manholes, pump stations, and sewerage treatment stations in the villages), the companies
                                     were fully responsible for day-to-day O&M. Each community dedicated one or two villagers to
                                     regularly check these sanitation facilities and report the issues to the water companies.
                                    In terms of sustainability of sanitation infrastructure, 1,722 small wastewater treatment stations were
                                     transferred to the water companies to ensure sustainable O&M in the future. A total of 646,550 people
                                     indirectly benefit from these O&M services. The project promoted sustainable wastewater treatment
                                     technology with low cost, low energy, and simple and affordable O&M requirements (i.e., bio-trickling
                                     filter which is one of the least cost technologies).
                                    The project supported the preparation of provincial technical rural sewage discharge standards,
                                     considering the realities and needs in the rural areas of Zhejiang Province. Zhejiang Provincial
                                     Government officially adopted the ‘Discharge Standard of Pollutants for Rural Wastewater Treatment
                                     Facilities on July 1, 2015, making Zhejiang a leader in the demonstration of good WSS practices.

                            Outcome:

                                    At project closing 715,854 people with improved sanitation services, which exceeded the revised
                                     target of 700,000. Female population served was 355,272, which was also above the revised target of
                                     350,000.

                            The project achieved its second objective, to improve access to sanitation services in selected villages and
                            towns in rural areas of Zhejiang Province to a high degree. The project exceeded its revised targets on sewer
                            connections, pollution levels and number of beneficiaries. In addition, the ICR provided information on the
                            sustainable O&M arrangements as well as project’s contribution to adopt rural sewage standards. Thus,
                            based on the information provided, achievement of the objective is rated high.




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)




  Rationale
  The efficacy is rated High, as the project fully achieved its objectives, evidenced by meeting and exceeding
  targets on access to water supply and sanitation. In addition, the ICR provided relevant information and
  evidence regarding improvements in the sustainability of the WSS services in the financial, O&M and
  environmental aspects.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: The project conducted cost effectiveness analysis -least cost analysis as the benefits were
hard to quantify at appraisal. For each WSS subproject, the cost of various alternatives was assessed over 20
years at a discount rate of 12 percent. Final selection was made on a least-cost basis using Net Present Value
(NPV) and Average Incremental Cost (AIC). At the project completion stage, the same method was adopted for
WSS subprojects to verify the efficiency and effectiveness of the selected option again. And the NPV and AIC of
the selected scenario was recalculated, based on the actual capital and operating cost and water or wastewater
treatment capacity of the subproject, to identify if the selected option is still the least-cost scenario. The analysis
showed that the selected option was still the least-cost scenario due to competitive bidding, better construction
management, and improvement in operation management. However, the project could have calculated the ex-
post ERR to better measure economic efficiency of the project, as the actual benefits became observable and
quantifiable.

Financial Analysis: The financial covenant in the Project Agreement from 2015 was that all PIUs have to meet
the cost recovery requirements (i.e., the project companies generating total revenues equivalent to not less than
their total operating expenses, excluding depreciation); this was met during the project period by all companies,
except one.

Fiscal Analysis: According to the financial sustainability analysis of the PIUs, the sewage treatment part and
the rural drinking water part of other PIUs need government subsidies to balance the operation expenditure,
capital cost, and repayment of the principal and interest of the loan. While tariff is being charged for WSS
services, it is not sufficient to cover the O&M costs, thus the government provide subsidies to cover the gaps.
The results of the fiscal revenue projection and comparison with local governments’ required contribution to
PIUs show that none of the local governments will need to use 3 percent or more of their fiscal revenues to
provide necessary funding requirement. The percent ranges from 0.31 to 1.06 percent. This means that fiscal
subsidy funding requirement for financial sustainability of PIUs will not have a significant financial impact on the
fiscal revenue of the participating local governments.

Administrative/Operational Efficiency: The project’s closing date was extended for six months mainly caused
by the COVID-19 outbreak in China at that time. Most of the results were achieved before the original project
closing date of December 31, 2020. All the planned activities were fully completed by closing and the loan was
disbursed at 99.44 percent. The project management cost (Components 2 and 3) was estimated at US$6 million




                                                                                                         Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



at appraisal; the actual cost at project closure was US$2.67 million. This efficiency gain was mainly caused by
savings from project management consultant costs.

The project could benefit from a cost benefit analysis in addition to the cost effectiveness analysis to capture
incremental project benefits compared to costs, However, the ICR provided evidence that the project
implemented the least cost option and also there were efficiency gains on project management. Considering all
these aspects, the efficiency of the project is rated High.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective is substantially relevant to the strategies of the World Bank and the Government both at
appraisal and at closing. The Efficacy in achieving the development objective is rated high based on the
evidence on improved access to sustainable water supply and sanitation services in selected villages and towns
in rural areas of Zhejiang Province. Efficiency is rated high based on project’s cost effectiveness, financial and
operational/administrative efficiency. Based on these three sub-ratings, the project’s overall outcome is rated
highly satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR’s assessment of the risks to the sustainability of development outcomes was low, which is
concurred by IEG and summarized below:




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



Technical (O&M): The rural WSS schemes invested under the project were properly designed and
constructed and are being operated and maintained by professional water companies with the support of
communities.

Financial: The Government has provided adequate subsidies to the operators to cover the difference
between O&M cost and tariff revenues. The fiscal burden of the counties that provide subsidies is minor.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design and implementation arrangements were based on good practices and lessons learned
  from ongoing or completed rural WSS projects in China. Some key lessons used were: (i) the importance
  of using appropriate water and waste water treatment processes and technology that require low
  investment, low energy, and are simple and affordable to operate and maintain; (ii) adequate subsidies
  for O&M of rural sanitary facilities needs to be ensured up front based on known tariffs and projected
  O&M costs; (iii) Operators should be properly identified and assessed during project preparation stage
  and their technical, financial, and managerial skills strengthened during project implementation; (iv)
  availability of adequate counterpart funding by the project counties.

  The project’s technical design was sound; the proposed technologies were reliable and easy to operate
  and required low capital investment and operational costs. The project had appropriate implementation,
  M&E design, safeguards, fiduciary, and risk mitigation arrangements. A framework approach was
  adopted. This allowed project preparation to be streamlined, and the results of the 1st batch investments
  would inform the selection and implementation of the 2nd batch investments.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR noted that (page 33), the World Bank provided timely guidance and assistance to the client. The
 World Bank provided capacity building of the project management entities (local governments, ZPMO and
 PIUs). The borrower appraised the World Bank performance as Highly Satisfactory in the borrower’s ICR.

 The supervision missions were conducted twice per year, with candid Implementation Status and Results
 Reports. Problems arising during project implementation were identified in a timely manner, with helpful
 recommendations provided. The World Bank team was diligent in ensuring that all fiduciary procedures
 were followed. There was no turnover of task team leader (TTL) for this project, with the same TTL from
 identification to completion, which ensured the stability of project management and improved overall
 management efficiency.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Results Framework was logical with linked outputs, outcomes and impacts. However, it lacked
 indicators on reliability, NRW, quality and affordability of the service. Also, there were no PDO level
 indicators to measure the ‘sustainability’ aspect of the PDO; indicators for environmental and financial
 sustainability were only included as intermediate outcome indicators. According to the framework
 approach, the target values were defined and set up to 2017 as the subprojects would be appraised in
 batches. The target values for 2018 and beyond were determined during the MTR. This framework
 approach allowed more realistic target setting during the MTR.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E data were collected and presented in semiannual reports. The progress reports were
  complemented by adequate and timely monitoring reports from external (third party) agencies on the
  implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).
  The local village committees were mobilized to collect and verify the data of beneficiaries and household
  connections with the support of the PIUs to ensure data reliability. Although not directly stated in the
  project M&E, the PIUs regularly monitored the water quality of effluent from the rural sewage treatment
  stations in the villages, to ensure compliance with the rural wastewater discharge standards..



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data collected were used to inform project implementation and support project management,
  to monitor progress, set realistic end targets during the MTR, identify bottlenecks, and facilitate decision-
  making. The engineering design of the recommended technology was reviewed, optimized, and
  standardized across all project counties.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



a. Safeguards
  Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as Category B-partial assessment and triggered
  three environmental safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural
  Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). During project preparation, the Environmental
  Impact Assessment (EIA) was conducted and a standalone EMP was developed to manage the project-
  related environmental risks/impacts following the policy requirements, which also includes an Environmental
  and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for subprojects that are not known at appraisal. As part of the
  EIA and EMP, the Dam Safety Plans and Emergency Preparedness Plans were also prepared by a Dam
  Safety Expert to address dam safety issues associated with the project-financed structures relying on
  upstream existing dams. The ICR noted that (page 30), the project complied with environmental safeguards
  and performance during implementation. Throughout implementation, there was no reporting of
  environmental complaints or occupational, health, and safety accidents. During operation, the
  environmental performance of project-supported water supply and wastewater facilities was also regularly
  monitored to support their performance management, which showed full compliance by project closing. No
  major issue was identified.

  Social Safeguards. OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement was triggered due to land acquisition and
  population relocation entailed by civil works for the construction of water supply plants and extension of
  WWTPs in three participating counties, as well as temporary land occupation by pipeline network
  construction for local sanitation establishment in all four project counties. The resettlement was
  implemented in full consultation with PAP, and it was closely monitored by an external professional agency
  and consecutively supervised by the World Bank task team. By the project closure, a total of 29.91 ha of
  rural land was requisitioned, which affected 486 people in 141 households, among whom 8 households
  were relocated. In addition, three enterprises were partially affected, and 110.64 ha of land was temporarily
  occupied during project implementation. All of the land was reclaimed and returned in the end. All the PAP
  were compensated in time and in full as planned in the RAPs which were developed for individual
  subprojects in participating counties. Over 98 percent of the PAP felt satisfied with the resettlement results.
  The project’s overall social safeguards performance was rated Satisfactory.

  Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). Due to the participatory and consultative approach, most of the
  concerns of the villagers could be resolved before and during the construction. A robust grievance redress
  mechanism was also in place during the construction stage as per the project design. The GRM was
  accessible to local communities and beneficiaries. With all these efforts, the World Bank task team did not
  receive any complaints during project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The project FM system provided accurate and timely information that the
  loan was being used for the intended purposes. The withdrawal procedure and funds flow arrangement
  were appropriate. The loan proceeds were disbursed for project activities in a timely manner. The ICR
  reported that (page 31) that there were no significant FM issues throughout the project implementation and
  the FM-related issues or weaknesses raised during FM implementation could be resolved on a timely
  basis. The project audit reports were all with unqualified audit opinions.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



   Procurement. Procurement of works, goods, and consultant services was carried out efficiently and
   satisfactorily in accordance with the legal covenants and the World Bank’s procurement policy and
   procedural requirements. The World Bank task team provided assistance and clarified procurement-related
   issues to the implementing agencies. Post reviews were carried out on a random basis, which indicated
   that procurement was carried out satisfactorily. All contracts were procured and signed following the World
   Bank’s Procurement and Consultant Guidelines.

   The project also provided training to project management officials for utilization of international funding in
   project preparation, design, project management, procurement, contract management, construction
   supervision, FM, and disbursement and project management methodology.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                  The M&E design lacked some
Quality of M&E                   High                  Substantial
                                                                                  relevant indicators.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided various lessons, some of which are summarized as follows:

In a situation where project implementation covers a large number of scattered village
subprojects, the framework approach may help to streamline project preparation and
implementation. The project implemented the framework approach, which allowed the counterparts
to propose the potential interventions batch by batch and helped prioritize the project intervention
according to emerging needs and streamlined the project preparation. This also allowed the
adaptive management of ‘learning by doing’. The lessons learned from early implementation
particularly on technical matters and O&M were incorporated into the design and selection of the
next batch’s intervention. The good technical and O&M experiences were further scaled up in the
following implementation.


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)



There is a greater chance of ensuring sustainable O&M, when community participation is
employed allowing ownership of communities. Participatory and consultative approach was
adopted throughout the project, and the local communities participated in the process of planning-
design-construction-O&M. The early involvement of local communities in deciding the locations of
sewers, septic tanks, and sewage treatment stations could avoid questions and delays during the
project implementation. The governments transferred the ownership of some small facilities to
villagers, who are responsible for the day-to-day maintenance. The project showed that with
increased ownership, villagers usually take better care of the facilities and make efforts to keep them
functional, which further reduces the O&M burden on the water companies.

The capacity strengthening of professional water companies is a key factor in achieving the
outcomes. The project included comprehensive interventions to enhance the technical, financial
and institutional capacities of the professional water companies at county level. As a result, these
companies are able to look after the whole process of master planning, engineering design,
construction, and O&M of rural WSS schemes in the villages. This institutional setup has proven
successful and served as a pilot for similar rural WSS activities. Since 2020, the Ministry of Water
Resources and the Ministry of Housing, Urban and Rural Development (MOHURD) have also
encouraged local governments to transfer O&M of schemes from communities/local governments to
professional water companies.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report was concise, provided a detailed overview of the project and followed the guidelines. The theory of
change of the project clearly outlined the outputs, outcomes and impacts. The ICR’s lessons were clear and
based on evidence. However, there were some shortcomings in the completeness of evidence and data in the
efficacy section, additional data on service indicators was needed. In addition, the efficiency section could have
benefited from a cost benefit analysis to capture and present the project’s incremental benefits.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Zhejiang Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (P133018)




                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
