     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022879

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P144029                                      The Power Recovery Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84290                                  30-Nov-2019                                             84,481,687.62

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Sep-2014                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                             126,380,800.62                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           84,512,506.98                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Joel J. Maweni               Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project is to improve reliability of power supply and financial viability of the power sector
   (Loan Agreement dated November 3, 2014, Schedule 1, page 6).

   The project development objective (PDO) is parsed into two parts for the purpose of evaluation as follows:

   Objective 1: To improve reliability of power supply.


                                                                                                       Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



   Objective 2: To improve financial viability of the power sector.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Short Term Complementary Power Import Support: Estimated cost at appraisal
   US$30.00 million, Actual cost US$25.55 million)

   The purpose of this component was to support Korporata Elektroenergjetike Shqiptare (Albanian Power
   Corporation - KESh) with the financing of complementary power imports to meet their short-term power
   supply obligations and to enable the build-up of adequate reservoir levels at the Drin cascade over the
   period of the project. This activity was to be complemented by analytical work under component 4 to
   develop a robust risk management strategy for the mitigation of weather-related volatility.

   Component 2: Upgrading Distribution Infrastructure: (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$138.30
   million, Actual cost US$ 43.53 million)

   The objective of this component was to support the Government of Albania (GoA) and its power distribution
   company, Operatori i Shperndarjes se EnergjiseElektrike (OShEE) in implementing their plan to reduce
   distribution losses, improve cash collection and reliability of power supply. The four subcomponents were:

        1. Upgrading the sub-transmission distribution system to upgrade system reliability in Tirana area by
          reinforcing two existing 35/MV substations (SSs) to 110/MV SSs with new 110 kV lines.
        2. Targeted investments in the medium voltage grid (6-20kV) comprising MV cable lines, LV ABC lines,
           LV concentric cable and concrete poles, MV metal clad switchgears, and MV/LV distribution cabins
           with associated LV metering facilities.
        3. Metering systems in the LV network consisted of the purchase and installation of about 230,000
           single and three-phase meters; low voltage coaxial cables; ABC cables and accessories; and three-
           phase regular conductor cables.
        4. Upgrading the billing and collection system and provision of any required training for its
           implementation.

   Component 3: Transmission Meter/Data Center Upgrade: (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$26.00
   million, Actual cost to completion – US$11.74 million)

   This component was to support the move of medium voltage commercial customers into the deregulated
   market, which was the next step after the earlier move of industrial customers in 2011. The two
   subcomponents included:

   Component 1: Short Term Complementary Power Import Support: Estimated cost at appraisal
   US$30.00 million, Actual cost US$25.55 million)


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



The purpose of this component was to support Korporata Elektroenergjetike Shqiptare (Albanian Power
Corporation - KESh) with the financing of complementary power imports to meet their short-term power
supply obligations and to enable the build-up of adequate reservoir levels at the Drin cascade over the
period of the project. This activity was to be complemented by analytical work under component 4 to
develop a robust risk management strategy for the mitigation of weather-related volatility.

Component 2: Upgrading Distribution Infrastructure: (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$138.30
million, Actual cost US$ 43.53 million)

The objective of this component was to support the Government of Albania (GoA) and its power distribution
company, Operatori i Shperndarjes se EnergjiseElektrike (OShEE) in implementing their plan to reduce
distribution losses, improve cash collection and reliability of power supply. The four subcomponents were:

    1. Upgrading the sub-transmission distribution system to upgrade system reliability in Tirana area by
       reinforcing two existing 35/MV substations (SSs) to 110/MV SSs with new 110 kV lines.
    2. Targeted investments in the medium voltage grid (6-20kV) comprising MV cable lines, LV ABC lines,
       LV concentric cable and concrete poles, MV metal clad switchgears, and MV/LV distribution cabins
       with associated LV metering facilities.
    3. Metering systems in the LV network consisted of the purchase and installation of about 230,000
       single and three-phase meters; low voltage coaxial cables; ABC cables and accessories; and three-
       phase regular conductor cables.
    4. Upgrading the billing and collection system and provision of any required training for its
       implementation.

Component 3: Transmission Meter/Data Center Upgrade: (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$26.00
million, Actual cost to completion – US$11.74 million)

This component was to support the move of medium voltage commercial customers into the deregulated
market, which was the next step after the earlier move of industrial customers in 2011. The two
subcomponents included:

    1. (Operatori i Sistemit të Transmetimit (Transmission System Operator- OST) investments in meters
       for MV customers, MV feeders, IPPs and data center: The project will finance power meters and
       upgrade a data center at OST.
    2. IT systems and rules: Under this subcomponent, the project will finance supplying and installing an
       IT system for the data center and providing technical assistance for developing procedures for the
       establishment of a market platform for IPP’s and eligible customers, among others.

Component 4: Supporting Power Sector Reforms and Project Implementation: (Estimated cost at
appraisal – US$7 million, Actual cost to completion – US$3.38 million)

This component comprised:

    1. The following sector reforms to facilitate the recovery of the power sector and improve the
       performance of the distribution company: (i) revision of the power market model to introduce more
       competition in the sector and reduce the Borrower’s power supply obligation as per the relevant EU
       directives; (ii) revision of the renewable energy law to ensure sustainability of independent power
       producers; (iii) introduction of a new cost-recovery tariff methodology to reflect updates in the power

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



          market model; iv) updating of the Borrower’s current energy strategy; and (v) design implementation
          and monitoring of social outreach programs targeting electricity consumers and key stakeholders.
       2. Project implementation support: entailing establishment of a Project Management Unit, within the
          Ministry of Energy and Industry (MoEI) through recruitment of relevant staff and provision of goods,
          operating costs, and technical advisory services.
       3. Management advisory services to support the implementation and monitoring of OSHEE’s
          Performance Management Program, including among others, loss reduction and collections
          increase for the period of the project.
       4. Risk management mechanism for weather volatility involving the carrying out of a risk management
          study to mitigate the impacts of weather volatility.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing: Total project cost at completion was US$84.20million (ICR, Annex 3, p. 42)
   compared to US$201.3 million estimated at appraisal (PAD, Table 1, p. 9). The financing plan at appraisal
   envisaged that US$150 million of the total cost would be financed by the World Bank Loan with the
   Borrower’s contribution covering the balance of US$ 51.3 million (PAD, Datasheet, p. ii). However, the
   actual total project cost was fully financed by the World Bank Loan and there was no contribution from the
   Borrower. Further, the ICR shows a total project cost of US$84.2 million compared to US$84.5 million
   system derived cost according to the datasheet, a discrepancy of US$0.3 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on September 29, 2014, and it became effective on January 30, 2015.
   The project was restructured twice. The first restructuring was approved on November 26, 2019, to extend
   the Loan closing date for 12 months to November 30, 2020. The objective of the loan closing date extension
   was to implement a partial cancellation of savings of EUR 17.6 million under the IBRD Loan arising from
   restructuring of the project, allow adequate time for completion of some activities under components 2 and
   3, and to update the project’s results framework and to revise the legal covenant related to OSHEE’s
   escrow account. The second restructuring was retroactively approved on December 20, 2020, to extend the
   closing date by seven months to June 30, 2021, to allow enough time for completion of some activities
   whose implementation had been disrupted due to the coronavirus pandemic. The delay in extending
   the closing date was caused by lengthy internal procedures within the Government of Albania (GoA)
   and processing delays due to pandemic disruptions. The project closed on June 30, 2021,19 months after
   the original closing date of November 30, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with The World Bank strategies: The Project was prepared and implemented under two World
Bank strategies for Albania – the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2011-FY2014 (Report No.
Report No. 54188–AL), and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2015-FY2019 (Report No.
98254). The FY2015-19 CPF was extended through FY2019/20 under the Performance Learning Review
of 2018 (Report No. 131038-AL). The CPF remained in effect at the closing date of the project because
preparation of a new CPF in 2020 was delayed by Covid-19 and the Albanian general elections in 2021.The

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



project sought to address the key developmental issues of unreliability of power supply and the fiscal
burden caused by the sector’s poor financial performance. The CPS had highlighted that Albanian firms of
all sizes regularly cited the unreliability and poor quality of electricity supply as being among the most
critical business constraints (PAD, p.5). Several factors contributed to the unreliability of power supply,
including, fluctuations in hydropower (the main source of power for Albania) due to hydrological variations,
tight supply capacity in the regional countries, transmission capacity constraints and inefficiencies at the
distribution level – especially high distribution losses and poor rates of revenue collection.

The World Bank’s strategy for Albania at project closure (CPF FY2015-FY2019) was organized around
three strategic objectives of: (i) restoring macroeconomic balances, (ii) creating the conditions for
accelerated private sector growth, and (iii) strengthening public sector management and service delivery.
The project was strongly aligned with the CPF strategic objective of creating conditions for private sector
growth and, particularly with the sub-objective of supporting enhanced energy security, efficiency, and
supply.

The project addressed these issues by: (i) financing of short-term imports, thus helping KESh and
KESh/WPS (the generation company and its wholesale power supplier agency) to meet their supply
obligations to the regulated market while also diversifying sources of supply, and allowing for water
reservoirs to fill up; (ii) supporting investments in the distribution system to improve system reliability,
reduce losses, and improve billing and revenue collection; and (iii) financing meters for MV customers, MV
feeders and IPPs and increasing the capacity of the transmission data center to support deregulation of MV
commercial customers which would reduce KESh’s power supply obligations and the fiscal burden through
GoA guarantees.

Country context: The CPS was aligned the GoA priorities as expressed in the National Strategy for
Development and Integration for 2007–13 (NSDI 1) and National Strategy for Development and Integration
for 2015–20 (NSDI2). NDSI1 focused on two areas: (i) consolidation of the democratic system notably
through electoral, judicial and property rights reform; and (ii) achievement of rapid and sustainable
economic, human, and social development in line with EU criteria. Similarly, a key goal under NSDI 2 was
to enhance competitiveness in key growth sectors by, among other measures, addressing infrastructure
constraints, including energy. The CPS and CPF were well aligned with the NSDI1 and NSDI2 and the
PDOs were aligned with both the World Bank’s and the GoA’s strategies for the sector.

The PDOs were achievable, and outcome oriented with clear measurable indicators regarding reduction in
system losses and improvement in reliability in the project area and distribution company level
improvements in revenue collection and arrears indicators. The design of the project was appropriate for
the sector’s implementation capacity with the support of management advisory services in some areas such
as on implementation of OSHEE’s performance management plan and development of a risk management
strategy for mitigating the impact of weather volatility on the sector.

The PDO is rated High for relevance because it was aligned with both the World Bank’s strategy for
Albania (CPF FY2015-19) and the Government NSDI 2 (FY2015-20) in seeking to relieve energy
constraints to the competitiveness of key growth sectors. As further evidence of its high relevance, the
PDO focused on improving reliability of electricity supply which has been regularly identified by Albanian
firms as a key business constraint.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      The Power Recovery Project (P144029)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve reliability of power supply

                             Rationale
                             THEORY OF CHANGE

                              The ICR constructed a theory of change (TOC) based on the project design described in the PAD (page 8 of
                             the ICR). The TOC was that upgrading the sub-transmission distribution system in Tirana area – an activity
                             under the Upgrading Distribution Infrastructure component would improve the reliability of power supply.

                             The expected outcome was improved reliability resulting from the improved network in Tirana. The indicator
                             of reliability was revised during project restructuring in November 2019 from reliability of MV level network in
                             the Tirana area (“percentage overload in the project area”) to “added capacity of medium-voltage network
                             level at Tirana area (Mega Volt Amp [MVA]). The target was accordingly revised from 70 percent overload in
                             the project area to 80 Mega Volt Ampere (MVA) of distribution capacity added in the MV network in Tirana.
                             The reason for the change in indicator was to measure the impact of the investment under the project rather
                             than for the Tirana area which the original indicator was doing. The shortcomings of the original indicator
                             were that it was measuring Tirana system impacts of the project which would also be affected by other
                             activities outside the project. The revised indicator was also limited in that it measured outputs – added
                             capacity instead of outcomes and in addition focused on the impact of one investment and excluding the
                             impact of the upgrade of the distribution system (installation of transformers cabins and cables in
                             several places) which was implemented, the extension of the supervisory control and data acquisition
                             (SCADA) system to twelve substations and the installation of communication links to OST’s control center
                             which was completed in immediately after loan closure in July 2021. Further, the substantial reduction in
                             system losses contributed to improved reliability of power supply through increased availability of energy to
                             consumers.

                             OUTPUTS

                             The outputs from upgrading of the electricity distribution infrastructure in Tirana were as follows:

                                       1. Construction of the 80 MVA Kombinat distribution substation was completed.
                                       2. Distribution transformer cabins and cables were installed in Tirana and several other locations (Fushe
                                         Kruje, Durres, Kavaje, Lushnje, Fier, and Vlore).
                                       3. OShEE’s distribution SCADA was extended to 12 substations and communication links with OST’s
                                         control center were established.

                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   The Power Recovery Project (P144029)




    4. Three (3) existing substations were rehabilitated in Tirana (Traktora, Farka, Kashari).

OUTCOMES

The outcome indicator of “added capacity of medium-voltage network level at Tirana area" was achieved with
the construction of the Kombinat 80 MVA substation.

 The project’s main contribution is the significant improvement in OShEE’s system-wide reliability indicators–
system average interruption duration index (SAIDI) and system average interruption frequency index (SAIFI).
The ICR cited OShEE’s business plan which stated that SAIDI and SAIFI had decreased from 122.00 hours
to 58.79 hours and 49.10 to 29.99, respectively, between 2015 and 2019. In Tirana, the main load center,
SAIFI and SAIDI reduced from 43 to 17 and 84 hours to 27 hours, respectively, between 2015 and 2020.

Assessed against the outcome indicator and target specified in the project design, the objective of improving
reliability of power supply was achieved. Despite the limitations of the indicator as described above the
improvements in system SAIDI and SAIFI indicators (and for the Tirana area) to which the project contributed
and the substantial reduction in system losses provides credible evidence that this objective was
achieved. The objective of improving reliability of power supply is accordingly rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve financial viability of the power sector

Rationale
THEORY of CHANGE

The theory of change was that improving financial viability of the sector would result from implementing
measures to reduce system losses, improve revenue generation and collection and reduce huge

intercompany arrears. At project appraisal the sector was in a precarious financial condition with large,
accumulated deficits amounting to US$550 million in 2015 which were expected increase to US$ 800 million
in 2018. A key factor which contributed to the sector’s dire financial performance was inefficiencies in the
distribution sector, especially staggering system losses of about 45% in 2014 and a revenue collection rate of
only 78 percent. In 2013 OSHEE had just been returned to Government control after a privatization attempt in
2009 had failed to address the sector’s financial problems which had deepened with a deterioration in system
losses and collection rates, and the expected investments (about US$150 million) had not materialized. The
TOC envisaged that reductions in system losses and improvements in collection rates and intercompany
arears would result from implementation of the following activities:

    1. Upgrading of the sub-transmission distribution system in the Tirana area, installation of metering
       systems in the LV network, and upgrading billing and collection systems. In addition, the improved


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



       network would result in increased reliability of power supply and, therefore, more energy available for
       sale and enhanced revenue generation for OShEE.
    2. The ICR also linked technical assistance provided under component 4 on a metering strategy and on
       developing a new cost recovery methodology to the objective of improving the sector’s financial
       viability, the first through reduction of system losses and the latter through more efficient pricing of
       electricity.

OUTPUTS

The outputs expected from implementation of the above activities were as follows:

    1. An upgraded sub transmission distribution network in Tirana, including the 80 Mega Volt-Amperes
         (MVA) Kombinat substation. Upgrading of the distribution feeder lines and associated infrastructure
         was partial with about 44 distribution feeder lines upgraded instead of the expected 55 lines leaving 11
         feeder lines without upgraded substations. The distribution SCADA was extended to 12 distribution
         substations and communication links with OST’s control center established by July 2021. Overall, this
         output target was partially achieved.
    2.   Installation of meters installed in the LV network: About 230,000 single and three-phase meters were
         installed in the LV network by OShEE.
    3.   About 2,338 additional meters were to be installed by OST for metering of MV customers, MV feeders,
         IPPs and for upgrading the data center. The actual number of meters installed was 1,704. This output
         was partially achieved.
    4.   An upgraded billing and collection system for OShEE: The distribution company’s billing and metering
         system was to be improved to reduce non-technical losses and improve revenue generation and
         collection. The system was satisfactorily upgraded, and target output was achieved.
    5.   A metering strategy and a new methodology for cost recovery electricity prices. These outputs, which
         were to be produced through technical assistance support under the project, were completed outside
         the project with the support of other donors. The funding allocated under the project was canceled
         during the first restructuring on November 26, 2019. These outputs were achieved although not under
         the project.

OUTCOMES

The outcomes that signal the achievement of financial viability improvements were:

    1. The target was a substantial reduction in system losses from 45 percent in 2014 to 23 percent at
       project close. The original end of project target of 14 percent was revised during the Project
       Restructuring approved in November 2019 because the scope of MV balancing meters which were to
       contribute to loss reduction could not be procured in time. Nonetheless, the revised target
       represented a substantial reduction in losses. The reduction in distribution losses would translate to
       significant financial viability benefits by increasing revenue from additional sales to customers or
       reducing power generation/import costs to meet a given level of electricity demand Upgrading of sub-
       transmission systems, metering investments in the MV and LV networks and upgrading of the billing
       and collection systems contributed to a reduction in systems losses from 45 percent to 22,6 percent -
       slightly exceeding the target of 23 percent. Achieved.
    2. The targeted improvement in the billing and collection system was to increase collection rates from 78
       percent in 2014 to 93 percent in June 2021. The billing and collection system was installed and helped


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



                                    OSHEE to improve its collection rate to 95.3 percent, thus exceeding the targeted rate of 93 percent.
                                    Achieved.
                                 3. The level of intercompany arrears was 1,290 days (November 2020) slightly above the baseline of
                                    1200 days and substantially above the target of 550 days. The intercompany arrears remained
                                    elevated because of several reasons: the agreement for OSHEE’s arrears to be paid over 10 years
                                    with the support of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), disputes among
                                    the utilities regarding balancing costs which are being handled by the courts, and lack of liquidity in the
                                    sector due to the high costs of imports in recent years. Not Achieved.

                            The outcome indicator on intercompany arrears was not tied to specific activities but would be an outcome of
                            a general improvement in the finances of the electricity distribution company which is responsible for the bulk
                            of the arrears to OST and KESH. However, it became clear that the indicator would not be met when the
                            EBRD arrangements to finance KESH’s short term loans was reached, including the agreement for OSHEE’s
                            arrears to be paid over a ten-year period. The outcome indicator on intercompany arrears should have been
                            revised.

                            With two out three indicator targets fully achieved and one not achieved, the efficacy rating for the objective of
                            improved financial viability is Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project fully achieved the objective of improving reliability of power supply (Objective 1), but the objective
                            of improving financial viability (Objective 2) was only partially met because one of the three outcome
                            targets was not achieved. The efficacy rating for the Objective 1 is rated Substantial while that of Objective 2
                            is rated Modest. Although the indicator for Objective 1 was not adequate to fully capture the impact of the
                            project’s activities, there was credible evidence on loss reduction, based on SAIDI and SAIFI data, that the
                            project had a significant impact on reliability of electricity supply.

                            The overall efficacy rating for the project is Substantial because of a strong Substantial rating for Objective
                            1.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



At appraisal the project’s EIRR was estimated at 12.1 percent compared to the ICR’s revised estimate of 6.4
percent. Table 1 provides the assumptions used to estimate the EIRR at appraisal and the paragraphs below
explain the reasons for the significant difference between the ex-ante and ex post EIRR. Estimated EIRR under
different assumptions for valuing benefits from unserved energy and assuming successful implementation of the
GoA’s current loss reduction plan reduction in losses are provided below.

Table 1: EIRR assumption at appraisal

Costs
Capital costs          Total project costs – US$201.3 million
O&M                    5 percent of capital costs
Discount rate          8 percent
                           1. Reduction in technical losses valued at the cost of power purchase.
                           2. Reduction in consumption due to decreased non-technical losses valued at the
                               cost of power purchase.
                           3. Improved power reliability (reflecting reduction in unserved energy) valued at
                               the cost difference between alternative diesel-based standby power generation
Benefits                       and the average retail tariff.
                           4. Import benefit to compensate for the loss of power due to the planned
                               rehabilitation of KESH turbines was valued at the difference between the cost
                               of standby power generation and the average retail tariff. The benefit was
                               assumed to occur in the first year of project implementation.




Re-estimated EIRR at completion (Case 1). The calculation uses the same methodology as at appraisal
except that: (a) the calculations are based on actual data and results; and (b) the additional up-front benefit
assumed at appraisal (item 4 above) is excluded since it did not materialize due to a change in
GoA priorities. On this basis, the post-completion estimates are an EIRR of 6.4 percent and a negative ENPV
of Lek 1,094 million (US$10 million).

The comparable figures from the appraisal analysis (i.e., Without the import benefit) are EIRR 8.1 percent and a
small positive ENPV at the same discount rate of 8 percent. The difference between the EIRR with both
calculations excluding the import benefit, is due to the actual lower benefits than anticipated despite a significant
cost saving.

The difference between the estimated EIRR at appraisal (12.1 percent vs 6.4 percent) is accounted for the by
two factors: (a) the upfront import benefit included at appraisal but excluded at post completion; and (b) the
lower than projected benefits of technical and non-technical losses and unserved energy in the EIRR estimation
at completion.

The ICR includes a Case 2 calculation which differs from case 1 in the valuations of unserved energy at the
average retail tariff instead of the differential between the average retail tariff and the cost of stand by
generation. This results in an ERR of 12.2 percent. Based on the GoA’s plan to reduce losses further to 16.5
percent by 2022 the ICR also estimates the project’s EIRR assuming the target 16.5 percent is achieved by



                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



2025 and 2029 respectively. The analyses show EIRRs of 22.2 percent and 20.5 percent for 2025 and 2029
respectively.

Administrative efficiency: The project incurred completion delays due to procurement and technical difficulties
especially regarding procurement of smart meters. Additional delays arose from the covid pandemic. The ICR
notes that the project had cost savings of about 17 percent, but this is also because several activities were
dropped. In any case the cost impacts of delays are captured in the economic analysis. Nonetheless the
completion delay of about 19 months would have had cost implications on the administrative budgets of the
participating companies, government agencies and on the World Bank’s supervision budget suggesting less
than fully cost-effective project implementation. Given low rate of the EIRR of 6.4 percent using the same
methodology as at appraisal compared to the revised appraisal EIRR of 8.1 percent and the modest
administrative efficiency, the overall efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 12.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     84.00
 ICR Estimate                                              6.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO is rated High for relevance because it was aligned with both the World Bank’s strategy for Albania
(CPF FY2015-19) and the Government NSDI 2 (FY2015-20) in seeking to relieve energy constraints to the
competitiveness of key growth sectors. Further, the PDOs focus on improving reliability of electricity supply
which has been regularly identified by Albanian firms as a key business constraint.

The overall efficacy rating for the project is Substantial because of a strong Substantial rating for Objective 1–
improve reliability of power supply and a Modest rating for Objective 2 – improve financial viability of the power
sector.

Efficiency is rated Modest because of a reduced ex post EIRR of 6.4 percent compared to the appraisal EIRR
(adjusted for import benefit as discussed above) of 8.1 percent.

With a PDO relevance rating of High, a Substantial rating for efficacy and a Modest rating for efficiency the
Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      The Power Recovery Project (P144029)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project helped the sector to recover from financial crisis and to build a firm foundation for further
improvements in energy security and financial sustainability. The distribution sector has stronger indicators
for reliability of power supply, revenue collection and distribution losses – the latter although still high are
continuing to decline further as the sector completes outstanding measures with its own resources, such as
installing MV balancing meters that could not be implemented under the project.

Albania will continue to be vulnerable to the impact of variations in weather patterns on domestic hydropower
generation and high cost of imports. Developing a risk mitigation strategy will continue to be an important
priority for managing this risk.

The important reform agenda that was initially part of the project and subsequently funded by donors is
critical for long term sustainability of the sector and will be important for Albania to continue
implementing. These activities include the Albania power exchange, implementing a new energy strategy
and cost recovery methodology for an evolving competitive power market.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Overall, the project was well designed but had a few significant shortcomings. The timing of the project
  was very important at a juncture when the country needed support to address the operational and
  financial issues related to the failure of the distribution sector privatization. Thus, the project objectives
  were appropriate given the urgent need to address the twin issues of reliability of electricity supply and
  the financial crisis in the sector. The physical components were well selected to address infrastructure
  problems, but it is not clear that Investment Project Financing was the most appropriate instrument for
  addressing key reforms such as the power market model. A single sector Development Policy Loan
  series may have been a better instrument to drive such far reaching reforms, which in addition needed
  coordination among different agencies, especially the Ministry of Finance. Alternatively, a phased
  Program for Results could have helped to phase the activities, including the policy reforms and to reduce
  the overload that seems to have occurred. In the end most of the activities included under the reform
  component were financed by other development partners, sometimes without any consultation with the
  Bank. Coordination with other donors appear to have been absent or limited but has since improved,

  For a project that sought to support an improvement in the financial viability of the sector a package of
  measures with a set of operational and financial metrics would have been expected with implementation
  of the package incorporated as an integral part of the results framework. While three PDO indicators are


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



  included to track financial viability improvements additional substantive financial indicators such as cost
  recovery could have been included. Another gap in the design of the results framework was that the
  PDO-level reliability was tied to a single substation and yet there were other activities contributing to the
  same PDO outcome.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank task team conducted regular implementation support missions during which meetings
 were held with client counterparts in the Project Management Unit, Project Implementation Units of the
 three power companies, consultants, development partners and officials from relevant ministries as
 needed. The World Bank team was adequately staffed to supervise the project. A co-Team Leader was
 based in the country and was able to provide appropriate coordination and quick responses to client
 requests. The project was team-led by two Task Team Leaders for the entire period, thus, providing
 consistency in approach and on substantive matters. The team was supplemented by consultants to
 provide adequate support to the client in specialized areas such as procurement of smart meters and
 related equipment.

 The World Bank team prepared Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) at least twice a year
 and used these to inform the World Bank management on critical issues and clients to focus attention on
 critical implementation issues. On the client’s side the PMU prepared semi-annual progress reports for both
 their internal use and to share with the World Bank. An in-depth Mid-term Review was conducted in 2018
 to assess overall progress and identify issues. By that time the project had been rated moderately
 unsatisfactory on implementation progress at the end of 2017 and it remained in that status for about 18
 months to June 2019. The ICR (page 29) noted that although the MTR surfaced some challenges facing
 the project which required

 project restructuring, such as the delays in balancing meters, it was more than 12 months before the
 project was restructured in November 2019.

 The World Bank’s implementation support missions were affected by travel restrictions starting in early
 2020 due to the Covid-19 pandemic and had to be conducted virtually. The pandemic contributed to the
 need for the second extension of credit closing date which was granted retroactively on 20 December
 2020.

 Shortcomings in the World Bank’s implementation support effort included a delay of more than 12 months
 in restructuring the project after the MTR had identified the need and the non-revision of the indicator on
 intercompany arrears when it had become apparent that the indicator target would not be achieved due to
 changes in the circumstances.

 Overall, the quality of The World Bank’s supervision of the project was Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project M&E system was generally well designed to include baseline data, target values, frequency of
 reporting, data sources and responsibilities for data collection (Result Framework Annex 1, PAD). The
 Results Framework (RF) comprised four outcome indicators: electricity losses, collection rate, reliability,
 and intercompany arrears. The electricity losses indicator had two sub-indicators for non-technical and
 technical losses, but the sub-indicators were dropped during project restructuring in November 2019. The
 M&E design provided a framework for assessing the achievement of project objectives.

 The ICR correctly points out two important shortcomings in the design of outcome indicators, i.e., that is the
 linkage of the reliability indicator to one investment (substation) excluding other activities in the project
 design which contributed to reliability; and the RF could have considered more substantive metrics for
 assessing progress of financial recovery than intercompany arrears. However, the ICRR assesses that the
 RF already considered reduction in losses and improvements in bill collection as measures for tracking
 financial recovery but agrees that more substantive relevant measures could have included cost recovery,
 and payments to suppliers, for example.

 In addition, the RF had seven intermediate indicators to facilitate monitoring of progress towards the
 achievement of outcomes. The ICR also makes several valid comments on the intermediate indicators,
 including the following: (a) that no indicators were linked to component 1; and (b) additional or alternative
 reliability indicators such as the number of rehabilitated MV/LV network feeders could have been included
 in the results chain – these were tracked during project implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The responsibilities for data collection analysis lay with the parties as laid out in the RF. The PMU
  consolidated the M&E inputs from KESH, OST and OSHEE and supported them as needed. The PMU
  shared the M&E reports with the World Bank team which also used the data for inputs into ISRs and for
  reviews of progress with the client.

  As noted above some changes were made to the RF during project implementation and these included
  the deletion of sub-indicators (i.e., technical, and non-technical losses) for system losses during the
  project restructuring in November 2019. The ICR notes the delay in implementing this change and points
  to the non-revision of the intercompany arrears targets even though it had become obvious that the
  indicator target would not be achieved given the changed context.

  Overall, implementation of the M&E system was generally well managed.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was useful to the World Bank and the clients in monitoring project implementation
  progress, identifying issues and constraints, deciding on key actions such as project restructurings,
  including extensions of closing dates. The M&E system was used alongside other systems such as
  procurement milestones and Financial Management Reports. Overall, the M&E system was a valuable
  project management tool for both the World Bank and the clients. Project implementation and
  completion were facilitated by the utilization of M&E framework.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered two The World Bank policies: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and

   Involuntary Settlement OP/BP 4.12. It was classified as a Category B project.

   The impact on safeguards was not known at the time of project preparation and hence an Environmental
   and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared. The World Bank-funded TA assisted OSHEE
   on Environmental and Social (E&S) issues, including for on-site monitoring activities. All issues that arose
   were resolved onsite. The World Bank safeguards staff held regular meetings with PIUs. E&S reporting
   was conducted in accordance with the requirements of the ESMF and Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMP). During the pandemic virtual meetings were held regularly based on reports
   and works photos provided by the PIUs. Both face to face and virtual meetings with PIUs helped to
   increase the knowledge and build capacity of counterparts on E&S matters.

   OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was triggered in relation to the Kombinat substation which involved
   land acquisition. Land acquisition was completed in December 2017 based on a Resettlement Action
   Plan (RAP) prepared for the project. The Kombinat location was chosen after the initial selection of Tirana
   was dropped to avoid land acquisition-related complexities since Kombinat was under public ownership.

   For grievance redress, the project used OSHEE’s customer relations mechanism for logging and
   addressing any project-related complaints in lieu of a stand-alone grievance redress mechanism, which was
   acceptable to the World Bank.

   The overall safeguards ratings for the project remained Satisfactory and the ratings for Environmental
   Assessment (BP 4.01) and Involuntary Settlement (BP 4.12) were also Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The final ISR rated financial management Moderately Satisfactory. There were two outstanding audit
  reports as of June 30, 2021 when the project closed. The delays were attributable to slippages caused by
  the Covid-19 situation, and to the technical assistance for the improvement of the financial reporting and
  audit disagreements, in the case of KESH. A functional unbundling process for OSHEE involving, amongst
  other things, the separation of the accounts and financial statements (including assets and obligations) had
  also contributed to the delayed submission of audit report. Other than the delayed audits project financial
  statements submitted over the years were acceptable, and no issues were reported by the auditors.

  Procurement was also rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closure due to procurement delays that the
  project encountered for most of its duration. The delays had led to the cancelation of important MV
  balancing meters which would have contributed to greater loss reduction than was achieved and were also
  important to facilitate deregulation of MV customers.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other


  Gender

  The project was not designed to address gender issues but included an indicator for female
  beneficiaries. The target for females was 52 percent of the beneficiaries by project close. The actual
  indicator value was 50 percent indicating the efforts made to include females among persons who benefited
  from access to quality power supply and to citizen engagement on energy matters. There were no
  negative impacts observed on females due to the project activities.

  Mobilization of private sector financing

  The project had no specific focus on attracting private sector financing but improvements in the reliability
  and affordability of power and in the financial viability of the sector would create conditions for private
  investors to invest in the country. System losses have decreased significantly, revenue collection has
  improved and so has the reliability of power supply. Albania will continue to build on this strong
  base. Private investment will be attracted in several ways. First, existing firms which have held back on

  expanding operations may be able to do so with reliable and affordable power. Second, efficiency
  improvements such as reductions in system losses will help to make power more affordable to small
  businesses and the informal sector thereby stimulating a sector that is critical for job creation. Third,
  exporting firms can become more competitive and expand their businesses locally, and finally an efficient
  and sustainable electricity sector will be attractive for IPPs and other power sector investors.

  Institutional Strengthening




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



   The complexity of the project provided varied opportunities for the participating companies and government
   agencies to build their capacities in several areas including cutting edge metering technology, coordination
   and monitoring, and evaluation of a multi-agency procurement packages. OShEE staff benefited from
   working on loss reduction, billing and revenue collection and improving knowledge on the latest
   developments in utility management practices.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR contains substantive lessons learned from the operation. The following suggestions are
made to add to or elaborate on some of the lessons that have already been identified:

Investment Project financing may not be an appropriate instrument for supporting complex
projects comprising both infrastructure investments and substantive policy reforms. The
Power Recovery Project contained important policy reforms for development of a power market
alongside investment in transmission and distribution which made the operation complex. In the end
the reform activities were taken over by other financiers. The World Bank could have selected
separate instruments for supporting the infrastructure investments and policy reforms or prioritized
between the two areas of engagement.

Bringing about sustainable policy changes or supporting sector financial recovery requires
intensive engagement over time. The World Bank could have selected a programmatic approach,
a DPL series for policy reforms or a Program for Results either of which would have allowed phasing
of activities to avoid the overload that appear to have occurred with the Power Recovery Project.

The capacity issues that arose with the PIUs could have been better managed by
strengthening the capacity of the PMU not just for financial management, disbursements,
and M&E but also on procurement. The utilities’ PIUs could be made responsible for technical
specifications while the PMU handles the rest of the procurement functions with a capacity building
plan for gradual devolution of functions to the utilities.

Designing and implementing power sector financial recovery requires buy-in at high levels in
Government because of the political economy issues related to electricity tariffs,
governance, transparency, and accountability of institutions. High level participation is key both


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       The Power Recovery Project (P144029)



at the design stage and during implementation is critical. At a technical level it is important to
formulate plans comprising both operational and financial restructuring measures and metrics. In
the context of the World Bank operations, getting formal commitment to the whole package for
example through DPL prior actions raises the profile of the required actions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well-written, but it also has some shortcomings as follows:

    1. The justification of overall efficacy rating is confusing because; (i) the reliability and financial viability
         objectives should have equal weight in assessing the overall efficacy as there is no indication of a
         hierarchy of objectives in the PAD; and (ii) funding is not a valid basis for weighting objectives in the
         efficacy assessment.
    2.   Annex 1 Results framework: provides no comments on deviations of actual achievements from targets
         for most of the indicators.
    3.   There is small discrepancy in the value of the collection rate indicator between the Annex 1, page 32
         (97.5 percent) and page 19 of the main text (95.30 percent).
    4.   The results framework (Annex 1) has different dates for actual achievements at completion (November
         2020 and June 15, 2021.
    5.   System losses target shown as 23 percent on page 13 (Table 3) of the ICR and on page 5 of the Project
         Restructuring Paper of 2019 and as 20 percent on pages 19 (Table 6) and 32 (Annex 1) of the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         Substantial




                                                                                                          Page 18 of 18
