     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022903

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P148868                                     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53780                                   31-Mar-2019                                          84,605,043.49

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Feb-2014                                 30-Jun-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           153,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                               99,335,149.45                                              0.00

 Actual                                           84,605,043.49                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii) and the Financing Agreement of July 11, 2014 (p.
   5) the Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to restore and improve housing and public services in
   targeted communities of Odisha and increase the capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and
   effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency”.

   This review will assess the project against the following objectives:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



   PDO 1 - Restore and improve housing in targeted communities of Odisha;

   PDO 2- Restore and improve public services in targeted communities of Odisha; and

   PDO 3 - Increase the capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or
   emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Mar-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included five components:

   Component 1: Resilient Housing Reconstruction and Community Infrastructure (appraisal estimate
   US$ 167.2 million, actual US$108.0 million): This component was to include two sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Housing reconstruction: This sub-component was to finance the reconstruction of
   about 30,000 houses in the designated rural areas in the coastal belt five kilometers from the High Tide Line
   (HTL) in the districts of Ganjam and Puri, and five kilometers from the Chilika Lake boundary as defined by
   the Survey of India in the district of Khordha.

   Sub-component 1.2: Selected community infrastructure: This sub-component was to finance public service
   infrastructure improvements to complement the housing reconstruction such as roads, water supply, solid
   waste management, power grid extensions and community infrastructure such as community and health
   centers, playgrounds, etc.

   Revised Component. The 2019 restructuring reduced the target number of resilient houses for
   reconstruction from 30,000 to 19,646, due to reduced number of beneficiaries identified by the Government
   of Odisha.

   Component 2: Urban Infrastructure in Berhampur (appraisal estimate US$28.7 million, actual US$6.17
   million): This component was to include four sub-components:

   Sub-component 2.1: Upgrading of slums: This sub-component was to improve the living conditions of
   households in slums in the city of Berhampur such as improving streets, access to improved water and



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



sanitation, drainage, septic management, and street lighting. The project was to be undertaken in about 80
settlements covering a population of about 30,000.

Sub-component 2.2: Public service infrastructure: This sub-component was to finance investments at the
city level including priority roads and trunk water supply infrastructure among others.

Sub-component 2.3: Community participation: This sub-component was to finance the facilitation of
community participation and ensuring a participatory approach in the planning of settlement level
infrastructure.

Sub-component 2.4: Technical Assistance: This sub-component was to finance support to the Berhampur
Municipal Corporation (BeMC) towards preparation of improved city-wide sectoral master plans and priority
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). These were to include drainage, sewerage, street lighting and other
relevant areas identified.

Revised component: The June 2020 restructuring cancelled the upgradation of 70 slum communities and
roads of over 4 km in Berhampur. Also, all-season roads (road package I) and storm water drainage were
partially cancelled.

Component 3: Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Management (appraisal estimate US$8.0 million,
actual US$1.2 million): This component was to support Odisha State Disaster Management Authority
(OSDMA) in strengthening their overall capacity towards better risk mitigation, preparedness, and disaster
response, in line with global best practices. This component was to finance the following activities: i)
Establishing an integrated complex comprising of OSDMA, Geographic Information System (GIS) cell
equipped with a decision support center, Emergency Operation Center and a training center, ii)
Capacity augmentation of the OSDMA by providing them specialized dedicated manpower and through
need-based hiring of technical experts in the areas of disaster risk management, hydro-met systems, risk
assessment and financing, structural engineering, remote sensing, GIS, others to provide timely support to
various project activities; and iii) Enabling the affected marginalized communities to cope with survival risks
posed by natural calamities through community-based initiatives.

Component 4: Implementation Support (appraisal estimate US$14.7 million, actual US$6.01 million):
This component was to finance the incremental operating costs of the Project Management Units (PMUs) in
OSDMA and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (H&UD), and the PIUs in OSDMA and the
BeMC. In addition, the component would include consultancies required for the preparation and supervision
of specific activities, trainings, exposure visits and knowledge exchange programs.

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (appraisal an actual US$0): Following an adverse
natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the respective governments may request the Bank to re-
allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component was to draw resources from
the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and
reallocate financing from other project components to partially cover emergency response and recovery
costs.

Revised component: The June 2020 restructuring deleted this component.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$218.6 million. Actual cost was US$120.8 million. The
  actual cost was significantly lower due to the reduction in scope.

  Financing: The project was to be financed through a US$153.0 million credit of which US$84.6 million was
  disbursed. Due to the reduction in the number of houses for reconstruction, SDR7.1 million (equivalent of
  US$9.8 million), was cancelled in March 2019. Due to non-completion of activities, additional US$40.13
  million was cancelled in June 2020. The ICR does not explain if the remaining US$18.4 million was
  cancelled.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$65.6 million. Actual contribution was US$36.3
  million The ICR did not provide any information on why the actual contribution was significantly lower than
  the planned contribution.

  Dates and Restructurings: The project closed on June 30, 2020, after a delay of 15 months. The project
  was restructured three times:

        On March 19, 2019, the project was restructured to:
             o Extend the closing date by 12 months from March 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020 to complete:
                (a) the implementation of housing reconstruction in Puri district for 3,046 beneficiaries; (b)
                the ongoing urban infrastructure works in Berhampur town, and (c) the ongoing
                establishment of the State Institute of Disaster Management (SIDM) integrated complex;
              o Cancel SDR 7.1 million (equivalent US$9.8 million) since the project had a surplus due to the
                reduced number of houses identified by the government of Odisha through a detailed
                beneficiary consultation and identification by the Odisha State Disaster Management
                Authority (OSDMA) (number of houses for reconstruction was revised from 30,000 to 19,604.
                The appraisal estimate was a rough estimate based on limited data availability
              o Revised the outcome target for PDO Indicator 1 ("percentage of households with
                fully/severely damaged houses in project areas provided with resilient housing reconstructed
                under the project") from 75 percent of all damaged houses reconstructed to 100 percent of
                all damaged houses.
              o Reallocate between disbursement categories and change implementation schedule.

  This restructuring and reduction in targets was done one year before the project original closing date.

        On March 31, 2020, the project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date by three months to
         June 30, 2020, to allow the government to determine its priorities in regards to the use of
         undisbursed funds under the project in support of its response to the Covid-19 crisis.
        On June 30, 2020, the project was restructured to:
              o Cancel SDR 29.11 million (equivalent US$40.13 million) due to an unspent amount related to
                non-completion of certain sub-components and dropping of some sub-components;
              o Revise Results Framework accordingly to reflect the reduction in scope;
              o Modify components and costs and reallocate between disbursement categories; and
              o Change institutional arrangements

  Split Rating: A split rating will be conducted as during the project restructuring, the scope of the number of
  houses reconstructed was reduced, while the PDO target was increased as follows: PDO indicator 1
  "Percentage of households with fully/severely damaged houses in project areas provided with resilient

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



   housing reconstructed under the project (original target: 75 percent, revised target: 100 percent). The 75
   percent target referred to the original 30,000 houses target, while the 100 percent target referred to the
   revised 19,604 houses target. (ICR p. 14).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: At the time of appraisal India was highly vulnerable to natural disasters including earthquakes,
floods, droughts, cyclones and landslides. According to the PAD (p. 1) 60 percent of India’s land mass was
at risk of earthquakes, over 60 percent of the area was at risk of droughts, and 12 percent was at risk of
floods and landslides. 5,700 kilometers (out of 7,516 kilometers) of India’s coastline was vulnerable to
cyclones of various degrees of intensity, putting approximately 40 percent of the total population, which was
living within 100 kilometers of the coastline, at high risk. Floods remain, on average, the greatest source of
loss with an estimated annual cost of US$7 billion per year.

 Even though the state of Odisha constituted only about 17 percent of the Indian east coast, it had been
impacted by 35 percent of all cyclonic and cyclonic storms passing the east coast. In October 2013, Odisha
was hit by the Very Severe Cyclonic Storm (VSCS) Phailin affecting 18 of the 30 districts in the state. In the
Ganjam district alone over 90,000 houses of poor fishers, farmers, and the landless people were destroyed
as well as over 780,000 hectares of agricultural land. As a result, growth in Odisha’s agricultural sector
dropped from 12.3 percent in 2012-13 to minus 9.78 percent in 2013-14. Also, Odisha’s Gross State
Domestic Product (GSDP) decreased by 1.72 percent. Also, in Berhampur, the largest city in the Ganjam
district, urban infrastructure and services such as the water supply network, road and trains were severely
damaged. According to the ICR (p. 1) this was partly the case due to settlements being developed on
vulnerable land close to the High Tide Line (HTL), inadequate resilience of riverine embankments to protect
coastal areas from saline water inundation, and roads with bituminous top and metal layers as opposed to
concrete roads.

In October 2013, a Rapid Damage Needs Assessment (RDNA) covering the districts of Ganjam, Khorda
and Puri was conducted by the Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The RDNA identified the
following: i) the need for an appropriate housing reconstruction policy to identify the criteria for eligibility,
required relocation and approach for reconstruction; ii) the significant social impact of cyclonic storm Phalin
on agricultural and fishing communities; and iii) the need for access roads for informal settlements and an
adequate storm water drainage system for evacuation and safety of these communities.

Government Strategy: In 2019, the government developed the National Disaster Management Plan
(NDMP) which aims to make India disaster resilient and reduce the loss of lives and assets significantly by
providing agencies with a framework and direction for all phases of the disaster management cycle.
Therefore, the objective of the project to restore and improve housing and public services in targeted
communities and increase the capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an
eligible crisis or emergency was in line with the aim of the government to make India more disaster resilient.

Bank Strategy: The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) and objective 1.5 (improve disaster risk management and resilience to climate change).
Also, the according to the ICR (p. 7) the Bank has been a key partner of the government of India as well as

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



               the government of Odisha in disaster risk mitigation and management. In 2010, the Bank started to work
               with the government of Odisha on the first National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP I) and has
               been engaged in other states in similar areas.

               Previous Bank Experience: The World Bank has been a key partner of the Government of India in
               general, and of the Government of Odisha (GoO) in particular, in their risk mitigation and management
               efforts. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project was supporting the Governments' of Odisha and
               Andhra Pradesh since 2010 with improving their capacity to manage hydro meteorological hazards. The
               Bank had also supported the Government of India with similar efforts in Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand,
               and other states, as well as at the national level. This project was part of a broader package (the Integrated
               Coastal Zone Management Project and Odisha State Livelihood project) to support the GoO's
               reconstruction and recovery efforts and to strengthen its capacity to manage future disaster events.

               Taking everything together, the relevance of the objective was High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Restore and improve housing in targeted communities of Odisha.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as the reconstruction
                             of resilient housing for fully/severely damaged houses in in Ganjam, Khordha and Puri, were to result in the
                             above stated objective.

                             The following assumptions were made: (i) the GoO would allocate sufficient human and financial resources to
                             implement the project; and (ii) the GoO and the beneficiaries will maintain the constructed infrastructure to
                             ensure long-term sustainability

                             Outputs:

                                        16,108 resilient houses were constructed, not achieving the original target of 30,000 houses. The
                                          design (such as using a column beam structure), location and material used for construction provided
                                          protection against floods, cyclones and earthquakes. The resilient design and construction of each
                                          house was verified by technical officers from OSDMA (ICR p. 14).




                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)




      No village development plans were completed, which were to guide the selection of community
       infrastructure investments in the in-situ housing reconstruction sites. Therefore, the target of 200
       development plans being completed was not achieved.

Outcomes:

      53 percent of households with fully/severely damaged houses (defined as those structures where
       walls and roofs were damaged and were not habitable) in project areas were provided with resilient
       housing reconstructed under the project, substantially lower than the original target of 75 percent.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Restore and improve housing in targeted communities of Odisha.

Revised Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change is same as under original objective 1 as the objective was not
revised. Only the target for the outcome indicator was increased.

Outputs:

      16,108 resilient houses were constructed, largely achieving the revised target of 19,604 houses (about
       82 percent of intermediate results indicator (IRI) 1). The ICR noted (p. 14) that the remaining houses
       would be completed using GoO’s resources. From June 2020 till June 2021, using its own resources,
       GoO constructed an additional 780 houses in Puri district, taking the total number of completed
       houses to 16,888 (86 percent of IRI 1)

      In-situ housing reconstruction was not accompanied by the preparation of Village Development Plans
       to construct accompanying infrastructure as planned. Instead, the selection of community and public
       infrastructure investments was carried out through an intensive community consultation process. The
       target of 200 Village Development Plans was dropped from Component 1 in 2018.

      The project financed paver block-laden internal village roads in project villages, which are resilient to
       floods and waterlogging (the first in India) as well as resilient community infrastructure including six
       primary schools,123 roads with storm water drains, 11 healthcare and 48 childcare centers, 65
       community buildings, 106 water supply systems, and 593 electricity supply substations. No targets
       were set for these outputs.

Outcomes:




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)




      86 percent of households with fully/severely damaged houses in project areas were provided with
       resilient housing reconstructed under the project, not achieving the revised target of 100 percent. The
       remaining houses were expected to be completed using GoO’s own resources.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Restore and improve public services in targeted communities of Odisha

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as the construction
of internal roads, water supply system and community infrastructure including schools and health centers as
well as upgrading of slums in Berhampur including roads, water and sanitation and construction of all-season
roads and rehabilitation of water and sanitation facilities as well as the development of city-wide drainage and
sewerage master plans were to result in the achievement of the project’s second objective of restoring and
improving public services in targeted communities of Odisha.

Outputs:

      The project hired a Non-Governmental Organization (NG), Gram Vikas, to conduct an awareness
       program including over 75 street theater performances, movies, and workshops to sensitize
       beneficiaries about hygiene, livelihood opportunities and formation of 106 Village Water and Sanitation
       Committees (VWSCs). VWSCs managed water and sanitation services in the relocated houses. Also,
       the project trained 2,340 masons, including 577 women through 51 mason training programs
       conducted by Gram Vikas.

      In Berhampur, the city’s water supply system was restored by replacing 23.9 km of damaged water
       pipelines. Approximately 60 percent of the works on all-season roads and just over 50 percent of the
       storm water drainage works were completed by project closing, therefore not achieving results
       relevant to improved access to all-season roads and improved sanitation facilities as the sub-activities
       remained incomplete.

      A city-wide drainage and sewerage master plan was completed, not achieving the original target of
       two master plans. The master plan serves as a planning tool for ongoing and future infrastructure
       development.

Outcomes:

      350,000 people (including nearly 120,000 slum residents living in over 250 settlements (exceeding the
       set 25,000 target) had access to improved public services in Berhampur, surpassing the target of
       30,000. This achievement is related to 350,000 beneficiaries which were provided access to improved
       water sources as compared to the original target of 25,000. According to the ICR (p. 34), not all public

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



       services were supported as planned and the city of Berhampur did not benefit from the interventions
       on improved sanitation services and all-access to all-seasons roads (as discussed above under
       outputs).

      The target of 25,000 people in urban areas provided with access to all-season roads within a 500-
       meter range was not achieved. At project closing, about 60 percent of the work on all-season roads
       was completed, therefore not providing the expected access benefit.

The ICR did not provide sufficient evidence at the outcome level and discussion of aspects of improved public
service delivery. Also, the ICR did not state what the planned target for roads, pipelines, sewerage and
sanitation facilities, city-wide drainage and sewerage master plans were and how many were actually
delivered.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Increase the capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or
emergency



Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as the establishment
of an integrated complex for Odisha State Disaster Management Agency (OSDMA) that includes a GIS cell,
an emergency operation center, a training center and a decision support system, as well as training of
OSDMA and H&UD staff on DRM would increase the capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and
effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Outputs:

      A decision support system was established in OSDMA as planned. However, OSDMA used its own
       resources to develop the system for automated assessment of risks, dissemination of warnings, and
       advisory for resource management.

      The State Institute of Disaster Management (SIDM), an integrated complex comprising of OSDMA, a
       GIS cell, an Emergency Operation Center and a training facility was only 50 percent completed by
       project closing. Therefore, the target of establishing one was not achieved. According to the ICR (p.
       40) the government of Odisha is currently completing the construction using its own resources.

      Expert staff was not employed at OSDMA, thus not achieving the target of three staff being employed.

      The project did not complete the following activities:

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



                                         o hiring of technical specialist to build capacity at OSDMA in the areas of disaster risk
                                           management, hydro-met systems, risk assessment and financing, structural engineering,
                                           remote sensing, and GIS; and
                                         o community based initiatives such as vulnerability mapping and needs assessment, provision of
                                           common facilities for income generating activities, and community-based DRM activities to
                                           enable affected marginalized communities to cope with survival risks posed by natural
                                           disasters.

                            Outcomes:

                                  When the project closed, none of the state departments were making use of the information generated
                                    by the OSDMA. As a result, the target of doing so was not achieved. The project conceptualized the
                                    pathway for strengthening the impact forecasting capacity of OSDMA as well as use of modern tools
                                    such as GIS and remote sensing for disaster planning and response.

                            Taking everything together, the achievement of the third objective was negligible since most targets were not
                            achieved.




                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the original first objective was Negligible given that the project was not able to achieve the
                            target for resilient houses being constructed and village development plans being developed. The project did
                            not achieve the target of "households with fully/severely damaged houses (defined as those structures where
                            walls and roofs were damaged and were not habitable) in project areas were provided with resilient housing
                            reconstructed under the project".

                            Achievement of the second objective was Modest given that the project was able to surpass the target of
                            people having access to improved public services in Berhampur (water supply). However, not all services
                            were supported as planned and the city of Berhampur did not benefit from the interventions on improved
                            sanitation services and all-access roads.

                            Achievement of the third objective was Negligible since the project was not able to deliver most of the
                            outputs and outcomes under this objective.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



         Negligible                                               Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Achievement of the revised first objective was Modest since the project largely achieved the target for
         resilient houses being constructed and target for fully/severely damaged houses in project area being
         provided with resilient housing reconstructed.

         Achievement of the second objective was Modest given that the project was able to surpass the target of
         people having access to improved public services in Berhampur (water supply). However, not all services
         were supported as planned and the city of Berhampur did not benefit from the interventions on improved
         sanitation services and all-access roads.

         Achievement of the third objective was Negligible since the project was not able to deliver most of the
         outputs and outcomes under this objective.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency:

Both, the PAD and the ICR conducted a traditional economic analysis.

The PAD (p. 60) estimated the economic benefits of resilient housing and access to improved water and
sanitation services to avoid illness, mortality and injuries caused by cyclones and other storms over a 10 year
period. The analysis used the costs, which had been estimated in the 2013 Rapid Damage Needs Assessment
(RDNA) and applied a 10 percent discount rate. The analysis calculated for the housing reconstruction and
community infrastructure activities a benefit-to-cost ratio (BCR) of 2:1. The BCR for the risk mitigation capacity-
building activities was 3:1. According to the ICR (p. 20) the economic analysis at appraisal lacked sophistication
and data due to the need to respond to the Phailian disaster in a timely manner.

No additional economic analysis was carried out during the restructurings, which mainly consisted of
cancellations of credit proceeds and extensions of the credit’s closing date.

The ICR (p. 52) recalculated the economic analysis conducted at appraisal (adjusting for exchange rate
changes, project restructurings and reduction in scope) and estimated a BCR of 3.69:1. However, due to the
limited availability of data at appraisal, the ICR applied a different model using international standard values for
several benefits (resilient housing, toilets, electrification for the first component and water supply) calculating a
BCR of 25.3:1 indicating that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational Efficiency:

At appraisal, costs were estimated at approximately US$4,697 per house, with the remaining costs including
community infrastructure (community meeting halls, marketplaces, water supply, medical centers, solid waste

                                                                                                          Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



management, childcare centers, internal roads, etc.) as well as housing insurance, relocation payments,
temporary rental payments and incentives for accelerated construction. According to the ICR (p. 50), at
project closing, the average house cost was about US$6,705. However, due the COVID-19 pandemic, it is not
clear how much of this cost went towards actual housing construction versus supporting infrastructure and other
payments.

Due to the reduction in the number of houses for reconstruction, US$9.8 million was cancelled in March 2019,
only one year before project closure. Due to non-completion of activities, additional US$40.13 million was
cancelled in June 2020. Furthermore, the ICR did not explain if the remaining US$18.4 million was cancelled.
This might indicate inefficiencies in project implementation.

The project experienced delays in regard to the reconstruction of housing in the Puri district, infrastructure
construction in Berhampur, as well as in the construction of the SIDM complex. As a result, the project’s
implementation period was extended by a total of 15 months. However, due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the
implementation of a national lockdown, the extended period could not be fully used to complete several activities
such as the construction of 3,046 houses in the Puri district, construction of the SIDM building and several
infrastructure activities in Berhampur, resulting in the underachievement of components 1, 2 and 3.

Given the cancellation of a total of US$49.93 million during the last year of project implementation and the lack
of clarity in regard to what happened to the remaining US$18.4 million, the efficiency of this project is rated
Modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                 Rating Dimension                                     Original Targets            Revised Targets
Relevance of the Objective                                                                    High
                          Efficacy                                        Negligible                  Modest

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



Efficiency                                                                                Modest
Outcome Rating                                                          Unsatisfactory     Moderately Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                                          2                          3
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                                             73.41                      11.19
Disbursement (%)                                                           86.8%                      13.2%
Weight Value                                                                1.73                       0.39
Total weights                                                                              2.12
Overall Outcome Rating                                                                 Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Commitment Risk. The government commitment risk is assessed as low because according
to the ICR (p. 30) the government continues to remain committed to improve its capacity to manage disaster
risks as demonstrated through the ongoing collaboration with the Bank in a follow up project (Odisha State
Capability and Resilient Growth Project, P178511). The aim of the project is to enhance the capability of the
government of Odisha to expand coverage of evidence-based systems for social protection and post-disaster
risk insurance for vulnerable communities within the state.

Operation and Maintenance Risk. The 2019 National Disaster Management Plan endorsed Owner Driven
Construction of Houses (ODCH) as a key approach for disaster-affected housing reconstruction.
Homeowners are maintaining their houses and public assets such as water supply pipeline, drainage works
and community infrastructure are being operated and maintained by the relevant state agencies. For
example, the ICR (p. 30) stated that in Berhampur, the Public Health Engineering Organization, the state
utility, is already operating and maintaining the municipal water supply. However, it is critical that relevant
state agencies have adequate budget for doing so. The ICR did not specify if they do. The O&M risk is
assessed as modest.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Due to the project’s response to an emergency, the preparation period was only about three months.
  According to the PAD (p. 7), the project design was built on lessons learned from the completed
  Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project (P094513) in Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry, Bihar Kosi
  Floods Reconstruction Project, National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project and projects in Bangladesh and
  around the world. Key lessons included the importance of involving local communities in disaster
  response including in the decision on locations and design of infrastructure. Also, the lesson to keeping
  the design simple with few sub-projects and implementing agencies to avoid overburdening was reflected
  in the project’s design.



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



  The project’s PDO was adequately ambitious, and the Bank team identified appropriate stakeholders and
  beneficiaries.

  The Bank team identified relevant risks such as large number of direct beneficiaries, management of
  social and environmental process due to nature of project location and involvement of implementing
  agencies with varied capacities to deal with various stakeholders and local communities. According to the
  PAD (p. 9) mitigation measures included provision of additional resources and training to the
  implementing agency staff to address: i) social and environmental safeguard issues; ii) ensure community
  participation in design and implementation; iii) capacity augmentation of beneficiaries towards managing
  their constructions; iv) procurement and financial management. However, the mitigation measures were
  not sufficient and the staff at the PMU and PIUs lacked experience in regard to Bank procedures/policies
  for financial management, procurement and environmental and social safeguards. As a result, the project
  experienced implementation delays.

  Also, the Bank team did not identify the risk of difficulties in beneficiary engagement in Puri. According to
  the ICR (p. 25) the PIU of the Puri district faced issues regarding implementing reconstruction activities,
  including litigation related to discrepancy in the beneficiary list. As a result, since the PIU was only able to
  finalize the beneficiary list in 2019, most houses in Puri still were incomplete when the project closed.
  Finally, the bank did not identify the risk of frequent natural disaster such as three different storms
  between 2018 and 2020, which resulted (according to the ICR p. 25) in the diversion of attention of the
  PMUs and PIUs since they were involved in emergency operations. As a result, project implementation
  experienced delays.

  Furthermore, the Bank based its Economic and Financial Analysis on damage and rebuilding cost
  estimates instead of findings from the Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA) resulting in an
  underestimation by almost 50 percent.

  The Results Framework had shortcomings (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 3), the Bank conducted 10 supervision missions throughout project
 implementation. The ICR (p. 29) stated that the team was composed of the necessary expertise, which
 prepared detailed aide memoirs and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). The ICR (p. 29) stated that the
 Bank team coordinated with other project teams from other complementary initiatives to avoid duplications.

 However, supervision missions were not conducted on a bi-annual basis as planned. The ICR (p. 29)
 stated that between January 2016 and project closure in June 2020, the Bank only conducted five
 supervision missions. Also, there was a delay in reporting after supervision missions. During the last year
 of project implementation, the Bank did not submit an aide memoire. The lack of regular supervision
 missions and delays in reporting might have detracted the Bank team from continuous monitoring of project
 implementation towards the objective.


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



 The Bank team restructured the project three times to adapt the Results Framework and extend the closing
 date by 15 months. The first restructuring was only one year before the closing date. The third restructuring
 approved a decrease in two intermediate outcome indicators (the target of 200 Village Development Plans
 and the target for the number of city-wide drainage and sewerage master plans) on the last day of project
 implementation in June 2020. Also, the project's M&E was weak and the Bank did not make any
 improvements (see section 9a for more details).

 Supervision of safeguards implementation was weak (see section 10 a below).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objective was sufficiently clear and specific. Also, the project's theory of change and how the
 outputs and activities were to result in the intended outcomes was soundly reflected in the Results
 Framework. However, The Results Framework only had two indicators duplicating the number of
 beneficiaries with reconstructed houses in terms of the number and a share. Also, the Results Framework
 lacked indicators to measure an improvement in public services (PDO 2) or the capacity of the State
 entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency (PDO 3).

 According to the PAD (p. 8), the OSDMA was responsible for the M&E activities for component 1 while the
 H&UD was responsible for component 2’s M&E activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p. 26) stated that the project produced progress reports, a Mid-Term Review (MTR) and
  completion report to the state-level Steering Committee and the Bank. Data for these reports was
  collected at the block level, aggregated at the district level, and compiled at the state level, making the
  reporting process rather complex. There were inconsistencies between data reported at the state level
  and aide memoires such as the number of houses completed. The ICR (p. 26) stated that these
  discrepancies possibly resulted from audits that were conducted at local, district, and state levels and
  were corrected for errors but with a time lag.

  The ICR does not discuss the reason for how the project benefited 350,000 people against the target of
  30,000 (eleven-fold increase).




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



  During two project restructurings the Results Framework was modified to reflect the reduction of the
  project’s scope.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p.26), the project’s M&E data was used to inform decision making such as project
  restructurings, identifying risks, assessing project costs, targets and timelines. The Steering Committee
  used progress reports to provide direction towards more effective implementation to the OSDMA and
  district officials.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the following four Bank’s safeguard policies: OP/BP
   4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural
   Resources) and OP/BP (4.12) Involuntary Resettlement. The project prepared an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) to address potential issues related to the construction of houses, roads,
   drains and community infrastructure. These included impacts on forests, human-elephant/wildlife conflict in
   select locations, vegetation, drainage, air quality, noise levels, and occupational health and safety.

   According to the ICR (p. 27), the environmental and social risks and impacts were screened and assessed
   but mitigation measures did not comply with the Bank’s safeguard policies. Several issues were not fully
   resolved including inadequate solid and liquid waste management, incomplete ratification of loosely hanging
   electrical wires, insufficient adoption of solar power technologies, lack of availability of potable water in
   selected villages, and human-animal conflict. The work at the SIDM building site did not conform with the
   required environmental norms, including work-specific environmental and social screening.

   Infrastructure activities in Berhampur were carried out without due attention to labor laws and resettlement
   action plans.

   The project established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) based on the state’s existing system.
   According to the ICR (p. 27) the GRM only received minor grievances mostly related to non-inclusion in the
   beneficiary list, delay in payments for housing reconstruction and deficiency in the provision of potable
   water. These issues were mostly addressed at the field level. There were litigation cases related to potential
   but not included beneficiaries in Puri (the matter was resolved by the courts in 2019) and resettlement-
   related concerns in Berhampur, which was not resolved by project closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 28) the project complied with all the legal covenants. Also, the government
   appointed financial management specialists at the PMU and PIUs. The flow of funds from the state to
   district to local levels was smooth and based on needs. However, the project encountered several financial
   management related issues such as lack of financial management staffing at later stages of
   implementation, inadequate maintenance of books and accounts at Berhampur Municipal Corporation
   (BeMC), delayed addressing of some internal audit observations such as payments to 113 ineligible
   housing beneficiaries in the amount of US$270,000. Also, the project experienced delays in submission of
   Interim Unaudited Financial report.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 28), India introduced a new e-procurement system in 2013, which caused some
   early delay and confusion among the staff at the PMU and PIUs. Also, the project experienced capacity
   issues at the district PIUs, at OSDMA and BeMC resulting in procurement and contract management
   delays. Furthermore, the project’s procurement plan was not regularly updated in the Systematic Tracking
   of Exchanges in Procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Based on a split rating
                                                                                methodology and negligible
                                Moderately
Outcome                                             Unsatisfactory              efficacy under the original
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                targets, the overall outcome
                                                                                rating is Unsatisfactory.
                                Moderately          Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                 Modest


12. Lessons



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



The ICR (p. 30-32) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        Collaborating at the community level in DRM initiatives may help ensure
         sustainability. This project worked with NGOs and beneficiaries at the local level which
         resulted in the resolution of most grievances, and community-friendly design of reconstructed
         houses.

        Failure to link projects to other development programs/projects before implementation
         may undermine efficiency and lead to delays. In this project, during the design state the
         government of Odisha had to coordinate with other central- and state-sponsored schemes to
         develop a list of beneficiaries. When beneficiaries changed from the government’s housing
         scheme to the project’s scheme, significant delays occurred. Especially the district PIU in
         Puri faced considerable challenges in finalizing the beneficiary list resulting in most houses
         not being completed when the project closed.

A lesson learned added by IEG:

        When working with counterparts that have no prior experience in the implementation
         of Bank projects, continuous Bank supervision is critical to ensure a successful
         project implementation. In this project, the Bank did not conduct regular supervision
         missions and reported findings with delay despite several implementation challenges such as
         natural disasters occurring. As a result of lacking Bank supervision, implementation progress
         was not tracked effectively.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR included lessons that
can be useful for future Bank engagement in this area. Furthermore, the ICR was concise.

However, the ICR did not use split rating methodology for outcome. Also, the ICR was not sufficiently candid in
regards to the cancellation of a total of US$49.93 million just before project closure and did not provide any
information on what happened to the remaining US$18.4 million. It lacked information in critical areas such as
how the Bank addressed several issues including financial management, weak capacity, and the occurrence of
natural disasters during project implementation. Also, the ICR did not provide planned targets for some outputs
such as number of water supply pipelines, number of sewerage and sanitation facilities. In addition, the ICR did
not state why PDO indicator 2 ("number of people with access to improved public services in Berhampur") was
substantially surpassed. Finally, it is not clear why it took so long for the ICR to be produced given that the
project closed in June 2020. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                            Page 19 of 19
