     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022963

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P143417                                     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55340,TF-A1906                          30-Sep-2019                                         92,825,339.10

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2014                                 31-Jul-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                     2,700,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            102,700,000.00                                     2,608,502.71

 Actual                                         92,825,339.10                                     2,608,502.71




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson               Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Project Agreement (PA, 2014) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, 2014), was: “To support the transformation of low productivity, subsistence-
   oriented cassava, maize and sorghum sub-sectors into commercially-oriented and competitive value chains in
   four agro-ecological areas”.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved (Section 4), this review parses the PDO
   into three inter-connected objectives (and their corresponding outcomes and indicators):

   Objective 1: to increase the yield of maize, sorghum, and cassava by beneficiary farmers in four agro-
   ecological zones; Objective 2: to improve the quality/price premium of commodities sold by beneficiary
   farmers in the targeted value chains of cassava, maize and sorghum; and Objective 3: to increase the volume
   of targeted crops/commodities sold by participating cooperatives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component A: Support to Agricultural Production, Processing and Marketing (Original allocation: US$135.3
   million; Actual Cost: US$76.1 million). This component aimed to increase production, processing and
   marketing of the target commodities and areas, through 4 subcomponents:

   (1) A.1: Establishment of Productive Partnerships (PPs) between Producer Organizations and Agri-
   businesses (ABs), supported by financial institutions (FIs);

   (2) A.2: Financing of business plans and training for POs, through a matching grant scheme and funding
   nutrition-sensitive agricultural investments in women’s groups.

   (3) A.3: Financing of basic public infrastructure, including rehabilitation of market platforms, key feeder
   roads, rural roads; and

   (4) A.4: Support for improved access to Rural Financing.

   Component B: Support to Seed Production & Distribution System, Relevant Public Services and
   Technology Transfer (Original allocation: US$15.3 million; Actual Cost: US$10.0 M). This included support
   for three sub-components, with their relevant objectives and results:

   (1) B.1: to enhance the seed production and distribution system and relevant public services, aimed at
   strengthening key components of the seed system, and strengthening the capacities of the relevant entities
   (notably Agricultural Development and Research Institute (IRAD) and MINADER in the implementation of
   key reforms which transform People’s Organizations (POs) into cooperatives, and to mainstream nutrition
   dimensions in the relevant policies and programs;




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



  (2) B.2: to build commodity-based public-private consultation and partnership through establishment of a
  national dialogue platform among key stakeholders (especially between Government, POs, ABs, partner
  financial institutions);

  (3) B.3: to promote agricultural technology generation and transfer, and promotion of healthy food and
  nutrition practices.

  Component C: Project Coordination and Management (Original allocation: US$ 13.4 million; Actual Cost:
  US$21.6 million), comprised of two sub-components:

  (1) C.1: strategic planning, coordination, management and implementation support, including a governance
  and anti-corruption plan, and grievance mechanism; and

  (2) C.2: monitoring and evaluation, communication, and knowledge production and sharing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (i) Project Cost: The total project cost at approval was US$166.6 million. The revised costs (following 2
  restructurings) was US$124.5 million. The actual project cost at closing was US$107.5 million (or 64.5% of
  total original costs and 86.3% of revised costs). The difference in the revised costs and final disbursement
  was due to a decrease in the counterpart contributions from Government, local beneficiaries and from
  private commercial sources (see ICR, Data Sheet and Annex 3).

  (ii) Financing: At approval and final actual/disbursed amounts, the sources/amounts of financing and
  disbursements were as follows, respectively: IDA ($100 million vs. $90.2 million); Trust Fund ($2.7 million
  vs. $2.6 million); Government ($12.4 million vs. $5.7 million); local beneficiaries ($10.9 million vs. 3.1
  million); and private commercial sources ($40.6 million vs. $5.9 million).

  (iii) Borrower Contribution: Original and revised amount: $12.4 million; actual amount: $5.7 million).

  (iv) Dates: The project was approved on September 25, 2014, became effective on January 29, 2015. A
  mid-term review was carried out in March, 2017. The original closing date was September 30, 2019, with
  the actual closing date being July 31, 2021 (i.e., an extension of 22 months). This extension was due to
  various implementation capacity weaknesses and resulting implementation delays, which were exacerbated
  by COVID conditions in Cameroon.

  (v) Restructurings and Significant Changes During Implementation. Although the PDO remained
  unchanged, the project had two level-2 restructurings, mainly to reflect more realistic targets and
  requirements, in light of implementation capacity weaknesses and commitments of key entities (ICR, paras.
  18 – 28), generally based on sound rationale, as reflected below.

  (a) in early 2018: there were 3 main changes: results framework; component/subcomponent costs and
  reduced costs; and reallocation between disbursement categories. More specifically, the revisions and their
  rationale involved:(i) the outcome targets for one of the PDO indicators were revised downwards, to reflect
  more realistic target: crops yields of sorghum were revised from 3 to 2 tons/hectare; (ii) one new PDO
  indicator was added, namely: increase in volume of targeted crops sold by participating cooperatives to
  PPs, to reflect the effectiveness of the marketing/contractual arrangements among key entities; (iii) all


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



   component costs were reduced to align with the availability of funds, including reducing the budget for sub-
   component A.2 (ref. business plans); (iv) reallocation of $13 million from subcomponent A.2 to A.3 (ref. rural
   infrastructure ,especially roads), reflected the low original cost estimates vis-à-vis the need for expanded
   marketing infrastructure in the project area; (v) cofinancing parameters for the matching grants scheme for
   subprojects (SPs) were revised as follows, to be more realistic and feasible, also reflecting reluctance of
   commercial banks: POs (remained 10%); project funding (from 50% to 70%); commercial banks (from 40%
   to 20%); (vi) expanding the co-financing partnership to include microfinance institutions (MFIs), in addition
   to commercial banks, to enable expanded cofinancing;

   (b) in mid-2019: there were 5 main changes (although of a lesser extent than restructuring in 2018): results
   framework; components/costs; extension of closing date; reallocation between disbursement categories;
   implementation schedule.More specifically, the revisions and their rationale involved: (i) the expected
   increase in the volume of cassava and maize sold by participating cooperatives were reduced (from 25,000
   MTs to 5,000 MTs, and 65,700 MTs to 14,400 MTs, respectively); (ii) an extension of the Credit and TF, by
   22 months, due to: various implementation delays, and additional time needed to meet key targets;
   consolidating project achievements, especially with respect to sustainability of SPs, including nutrition SPs
   supported by the TF; (iii) an increase in the allocation for component C.1 (budget funding, from $12.1 million
   to $16.2 million), to reflect the additional management costs for the extension period.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project’s objectives were substantially relevant to addressing the country’s key developmental
challenges and to contributing to the implementation and achievement of the country’s main developmental
strategies. At the country level and sectoral levels, the project contributed to the following core
developmental policies and strategies: Cameroon Vision 2035; Growth and Employment Strategy; Rural
Development Strategy (2005-2009); National Agriculture Investment Program (PNIA, 2014 – 2020, and
PNIA for 2020 - 2030); National Development Strategy, 2020-2030. More specifically, the project showed
solid alignment with these national strategic frameworks/interventions as follows (ICR, para. 3): (i) to
organize small farmers in cooperatives and other forms of efficient professional organizations capable of
accessing inputs, technologies, credit, and market of their products; (ii) to broaden the focus of agriculture
production to meet demand for both food and agroindustry inputs; (iii) to increase productivity,
competitiveness and modernization of production of key subsectors and marketing infrastructure in the
main production basins. During the project’s implementation period, the project continued to be fully
consistent and aligned with the Government’s policies, strategies and thematic areas (ICR, para. 31).

Also, during design and implementation the Project was and remained strongly aligned with and addressed
key pillars and elements of the Bank’s strategy documents, and supporting analytical reports, overlapping
with two Bank strategy documents and an IFC framework for Cameroon, including (ICR, paras. 4, 30): (i)
Cameroon Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, 2010-2014) priorities to increase competitiveness and
improve service delivery, as reflected by the Project’s three components; (ii) IFC’s agri-business strategy in
Sub-Sahara Africa, and key areas of engagement in Cameroon, including support for supporting and
strengthening productive partnerships (PPs), supporting development of a more market-oriented and
commercial agriculture sector, and an expanded role of financial sector; (iii) Cameroon Country Partnership


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



               Framework (CPF, for FY17-21), which included 12 objectives, three focus areas, including increased
               productivity, access to markets and competitiveness of key value chains in the agriculture sector.

               However, while there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and
               WB strategies, the relevance of the objectives is pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect a
               potential solution to a development problem. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational
               environment, a shortcoming here was that the objective was at a very low level (input/output, at best) of the
               logical chain: “to support the transformation of agricultural sub-sectors” alone is not outcome focused and
               does not help in understanding what development results were expected as a consequence of the project
               (i.e. how this were to change people’s lives). The ICR’s reconstructed ToC identified expected outcomes at
               a higher level (“in the long-term, the Project was expected to contribute to economic development and job
               creation, and to the enhancement of the food security and livelihood of the targeted rural farming
               population”), but these aspects were not captured in the PDO formulation. These may be longer term
               targets, but tracking and assessing them are important aspects of a successful development operation and
               its relevant objectives.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the yield of maize, sorghum, and cassava by beneficiary farmers in four agro-ecological zones

                             Rationale
                             The project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), but did
                             not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR
                             reconstructed a ToC for the project, which is consistent with its overall PDO, core outcomes and supporting
                             components/outputs/activities. (ICR, Figure 1, paras. 8 -11). The ToC figure clearly highlights the rationale for
                             and operational logic of this objective 1 to help achieve the overall PDO.

                             Theory of Change:

                             The prioritized interventions with respect to achieving objective 1 include three types, in terms of ensuring the
                             relevant activities are carried out to generate the most relevant outputs and their associated outcomes, as
                             indicated below:

                                       a. Enhancing the seed production and distribution system and relevant public services in order to:
                                          strengthen the seed control, seed certification, seed bio-forcation, seed multiplication and distribution
                                          of maize, cassava, and sorghum; strengthening the capacity of the Agricultural Development and
                                          Research Institute (IRAD) to increase production of breeder and foundational cuttings of cassava and

                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



       seeds of maize and sorghum, including bio-fortified crops; strengthening the Ministry of Agriculture
       and Rural Development (MINADER’s) capacity to support implementation of reforms that transform
       POs into cooperatives and mainstream nutrition considerations in its policies and programs;
    b. Enhancing agricultural technology transfers and promotion of healthy food and nutrition practices,
       based on the most relevant activities and outputs, to support the associated outcomes of R&E and
       dissemination of improved technologies, and development of nutrition activities in the project area;
       and
    c. Improving access to rural finance (to enable POs/farmers) to adopt improved technologies, enabled
       and supported by the project's credit activities and outputs.

Key Intermediate Result Indicators/IRIs and Outputs (ICR, Annex 1)

Outcomes:

     i. Increased yield (MT/ha.) of sorghum by direct beneficiaries: Original target: 3.0; Actual: 1.9 (as % of
          Original target: 63%);
    ii.   Increased yield (MT/ha.) of maize by direct beneficiaries: Original target: 4.0; Actual: 3.6 (as %
          of target: 90%);
   iii.   Increased yield (MT/ha.) of cassava by direct beneficiaries: Original target: 24.0; Actual: 22.4 (as % of
          target: 93%);
   iv.    No. of clients (000s) adopting improved agricultural technology (promoted by project): Original target:
          120 Actual: 16.8 (as % of target: 14%);
    v.    No. of farms adopting biofortified varieties: Original target: 6,000; Actual: 958 (as % of target: 16%);

Key Outputs:

Volume/MT (million) of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Original target: 9.7 M; Actual: 9.4 (as %
of target: 99%);

      Volume/MT of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Sorghum: Original target: 130; Actual: 78
          (as % of target: 60%);
      Volume/MT (million/M) of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Cassava (cuttings): Original
       target: 9 M; Actual: 9 M (as % of target: 100%);
      Volume/MT (000s) of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Bio-Fortified Cassava variety:
       Original target: 735; Actual: 385 (as % of target: 52%);
      Volume/MT of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: maize; Original target: 130; Actual: 162.5
       (as % of target: 125%);

  vi. Volume/MT (million) of certified seeds produced & distributed: Total: Original target: 85; Actual: 17.5 (as
% of target: 20%);

      Volume/MT (million) of certified seeds produced & distributed: bio-fortified cassava
       varieties/cuttings; Original target: 5; Actual: 0.17(as % of target: 3%);
      Volume/MT of certified seeds produced & distributed: sorghum; Original target: 3,800; Actual: 137 (as
       % of target: 3.6%);
      Volume/MT (million/M) of certified seeds produced & distributed: cassava cuttings; Original target: 80
       M; Actual: 17.4 (as % of target: 22%);

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




      Volume/MT of certified seeds produced & distributed: maize; Original target: 3,700; Actual: 1,977(as
       % of target: 53%);

  vii. No. of Women who benefitted from labor-saving technologies & equipment; Original target:
84,000; Actual: 8,735 (as % of target: 10%);

    ix. Volume of credit (million) granted by IFPs to participating cooperatives: Original target: 2.7; Actual: 5.7
(as % of target: 211%);

In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved before restructuring is rated Substantial.
Despite the low achievement of numerous outcome and output targets (8 of 9 targets, or 89% were not
achieved), there was good progress toward achieving the main targets. It is noteworthy that the actual target
yield increases for the three target commodities (sorghum, maize and cassava), which are the primary
indicators/targets, were 90+% of their targeted yield levels.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the yield of maize, sorghum, and cassava by beneficiary farmers in four agro-ecological zones
(note: same as original objective 1)

Revised Rationale
The project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), but did
not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR
reconstructed a ToC for the project, which is consistent with its overall PDO, such that the project supported
priority activities to generate the relevant outputs and resulting strategic outcomes (ICR, Figure 1, paras. 8 -
11). The ToC figure clearly highlights the rationale for and operational logic of this objective 1 to help achieve
the overall PDO. (note: same rationale and theory of change before and after restructuring).

Key Intermediate Result Indicators/IRIs and Outputs (ICR, Annex 1). The revised targets are shown below,
with the other original targets shown as above.

Key Outcomes:

     i. Increased yield (MT/ha.) of sorghum by direct beneficiaries: Revised target (2018): 2.0; Actual: 1.9 (as
       % of revised target: 95%);
    ii. No. of clients (000s) adopting improved agricultural technology (promoted by project): Revised target
        (2018): 25; Actual: 16.8 (as % of Revised target: 60%);
   iii. No. of farms adopting biofortified varieties: Revised target (2019); 900; Actual: 958 (as % of Revised
        Target: 106%).

Key Outputs:


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




     i. Volume/MT (million) of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Total; Revised target (2019): 9.5
       M; Actual: 9.4 (as % of Revised target: 99%);

      Volume/MT of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Sorghum; Revised target (2018): 205;
       Actual: 78 (as % of Revised target: 38%);
      Volume/MT (million/M) of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Cassava (cuttings): Revised
       target (2019): 8.9 M; Actual: 9 M (as % of Revised target: 101%);
      Volume/MT (000s) of Foundation Seeds Produced and Distributed: Bio-Fortified Cassava
       variety; Revised target (2018): 550; Actual: 385 (as % of Revised target: 70%;

  ii. Volume/MT (million) of certified seeds produced & distributed: Total; Revised target (2019): 22.9 ; Actual:
17.5(as % of Revised target: 76%);

      Volume/MT (million) of certified seeds produced & distributed: bio-fortified cassava
       varieties/cuttings; Revised target (2019): 1.7 ; Actual: 0.17(as % of Revised target: 10%);
      Volume/MT of certified seeds produced & distributed: sorghum; Revised target (2019): 1,000 ; Actual:
       137 (as % of Revised target: 14%);
      Volume/MT (million/M) of certified seeds produced & distributed: cassava cuttings; Revised target
       (2018): 20.9; Actual: 17.4(as % of Revised target: 83%);
      Volume/MT of certified seeds produced & distributed: maize; Revised target (2018): 4,400; Actual:
       1,977(as % of Revised target: 45%);

  iii. No. of Women who benefitted from labor-saving technologies & equipment; Revised target (2018):
25,000; Actual: 8,735 (as % of Revised target: 35%);

   iv. Volume of credit (million) granted by IFPs to participating cooperatives; Revised target (2019): 5.7;
Actual: 5.7 (as % of Revised target: 100%);

In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved after restructuring is rated Substantial. Most
of the IRI and output targets (7 of 9) were revised downwards, and most (78%) of these were not fully
achieved, although 5 of 9 indicators exceeded 90% of the revised targets, and 22% of the targets were
achieved/exceeded. It is noteworthy that the actual target yield increases for the three target commodities
(sorghum, maize and cassava), the main target indicators, were 90+% of their targeted yield levels.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality/price premium of commodities sold by beneficiary farmers in the targeted value chains
of cassava, maize and sorghum

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



Similar to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is reflected in the project’s original design and in the ToC
reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1, paras. 8-11), with respect to the various types of project-funded activities,
which contributed to generating sustainable IRIs/outputs, which in turn, contributed to the sustainable
outcome of improved quality/price premium of the 3 targeted commodities (see relevant indicators below).
The project’s restructuring, which involved a decrease in many of the targets, also contributed to the overall
PDO.

Theory of Change:

The prioritized interventions with respect to achieving objective 2 include three types, which generated the
relevant outputs and resulting outcomes:

    a. Providing post-harvesting and processing installations, which were mostly in the form of prioritized
       outputs;
    b. Providing improved rural road infrastructure, as prioritized outputs, which contributed to enhanced
       market access;
    c. Providing access to financing for business plans for POs, for modern equipment & post-harvest
       infrastructure, in terms of the increased outputs of credit loans to beneficiaries;

Key Intermediate Result Indicators/IRIs and Outputs (ICR, Annex 1)

Key Outcomes:

     i. Increased quality as measured by percentage of price premium of sorghum sold by beneficiary.
        farmers; Original target: 20%; Actual: 17.1% (as % of original target: 86%);
    ii. Increased quality as measured by percentage of price premium of maize sold by ben. farmers;
        Original target: 15%; Actual: 17.2% (as % of target: 115%);
   iii. Increased quality as measured by % of price premium of cassava tubers sold by ben. farmers;
        Original target: 10%; Actual: 0% (as % of target: 0%);

Key Outputs:

     i. No. of Kms. of roads rehabilitated; Original target: 500; Actual: 217 (as % of Original target: 43%);
    ii. No. of post-harvest/processing facilities constructed or rehabilitated: Original target: 160; Actual: 115
       (as % of Original target: 72%);
   iii. No. of subprojects implemented: Original target: 300; Actual: 78 (as % of Original target: 26%);

In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved before restructuring is rated
Substantial. Despite the fact that 67% of the original IRI/outcome and output targets (4 of 6) were not
achieved, based on the project-supporting activities and resulting outputs, there was good progress toward
meeting the other performance targets, which comprised the main targets. While the ICR did not present
evidence on meeting the price premium of cassava, follow-up discussion/note with the Bank's ICR team
conveyed positive anecdotal evidence of progress in meeting this target. A conservative performance figure
(5%) is shown above. Also, it is noteworthy that the target price premium for 1 of the target
commodities/maize was exceeded (115% of the original target).




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the quality/price premium of commodities sold by beneficiary farmers in the targeted value chains
of cassava, maize and sorghum.
(note: objective 2 remained the same after restructuring)

Revised Rationale
Similar to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is reflected in the project’s original design and in the ToC
reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1, paras. 8-11), with respect to the various types of project-funded activities,
which contributed to generating sustainable IRIs and outputs, which in turn, contributed to the sustainable
outcome of improved quality/price premium of the 3 targeted commodities (see relevant indicators below).
The project’s restructuring, which involved a decrease in many of the targets, also contributed to the overall
PDO. Note: The rationale and theory of change for objective 2 (after restructuring) remained the same as the
original objective 2.

Key Intermediate Result Indicators/IRIs and Outputs (ICR, Annex 1). This section shows only revised targets,
with the other original targets shown as above.

Key Outcomes:

     i. Increased quality as measured by percentage of price premium of sorghum sold by
       beneficiary farmers; Original target: 20%; Actual: 17.1% (as % of target: 86%);
    ii. Increased quality as measured by percentage of price premium of maize sold by beneficiary farmers;
        Original target: 15%; Actual: 17.2% (as % of target: 115%);
   iii. Increased quality as measured by % of price premium of cassava tubers sold by beneficiary farmers;
        Original target: 10%; Actual: 5% (as % of target: 50%);

Strategic Outputs:

     i. No. of Kms. of roads rehabilitated; Revised target (2019): 190; Actual: 217 (as % of Revised target:
        114%);
    ii. No. of post-harvest/processing facilities constructed or rehabilitated: Revised target (2019): 100;
        Actual: 115 (as % of Revised target: 115%);
   iii. No. of subprojects implemented: Revised target (2018): 100; Actual: 78 (as % of Revised target:
        78%);

In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved after restructuring is rated Substantial.
Despite the fact that 50% of the IRI and output targets (3 of 6) were revised downwards, 50% of the revised
targets exceeded the revised targets, and about 50% of the revised targets were not fully achieved, although
made good progress toward achieving the targets. It is noteworthy that the target price premium for 1 of the
target commodities (only 33%) were achieved/exceeded. It is recognized that the progress in achieving
the revised targets after restructuring was better than before restructuring.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase the volume of targeted crops/commodities sold by participating cooperatives.

Rationale
Similar to Objectives 1 and 2, the rationale for Objective 3 is reflected in the project’s original design and in
the ToC reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1, paras. 8-11), with respect to the various types of project-funded
activities, which contributed to generating sustainable IRIs and outputs, which in turn, contributed to the
sustainable outcome of increased volume of targeted crops/commodities sold by participating cooperatives.
(see relevant indicators below). The project’s restructuring, which involved a decrease in the targets for this
objective, also contributed to the overall PDO.

Theory of Change:

The prioritized interventions with respect to achieving objective 1 include three types, in terms of outputs and
resulting outcomes

    a. Completing/signing productive partnership agreements, as key outputs;
    b. Establishing commodity-based consultation and partnership frameworks, as key outputs;
    c. Ensuring/strengthening cooperatives, with functional systems, as key outcomes, resulting from the
       above cited outputs

Key Intermediate Result Indicators/IRIs and Outputs (ICR, Annex 1)

(i) Increased vol.(000s) of targeted crops sold by participating coops. to buyers from prod. partn.:
total. Original target: 90.7 MT; Actual: 47.0(as % of Original target: 52%)

      -Increased vol.(000s) of cassava sold by participating coops. to buyers from productive
partnerships: Original target: 14.4 MT; Actual: 4.5 (as % of Original target: 31%)

      -Increased vol.(000s) of maize sold by participating coops. to buyers from productive partnerships:
Original target: 65.7 MT; Actual: 28.6 (as % of Original target: 44%)

      -Increased vol.(000s) of sorghum sold by participating coops. to buyers from prod. partnerships: Original
target: 10.6 MT; Actual: 14.0 (as % of Original target: 132%).

(ii) Percentage of credit reimbursement of participating cooperatives to partner financial institutions: Original
target: 75 (2018); Actual: 81 (as % of target: 108%).

(iii) Agro-Business buyers’ percentage rate of satisfaction on achievement of contractual commitments of
cooperatives for cassava: Original target: 70% (2018); Original Target: 70% (2018); Actual: 20% (as % of
Original target: 28%).


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



(iv) Agro-Business buyers’ percentage rate of satisfaction on achievement of contractual commitments of
cooperatives for maize: Original target: 70% (2018); Actual: 64% (as % of Original target: 91%).

(v) Agro-Business buyers’ percentage rate of satisfaction on achievement of contractual commitments of
cooperatives for sorghum: Original target: 70% (2018); Actual: 62% (as % of Original target: 89%)

(vi) Percentage of complaints/grievances addressed related to delivery of project benefits: Original target:
100%; Actual: 96% (as % of original target: 96%) (out of total of 165 complaints).

Key Outputs:

(i) No. of commodity platforms established: Original target: 1; Actual: 1 (as % of target: 100%);

(ii) No. of productive partnerships established and functioning: Original target: 35; Actual 20 (as % of original
target: 57%);

(iii) No. of participating cooperatives with a Director and a functioning business accounting system: Original
target: 100; Actual: 75 (as % of Original target: 75%).

In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 3 was achieved before restructuring is rated Modest, because
7 of 9 original outcome and output targets (78%) were not fully achieved, with only 2 of the 9 original targets
(or 22 %) being achieved/exceeded.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the volume of targeted crops/commodities sold by participating cooperatives.
(note: the objective remained the same as the original objective)

Revised Rationale
Similar to Objectives 1 and 2, the rationale for Objective 3 is reflected in the project’s original design and in
the ToC reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1, paras. 8-11), with respect to the various types of project-funded
activities, which contributed to generating sustainable IRIs and outputs, which in turn, contributed to the
sustainable outcome of increased volume of targeted crops/commodities sold by participating cooperatives.
(see relevant indicators below). The project’s restructuring, which involved a decrease in the targets for this
objective, also contributed to the overall PDO.

Note: The rationale and theory of change remained the same as the original rationale and ToC.

Theory of Change:

The prioritized interventions with respect to achieving objective 1 include three types:



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 27
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




                                 a. Completing/signing productive partnership agreements, as key outputs;
                                 b. Establishing commodity-based consultation and partnership frameworks, as key outputs;
                                 c. Ensuring/strengthening cooperatives, with functional systems, as key outcomes.

                            Key Intermediate Result Indicators/IRIs and Outputs (ICR, Annex 1). This section shows only revised targets,
                            with the original targets shown above.

                            Key Intermediate Outcomes::

                            (i) Increased vol.(000s) of targeted crops sold by participating coops. to buyers from prod.
                            partn.:total: Revised target (2019): 40.6 MT; Actual: 47.0(as % of Revised target: 116%)

                                  -Increased vol.(000s) of cassava sold by participating coops. to buyers from productive
                            partnerships: Revised target (2019): 5 MT; Actual: 4.5 (as % of Revised target: 90%)

                                 -Increased vol.(000s) of maize sold by participating coops. to buyers from productive
                            partnerships: Revised target (2019): 25 MT; Actual: 28.6 (as % of Revised target: 114%).

                            Key Outputs:

                            (i) No. of productive partnerships established and functioning: Revised target (2018): 20 MT; Actual: 20 (as %
                            of Revised target: 100%);

                            In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 3 was achieved after restructuring is rated Substantial,
                            because 20% of the IRI/output targets (2) were revised downwards, and 5 of 9 intermediate outcome and
                            output targets (or 56%) were not fully achieved, while 6 of 9 revised targets being above 90% of the revised
                            targets, and 4 of the 9 targets (or 44%) of the targets being achieved/exceeded. It is noteworthy that the
                            revised targets for 2 of the 3 target commodities were exceeded by project closing.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the extent to which the original overall PDO and 3 core objectives (which remained the
                            same), and their original targets were achieved is rated Substantial. Although there was variability in
                            meeting the targets, the more important targets for each of the two objectives (before and after restructuring)
                            were met or exceeded (e.g., crop yields and price quality premium).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 27
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The overall efficacy of the extent to which the restructured overall PDO and 3 core objectives (which
         remained the same), and their revised targets were achieved is rated Substantial. Although there was
         variability in meeting the targets (10 out of 25 targets were achieved/exceeded), the more important targets
         for each of the 3 objectives were met/exceeded (e.g., yields, price quality premium and overall volume of
         marketed produce of the target commodities). It is important to affirm the decision to revise downward some
         of the key targets during the two restructurings (especially the first one in 2018), to reflect more realistic
         targets in the light of weaknesses in existing institutional delivery capacities of the key entities. Accordingly,
         the ratings after restructuring were slightly better than before restructuring.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project’s performance and results demonstrated an efficiency of Modest, based on various
evidenced-based tools and analyses applied and presented in the ICR (ICR, paras. 63-72, and Annex 4
presents further details). The methodology and results used to assess efficiency involving applying financial and
economic analyses, with respect to the components assessed at appraisal, as follows:

(a) Financial Analyses: The ex-post financial analysis covered six models, including three crop production
models (cassava, maize, sorghum) at farm level, as well as three models for cooperative bulking, drying, and
cleaning facilities that were promoted by the Project. Three farm models were updated using the standard
methodology of comparing a With-Project (WP) and Without-Project (WOP) situation, in order to measure the
incremental benefits of the interventions on production of cassava, maize, and sorghum. In addition, three
typical enterprise models were elaborated, in line with the Project achievements, namely: (i) bulking and drying
of maize; (ii) bulking and cleaning of sorghum; (iii) processing facility to produce cassava flour. The analyses
generated 4 financial performance indicators for the six financial models: incremental cash flow, Benefit-Cost
Ratio, net present value and internal rate of return. The financial results show that the project-supported
investments are financially sound and sustainable for the participating farmers, enabling them to repay the
loans. For cooperative processing, drying and cleaning, the financial returns based on the 4 indicators showed
the financial results are sustainable (for further details, see ICR, paras. 64-67). Compared to the ex-ante
analyses, the project’s financial returns compared favorably (RA to clarify).

(b) Economic Analyses: The economic benefits of the Program were calculated taking into account the financial
analyses, and using the economic benefits, against the economic costs of the project. The economic analysis
was developed over a period of 20 years (2014-2033). It assessed the Project as a whole, and took into account
investments in: (i) productive goods at farm levels and cooperative levels; (ii) economic public goods (drinking
water, roads, nutrition investments & education) with their direct return on investment, but also their impact on
the livelihoods of the rural populations; and (iii) environmental benefits (greenhouse gas mitigation), which were

                                                                                                              Page 14 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



calculated using EX-ACT (see ICR, Annex 4 for details); calculations were based on data provided by the
Project (number of hectares developed, upgrading production technology, fertilizers provided to farmers, and
energy consumption for drying of produce, changes in land use). Overall, the EFA results indicate that the
AIMDP interventions were economically justified, generating an indicative NPV of US$40.2 million and an ERR
of 18.2 percent, not accounting for environmental externalities (and ERR of 20% with the externalities). The
valuation of environmental externalities enhances the economic justification of the project. The ex-ante ERR
was well above the ex-post ERR --- 32.7% vs. 18.2 - 20% - for the following main reasons (ICR, para. 70, Annex
4): (i) a delay in benefits of 2 to 3 years compared to the initial planning; (ii) a lower than anticipated adoption
rate of new technologies of 65 percent by cooperatives; (iii) more positive ex-ante assumptions with respect to
key outputs (i.e., hectares, roads, processing units).

(c) Implementation Efficiency (ICR, para. 71): The project’s positive technical performance as reflected by the
above financial and economic indicators was achieved, in the light of an overall disbursement of IDA Credit of
about 90 percent (and about $90 million). The co-financing from partner financial institutions was about US$5.9
million (vs. the end of project target of US$5.7 million target). The high rate of disbursement of IDA resources
against an average technical performance demonstrates the existence of various sources of inefficiency
throughout the implementation of the project, including: (i) the long procurement procedures for the earth roads
component; (ii) delays in obtaining from the World Bank “No Objection”; (iii) delays in launching critical project
activities (e.g., implementation of business plans, production of seeds); and (iv) the financing of activities not
planned or unrelated to the development objective, especially with respect to: the registration of cooperatives,
the preponderance of advisory support activities, and the financing of the preparation of other proposed Bank-
supported Projects.

In summary, while the quantitative analyses showed positive financial and economic efficiencies, they are below
the overly optimistic ex-ante levels, and the project experienced various types of implementation inefficiencies
as cited above. Accordingly, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      90.00
 Appraisal                                                  32.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      90.00
 ICR Estimate                                               18.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




The overall outcome rating is based on the assessment of the 3 dimensions as summarized above. Based on
the IEG guidelines (IEG, 2017, p. 45-51), a split evaluation was conducted, mainly because the project’s
PDO/objectives remained the same, the “level of ambition”/targets for numerous indicators were revised
downwards during the 2 restructurings (2018 and 2019), and the level of project funding remained similar
(although decreased financial contributions from beneficiaries and banks). Although the Project had 3 formal
restructurings, this ICRR considers the two important restructurings for the split evaluation. The project’s two
restructurings retained the original PDO and project components and key indicators, but reduced some of the
original targets for several of the indicators, in order to be more realistic, in the light of prevailing institutional
implementation constraints. Accordingly, the assessment of the entire project is based on the original and
revised outcome/output targets and achievements, in accordance with IEG split evaluation methodology. This
review concludes that the project’s overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The following points
provide a summary of the outcome assessment, and Table 1 provides further details of the split outcome
assessment.

(a) Substantial rating for Relevance of Objectives: This rating is based on the project’s initial and continued
(throughout implementation) solid alignment of objectives and priority activities with: Government’s national and
agricultural sector policies, strategies, national investment program, and contribution to their strategic targets;
and the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy/Framework (covering two periods: FY2010-2014 and FY2017-
2021), and various analytical reports. Also, the country’s fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) challenges involving
the project area reinforced the relevance of the project. Section 3 also highlights the nature of a design shortfall
with respect to sharpening and tracking the relevance of the objectives.

(b) Substantial rating for Efficacy before restructuring and Substantial after restructuring: The overall
efficacy of the extent to which the original overall PDO and 3 core objectives (which remained the same), and
their original and revised/downward targets arising the 2 restructurings were achieved is rated
Substantial. Before and after restructuring the rating was Substantial, although more robust following
restructuring.

(c) Modest Rating for Efficiency: While the quantitative ex-post analyses showed positive financial and
economic efficiencies, they are below the overly optimistic estimated ex-ante levels, and the project also
experienced various types of implementation inefficiencies as cited above.

      Table 1: Split Evaluation for Assessing Outcome Rating

                                        Original PDO and Objectives Original PDO/Objectives and
   Rating Aspects/Dimensions
                                          and Targets (2014-2018)     Revised Targets (2018-2021)
    1) Relevance of Objectives                                  Substantial
    2) Efficacy (1 overall PDO)                  Substantial                   Substantial
  Objective 1: Increased Yields                  Substantial                   Substantial
  Objective 2: Increased Quality                 Substantial                   Substantial
  Objective 3: Increased Volume                    Modest                      Substantial
            3) Efficiency                                          Modest
         Outcome Ratings                   Moderately Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
   Numerical Value of Outcome
                                                         4                                4
              Ratings
           Disbursement                         US$34.3 million                   US$44.2 million


                                                                                                          Page 16 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



 Weight (% disbursed before/after
                                          37 % (US$34.3/$91.5)        63 % (US$ 57.2 million/$91.5)
            changes)
Weighted Value of Outcome Rating                 1.48                             2.52
      Final Outcome Rating                     Moderately Satisfactory (1.48 + 2.52 = 4.0)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Overall, there is substantial risk to sustaining the project’s development outcomes and overall PDO,
especially in the light of the complex country environment, institutional weaknesses and the increasing FCV
challenges, with 4 main types of risks (see ICR, paras. 109 - 113):

(a) Risks of Sustaining Effective Partnerships: The partnerships between cooperatives, Agribusinesses (ABs)
and Intermediate Financial Partners (IFPs) supported by the Project were the first of the kind in country. At
the beginning of the Project implementation, AIMDP was the catalyst to value chain integration, reduced
market fragmentation, and improved productivity. The Project effectively established partnerships among key
entities, but the interaction and coordination of actors along targeted value chains through good governance
and strong leaderships was still challenging. The Project sought to put in place a commodity platform to
institutionalize the value chain approach and commercial agriculture. This platform was intended to be an
opportunity for dialogue between participants to address differences and to establish a functional market
information system. At project closing, this platform was still not functioning, and therefore raises some
doubts about sustainability of project benefits.

(b) Infant Cooperatives: At project closing, the cooperatives supported by the Project were still at an infant
stage. The transition from a community interest group (GIC) to Cooperative under the OHADA legislation
was a significant change in the country, and the learning curve was steep. During the life of the Project,
commendable progress was achieved in terms of organizational and management capacity, adoption of
improved production technologies, modernization of production system, and enhancing marketing systems.
However, at project closing, it was evident that beneficiary cooperatives still needed support. The PAD
anticipated the key to success of PO development to be the quality of Local Service Providers (LSPs). The
Project, with the help of IFC, worked to enhance the quality of LSPs, but the capacity of the POs was
significantly overestimated. Despite the TA provided by the Project, these POs/cooperatives are still facing
organizational and governance challenges.

(c) Weak O&M Capacities/Regulations for Sustainable Infrastructure: Both the PAD and ICR of the project
recognized that the main challenge for the sustainability of infrastructure is the lack of/weak maintenance
capacity. The committees set up by the Project (water point management committees, road committees in
villages, borehole management committees) for maintenance of project-improved infrastructure were still
very weak and had limited budgets. Most of these committees were set up towards the end of the Project,
which did not give enough time for AIMDP to build the capacity. During ICR preparation communal
government officials consistently explained to the ICR team that sustainability was also compromised by the
lack of regulation on the use of the roads. In addition to lack of road maintenance, roads were being
damaged by vehicle overloading.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



(d) Weak Seed Multiplier Cooperatives and Farms: Although the project made substantial investments in the
seeds subsector (through revitalized seed entities), the ICR indicated that seed multiplier cooperatives
showed limited capacities and performance. While the rate of use of improved seed by beneficiary producers
increased significantly during project implementation, the ICR recognized there is a significant risk this rate
will decline if the seed cooperatives and multiplication farms remain weak, unless there is continued
technical and financial support.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The quality-at-entry of AIMDP was “mixed”, based on the evidence summarized in the ICR (para. 106),
  and taking into account the QatE criteria outlined in the IEG Guidelines (Section 10):

  On the positive side: (i) the project showed strong alignment and relevance with Government and World
  Bank strategy frameworks, and reflected relevant WB global experiences; (ii) several measures were
  taken to prepare the pathway for solid implementation arrangements (e.g., implementation studies;
  project manuals; selection of project personnel; procurement planning); (iii) systematic monitoring of
  preparation activities.

  On the negative side: (i) beneficiary POs were not ready to successfully implement the SubProjects
  (SPs), whereby PO capacities were overestimated, which resulted in underachievement of the SPs and
  their delayed implementation; (ii) delay in selecting SPs and poor quality of SPs were identified as
  substantial risks during preparation. Proposed mitigation measures were to adopt an administrative and
  financial manual of procedures as part of the Project Implementation Manual/PIM, and a manual of
  procedures for selecting SPs in which selection criteria and mechanism would be designed. However, the
  main cause of the delays of SP identification and implementation was the long delays in POs registration
  as cooperative according to OHADA legislation; (iii) the results framework was not well prepared; the RF
  was not comprehensive and the targets for several key indicators were overly ambitious; and (iv) risk
  mitigation measures were quite general and insufficiently clear/operational.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The WB played its role of monitoring the implementation of AIMDP adequately through: (i) Thirteen
 regularly scheduled supervision missions with experts from both the WB and the client, and field visits to
 project sites, notwithstanding the challenging relationship and associated conflicts/tensions during
 implementation between the Bank team and Government. The recommendations from these missions and
 their follow-up helped to address constraints and improve performance; (ii) Task Team Leaders’ (TTLs)
 close supervision and collaboration with both the Project Coordination Unit and Government.[VD1] All
 three TTLs who managed the Project were based in-country, while recognizing that this is a relatively high

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



 turnover of TTLs to ensure smooth continuity, also in the light of the challenging relationships cited in the
 ICR; (iii) together with the PCU team, the ICR stated that the Bank promoted a sound strategy to promote
 the project’s active implementation during the COVID-19 pandemic, although specific examples were not
 provided.

 However, the quality and effectiveness of the WB supervision demonstrated several shortcomings (para.
 107):

 (i) delays over two weeks by the WB team to provide procurement no-objections. From the PCU
 perspective, these delays negatively impacted implementation of the Project, especially, constraining the
 PCU to fully commit IDA funds to execute the Project. From the Bank’s TTL perspective, these delays were
 caused by the quality of ToRs submitted and the nature of expenditures requested. These aspects,
 according to the TTL, required multiple iterations of communications before the Bank’s no-objections were
 given. A review of records suggests, however, that even sending back the first iteration to the PCU took the
 WB more than two weeks and in some cases more than one month;

 (ii) lack of adequate attention and associated actions by the Bank with respect to the various types of
 financial management challenges which arose during implementation (ICR, para. 105, e.g., frequent non-
 conformity with agreed financial management procedures; substantial sum of ineligible expenditures at
 project closing; four of seven financial reports exhibited qualified opinions);

 (iii) the Government also noted that the consolidation of the dialogue between the WB and the Government
 was not a priority on the WB side. Review of several letter exchanges between the PCU, MINADER, and
 the WB suggest instances of tension and disagreement between the PCU and the WB Project team.

 Notwithstanding these shortcomings, the WB project team remained proactive throughout Project
 implementation. In collaboration with the PCU, the Bank’s team conducted three restructurings to address
 emerging issues, although the ICR considered the two most important restructurings in the split
 assessment (see ICR, Annex 6 for further details). Long delays in providing no objections and tensions
 between PCU and the WB were, at the end, overcome with the support of the Bank’s Country Management
 Unit (CMU).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The design of the M&E system reflected a partial mixture, application and performance of the M&E criteria
 outlined in IEG’s Guidelines (ref. p. 57/58). The M&E system was designed to: (i) support the
 implementation of technical components in the decision-making and engagement of direct and indirect


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



 beneficiaries. This included data collection at the individual producer and cooperative level; (ii) monitor
 indicators (linked to the PDO and intermediate results/outputs) linked to the Project’s RF and to monitoring
 the implementation of the Project’s ToC.

 The AIMDP M&E system was supported by two separate software, which were appropriate and functional.
 The M&E system was decentralized, with teams both at the national and regional level, collecting data and
 tracking consistency and alignment between the financial flows and the technical outputs. In the design
 stage, the PDO was clear, but the ToC was not explicitly prepared. The RF indicators were relevant,
 measurable, though ambitious at the onset, with some gender disaggregation, enabling smooth tracking
 through the M&E system. In addition, the design at entry failed to identify one key PDO indicator: volume of
 targeted crops sold by participating cooperatives to PPs, which was added subsequently.



b. M&E Implementation
  The implementation arrangements and progress of the M&E system performed satisfactorily, as follows:

  (i) Following the design of the M&E system, the data collection responsibility to inform the M&E system
  during Project implementation was shared between the PCU and the beneficiary cooperatives; (ii) The
  PCU hired consultants to implement the M&E information system; (iii) The PCU trained beneficiary
  cooperatives to collect and enter data into the M&E system to support their own decision-making; (iv) The
  PCU also involved specialized local services of MINADER to learn and monitor the M&E system to
  anticipate sustainable transfer of project activity supervision responsibilities; (iv) The M&E system
  produced most expected outputs on a regular basis, including reports on the Project status, evaluation
  data of productive SPs, monitoring investment and output data for the implementation of nutrition SPs,
  data on environment, infrastructure, and seeds; (v) These reports were produced and transmitted every
  six months to sectoral ministries and to the WB. The reports included: key performance indicators;
  technical, financial and implementation monitoring reports, and implementation of the procurement plan.
  (vi) During implementation the AIMDP, MINADER, and the WB worked together to put in place the
  guiding principles for greater involvement of MINADER's entities/services (through two directorates), in
  anticipation of the completion of AIMDP, and arrangements to sustain the relevant M&E activities; and
  (vii) The Project also supported each cooperative to maintain a Monitoring and Evaluation Committee to
  ensure sustainability after the project ends. At closing, these committees still faced challenges to support
  data collection.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, there was good utilization of the M&E system/information, as follows:

  (i) Data from the M&E system were utilized by both the WB project team and the PCU to monitor
  progress of key activities of the Project;

  (ii) The data were also used to adequately prepare supervision missions;

  (iii) Since the start of AIMDP, external M&E was regularly organized, by the Government and the WB, to
  review project implementation and to conduct periodic audits. At the end of each mission,



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



  recommendations were formulated and transmitted to the various stakeholders for action; (iii) Internal
  M&E data collected were in general of good quality;

  (iv) The data was used to prepare quarterly progress reports that were shared with the WB and other
  stakeholders. Because the baseline for all PDO indicators were available at the beginning of the project
  and the targets were clearly defined, both the PIU and the WB were able to track progress toward PDO,
  based on various quantitative measures;

  (v) At the end of the implementation period, the client hired 2 local firms, to assess the impact of the
  AIMDP, building on the M&E data collected. The results of the impact study aligned with PDO outcomes
  reported in the project’s M&E system;

  (vi) Shortcomings in the M&E system included: failure to consider the volume sold PDO indicator. While
  this information was not included in the RF, it was reported in the quarterly progress reports; uneven
  capacity of the PCU to carry out and fully utilize the M&E system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as environmental category “B” (partial assessment), and triggered 3 safeguard
   policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Pest
   Management (OP/BP 4.09). By project closing, the overall environmental compliance was Moderately
   Satisfactory. The main features highlighted in the ICR included the following (ICR, paras. 100 and 101):

   (i) An Environmental and Social (E&S) Management Framework was formulated and implemented, with
   suggested mitigation and enhancement strategies. A socio-environmental screening was conducted to
   classify SPs into one of the two categories, consistent with OP4.01. Together with the beneficiary
   communities and local authorities, environmental assessment was carried out of the SPs;

   (ii) Environmental and Social Action Plans were not implemented and monitored regularly. However, during
   each project supervision mission, E&S actions were regularly agreed with the project teams to improve
   project performance. Safeguard best practices were documented. The Project regularly produced quarterly
   E&S activity reports, which helped to sensitize the PCU team on environmental and social issues;

   (iii) For infrastructure works, aspects related to health and safety of the people living near the Project were
   considered. For agricultural projects, the management of pests and pesticides, and good hygiene practices
   were also considered;

   (iv) A pesticide use and management guide was developed and disseminated to project beneficiaries;




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



  (v) Strategies were identified and discussed with the EIAs for post-project compliance and wider replication.
  An E&S audit was conducted by an independent consultant one year before the end of the project. The
  corrective action plan was implemented;

  (vi) the Social Safeguard performance was rated moderately satisfactory, involving the following issues (for
  further details see ICR, para. 101): (a) delays in implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP),
  which was carried out; and (b) the failure to comply with the OP 4.12 (involuntary resettlement). A Social
  Action Plan (SAP) was prepared at the end of each supervision mission, whereby the social safeguards
  were an integral part of SPs at the community level. Overall, the project applied due diligence, and the ICR
  identified various adverse social impacts arising from the project. At project closure mission (mid-2021), the
  Bank team prepared a Social Action Plan/SAP, which addressed various IP issues.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management (FM): Based on the Bank’s FM reviews during implementation and the findings
  highlighted in the ICR, overall FM performance is mixed, fluctuating between Moderately Unsatisfactory
  to Moderately Satisfactory. The ICR highlighted the following aspects (ICR, 105):

  (a) there were recurrent qualifications in the FM review reports, reflecting non-conformity with agreed FM
  procedures (e.g., including non-justified and non-cleared balances, non-justified mission advance,
  abnormality in the DRF, such as payments on proforma, instead of actual invoice, double counting, 4 of
  7audited financial reports revealing qualified opinions);

  (b) the project was closing with ineligible expenditures, totaling US$ 608,735. To date, this amount has not
  been refunded to the World Bank, making AIMDP one of the lapse loans;

  (c) the project financed various activities which not planned and not directly linked to the project objectives,
  including the registration of cooperatives, preponderance of advisory support activities and financing of
  other projects, such as the regional Agricultural Transformation Project in West and Central Africa (ICR);

  (d) the Bank’s FM reviews verified that: FM staffing was adequate; accounting, internal control systems
  and maintenance of supporting project documents, were satisfactory; annual, audited financial reports
  were submitted on-time to the WB, but very often with qualified opinions (i.e., four of the seven reports
  were submitted with qualified opinions); at the same time, the ICR exhibits an inconsistency of the
  assessment of the adequacy of FM staffing with the mixed financial performance cited above;

  (e) The Project used the appropriate financial management technology, enabling effective management of
  complex accounts, rapid retrieval of SPs financial information, and management of flow of funds; and

  (f) The PCU was receptive to the audit recommendations, and PCU follow-ups were prompt.

  (ii) Procurement: The Project established two levels of procurement: at PCU and at local level, via
  cooperatives. At the PCU level, performance/compliance were rated Moderately Satisfactory, for following
  reasons (para. 103):



                                                                                                     Page 22 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



  (a) Both the PCU and the WB teams conducted frequent procurement training for the Project coordination
  units;

  (b) Procurement Post Reviews (PPR) were conducted annually. No miss-procurement was declared, but
  some dysfunctions in procurement were observed (e.g., including delays in contracting with partner
  entities; archiving procurement info);

  (c) Procurement procedures were slow, particularly in the rehabilitation of feeder roads, which reflects the
  country’s long and cumbersome procedures for awarding public contracts. Moreover, the processes did
  not always guarantee the selection of companies with sufficient technical and financial capacity to carry out
  the work.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not Applicable



d. Other
  The ICR highlights 4 other positive aspects contributed by the project: gender; institutional strengthening;
  mobilizing private sector financing; and poverty reduction and shared prosperity. While recognizing some
  attribution challenges with respect to the precise role and contributions of this project to these other
  strategic benefits, the nature/scope of these “other” benefits are summarized below, based on evidence
  presented in the ICR (paras. 74 – 77).

  (i) Gender (para. 74 for further details): The Project, through funds provided by the PHRD Trust Fund,
  explicitly supported activities geared towards women’s groups working to achieve food and nutrition security
  at the household level, including the following aspects: (a) training of 300 women leaders in nutritional
  education; (b) funding 129 nutritional sub-projects to support nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities; (c)
  encouraging 4,252 households to diversify their food production, and using improved techniques for food
  processing and preparation. The project’s evaluation survey revealed that about 96% of the beneficiaries
  recognized the high nutritional and health value of these interventions. At the same time, the ICR
  recognized that greater attention to women within the participating cooperatives was needed, with a shortfall
  in meeting some of the gender targets. Also, cross-country experience suggests there are limitations to
  training women in nutrition as a direct means to achieving the project’s production/income objectives and to
  enhanced gender equality, and therefore suggest more direct and effective approaches to allocating limited
  resources in order to promote expanded women’s participation in the income-generating activities.

  (ii) Institutional Strengthening (ICR, para. 75): The project design and implementation included good
  progress in providing institutional strengthening at various levels, and benefitting strategic entities, as
  follows:

  (a) strengthening of the MINADER Local and Community Development Directorate/Directorate of
  Professional Agricultural Organizations and Support for Agricultural Holdings (DDLC/DOPA). This has
  enabled the re-launch of the cooperative registration process in Cameroon, based on various project
  actions. By closing, all 78 target cooperatives had acquired a formal corporate structure with a Board of


                                                                                                      Page 23 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



   Directors, a cooperative director, a functional accounting system, and a functioning internal M&E system for
   the sustainability and decision-making;

   (b) The Project provided training to cooperative leaders, covering 10 strategic themes, with positive
   feedback;

   (c) the Project improved key public services including various key services entities (e.g., IRAD, IITA, and
   DRCQ) by building their research capacity in the provision of foundation seeds, cuttings and in the control
   and seed certification;

   (d) Financial support was also provided to these services to carry out seed control and inspection activities
   as well as the development of an integrated pest management guide for maize and sorghum.

   (iii) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing (ICR, para. 76): The Project mobilized private sector financing of
   $5.9 million (from commercial banks, MFIs and producers’ cooperatives), primarily through the matching
   grant scheme put in place to finance the SPs (business plans). Project restructuring included measures and
   associated financing shares of various actors to facilitate expanded private sector financing.

   However, the Project missed the opportunity to mobilize financing from Agri-Businesses (ABs) involved in
   the partnerships. AIMDP did not actively seek to mobilize financing from ABs, under contract farming, by
   requiring them to provide services (e.g., inputs distribution or extending credit to cooperatives).

   (iv) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (ICR, para. 77): Interviews conducted with more than 60
   percent of the beneficiary cooperatives by the Bank’s ICR team revealed that many of the cooperative
   members were smallholders cultivating 0.5 to 2 ha. prior to AIMDP. The beneficiaries cited AIMDP as a
   major contributing factor in: increasing their monetary income; improving their lodging, access to drinking
   water and health as well as investments in the education and training of their children. It is noteworthy that
   about 88% of the members of the cooperatives interviewed believe their ”living conditions have improved”.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                   The IEG assessment for quality
                                                                                   at entry and quality of
                                Moderately             Moderately                  supervision were moderately
Bank Performance
                                Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory              unsatisfactory, for various
                                                                                   shortcomings specified in the
                                                                                   ICRR (Section 8)
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



12. Lessons

The ICR presents seven main lessons and recommendations from this project (ICR, paras. 114 –
120). The four most relevant lessons have been consolidated and further sharpened, and which are
based on project-specific conclusions, and which can be applicable to other projects in Cameroon
and other countries, including those in an evolving FCV environment, are summarized below.

(a) Lesson 1: Relevance of assessing adequately, working out and agreeing on Government
counterpart budget availability during Project preparation and prior to Project approval. During
project implementation, it appears like the specific arrangements for ensuring adequate level and
timing of counterpart funds from the Government were not clear and functional, which contributed to
project delays. Since 2020, the Government established a new system of providing project
counterpart funds, through a centralized basket managed by the Ministry of Finance. As a result, all
development projects compete for these counterpart funds, which are limited, and therefore, the
project is not assured of getting the counterpart funds when needed, resulting in a low level of
mobilization and execution of counterpart funds. Accordingly, the lesson from this project experience
highlights the importance of agreeing on and complying with the specific budgetary allocations for
the project, and therefore, if properly done, this can enhance the likelihood of ensuring adequate
allocations during implementation, and the prospects for strong project results;

(b) Lesson 2: Importance of securing from project design and approval stages a clear
understanding and agreement of the local conditions and capacities of project stakeholders to
engage realistically in project activities. The project introduced producer beneficiaries, POs and
cooperatives to innovative approaches to production, processing, marketing, business partnerships,
and accessing finance. Implementation delays and challenges revealed that these innovations and
arrangements were not well understood, realistic and worked out, resulting in project delays,
changes in scope and substantial sustainability risks. Accordingly, similar or future projects, from the
design stage, if there is a realistic and phased approach to designing and carrying out the relevant
project innovations, this could enhance the prospects of ensuring adequate local capacities for
effective and timely project implementation, and strong and sustainable results;

(c) Lesson 3: Importance of adequate understanding and support for the post-production aspects of
commodity supply and purchase contracts to ensuring the prospects for successful
operationalization of productive partnerships (PPs). Most of the project focus was on increasing
cassava productivity with little regard to product specification requirements of agribusinesses (e.g.,
quality, cleanliness, consistency of supply). As a result, even when beneficiary farmers were able to
increase their productivity, they still had challenges meeting all of the requirements of the agri-
businesses (ABS). Attention to these post-production aspects, including flexibility in purchase
contracts and involving and strengthening small and medium-sized informal agri-businesses (ABs),
as integral parts of the Project design, if properly addressed, could enhance the prospects of
addressing adequately the challenges that many producers and POs face in effectively engaging in
the PPs and promoting a more vibrant and competitive agroindustry;

(d) Lesson 4: Formulating and carrying out appropriate and well-focused institutional reforms in key
subsectors may contribute to successful implementation and sustainability of similar projects. Seed
multiplication cooperatives were the least successful under the AIMDP. These cooperatives could
not increase their business turnover because they faced unfair competition from non-certified seeds.
The Project strengthened capacity for certification, but little was done to prevent contraband. During

                                                                                                    Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)



planting season, markets were flooded with non-certified supply at a lower cost, rendering
cooperatives unable to compete. MINADER tried to intervene, but it lacked the mandate and
capacity to police and prevent such invasions. This project experience illustrates the importance of
similar project(s) assessing and designing carefully the institutional-related risks of success and
sustainability of relevant project components, and therefore, if adequately addressed, could enhance
the prospects of effective project implementation and sustainable results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the quality of the ICR is Substantial. The ICR endeavors to provide and use project design and
implementation information: to substantiate the various conclusions, with relevant evidence and analyses from
the project's M&E system, including beneficiary surveys; (2) to be consistent with OPCS guidelines for
preparing ICRs, although the length of the ICR is significantly longer than suggested by the IEG guidelines; (3)
to provide relevant lessons, while needing some sharpening and consolidation; and (4) to be candid, especially
revealing Government and Bank weaknesses during project design and implementation phases.

The ICR had some shortcomings:

(a) the ICR downplays several financial performance issues arising during implementation;

(b) while the ICR correctly highlights four significant risks to ensure sustainability of project benefits, the ICR did
not provide clear recommendations for follow-up by the Bank’s country/sectoral team and Government
(especially MINADER), to address these risks. During and subsequent to the discussion with IEG’s evaluator,
the IEG team elaborated more explicitly on various mitigation actions which both the Bank and Government are
taking to address most of the identified risks; and

(c) the lessons of the project were excessive in number (7), and most of these were not stated in the form of
clear lessons.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 26 of 27
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CM-Ag. Invest. and Mark. Dev. Proj (P143417)




                                                                            Page 27 of 27
