     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022965

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P121186                                   WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82110,IBRD-88170,TF-14255            31-May-2018                                         66,106,326.38

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2012                               31-May-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                    5,094,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            70,657,641.37                                    4,293,546.54

 Actual                                        66,106,326.38                                    4,293,546.54




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hassan Wally               Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Water Resources and Irrigation Project (WRIP) as
   articulated in the in the Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) was almost identical (except where underlined) to the
   one in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 19) and aimed at:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



   "establishing the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and at the level
   of the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins; and (2) improving, in a sustainable manner, the
   performance of Selected Irrigation Systems" (LA, page 5); and to:

   "(i) establish the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and in the Drin-
   Buna and Semani river basins and (ii) improve, in a sustainable manner, the performance of irrigation
   systems in the project area" (PAD, paragraph 19).



   The project was restructured in 2018 and the PDO was revised to:

   "(a) establish the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and at the level
   of the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins and (b) improve irrigation service delivery in selected
   irrigation systems."



   Parsing the original PDO. The PDO will be parsed according to the PDO statement in the Loan Agreement
   into two objectives as follows:

   Objective 1: to establish the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and at the
   level of the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins.

   Objective 2: to improve, in a sustainable manner, the performance of Selected Irrigation Systems.

   Parsing the revised PDO. The revised PDO will be parsed according to the PDO statement in the
   Restructuring Paper into two objectives as follows:

   Objective 1: to establish the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and at the
   level of the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins.

   Objective 2: to improve irrigation service delivery in selected irrigation systems.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  22-Feb-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



d. Components
  The PDO was supported by the following four components:

  1. Dam and Irrigation and Drainage System Rehabilitation (appraisal cost: US$59.54 million, actual
  cost: US$57.67 million). This component aimed to rehabilitate (and, where possible, modernize) irrigation
  and drainage (I&D) systems and dam infrastructure. The component would finance the following two sub-
  components:
  1.1. Rehabilitation and modernization of selected dams and I&D systems. This sub-component would
  finance preparation of all feasibility and detailed design studies, and all rehabilitation and modernization
  works of 14 dams and 15 I&D systems, as well as the supervision of the works. Investments would be
  mostly located in the Drin-Buna and Semani river basins, and would be undertaken in a comprehensive way
  (i.e., investments would be done as much as possible in dams and in associated I&D systems) to maximize
  the returns on investments. . Pre-feasibility studies have been conducted for the 13 irrigation systems
  associated with these dams (including one Public-Private Partnership (PPP) pilot site), and for two
  additional PPP pilots.

  1.2. Preparation and implementation of safeguard instruments and measures. For the rehabilitation
  and modernization activities under component 1.1, this would include Environment (and Social)
  Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and strengthening the framework
  governing safety of agricultural dams, including capacity strengthening and awareness raising, and
  preparation of emergency preparedness plans, supervision and quality assurance plans, and dam safety
  O&M plans, including an instrumentation plan.

  2. Institutional Support for Irrigation and Drainage (appraisal cost: US$1.70 million, actual cost:
  US$2.83 million). This component aimed to improve the performance of organizations that provide
  irrigation services. This included institutional reforms and capacity strengthening of Local Governments
  (LGs), Drainage Board (DBs) and Water Users’ Association/Organization (WUOs), and piloting Public-
  Private Partnership (PPP) in I&D service delivery through recruitment of third party operators to deliver
  irrigation services in three I&D pilot schemes. The component would also finance preparation of a National
  I&D strategy. The project would finance the following two sub-components:

  2.1. Institutional reforms of I&D sector. The project would define the responsibilities for O&M of I&D
  systems among stakeholders (including Ministry, DBs, LGs, WUOs and private operators) through, inter
  alia, (i) preparation of a National I&D strategy; (ii) development of cooperation arrangements (including
  contractual arrangements) among agencies including through provision of consultants services; (iii)
  development and formalization of I&D service delivery standards; and (iv) development and carrying out of
  small scale pilots in public-private partnership, including outsourcing O&M of I&D schemes to private
  operators.

  2.2. Strengthening the capacity of organizations that provide I&D services and the capacity of
  stakeholders. This would include Ministry, DBs, LGs, WUOs and private operators inter alia, through
  provision of goods and training in areas, including contract management and outsourcing, administration,
  financial management and procurement, and water management and O&M. The project would train an
  estimated 10 civil servants from Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Protection (MAFCP), 15 civil
  servants from five DBs, staff from 15 LGs, and office bearers from 15 WUOs. Decentralized WUO support
  staff from DBs and LGs would be trained in strengthening capacities of WUOs. Some goods would be
  procured for DBs and LGs.


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



3. Institutional Support for Integrated Water Resources Management (appraisal cost: US$9.57
million, actual cost: US$4.55 million). This component aimed to establish the strategic framework to
manage water resources at the national level and at the level of the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins.
Capacity strengthening activities, critical for satisfactory water sector performance, would be fully integrated
into each of the subcomponents to ensure their relevance and applicability.
 The project would finance the following three sub-components:

3.1. Preparation of a National Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Strategy. This
would include the establishment of a stakeholder forum for cross-sectoral dialogue and decision making
under the aegis of the National Water Council (NWC), and strengthening capacities of institutions
responsible for IWRM, such as the NWC, Technical Secretariat (TS), and the River Basin Councils (RBCs)
and River Basin Agency (RBAs) of Drin-Buna and Semani basins. In view of EU candidate status, the
strategy would incorporate the EU’s Water Framework Directive (WFD), as reflected in the Law on Water
Resources (LWR, currently under revision). The project would ensure inclusiveness of the preparation
process by involving all stakeholders involved in the management of water resources. A communications
strategy would be prepared and implemented to accompany the investments and the preparation of the
strategy.

3.2. Preparation of River Basin Management Plans for the Drin-Buna and Semani river basins. This
would include identification of structural and non-structural measures to improve the quality of IWRM and
strengthening capacity to implement said plans through provision of training and goods to River Basin
Agencies and minor rehabilitation of their offices. The project would work closely with the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) supported Drin dialogue and would take advantage of the river
characterization that is undertaken in that context.

3.3. Establishment of a consolidated Water Resources Database. This would be used as basis for
national water resources planning and programming. The database would be
established within the General Directorate of Water Administration (GDWA). The proposed water resources
database would be populated through the coordinated acquisition of monitoring data from all relevant
organizations involved with water resources monitoring.

4. Implementation Support (appraisal cost: US$0.98 million, actual cost: US$1.06 million). This
component aimed to manage project resources in accordance with the project’s objectives and procedures
as outlined in the POM. The project would provide support for the implementation of the project, including
provision of technical assistance, training and goods, and establishment and implementation of a
performance based management information system.

Revised Components


Component 1. The number of irrigation schemes and dams to be rehabilitated or improved changed before
and after the 2015 restructuring and the additional financing (AF). In early February 2015, prior to the
restructuring, about €8.4 million originally planned for the I&D schemes were reallocated to finance critical
flood mitigation activities outside of the project area, resulting in extensive agricultural damage and need for
urgent flood control investments. Under the 2015 restructuring, the area with improved irrigation service was
reduced from 35,000 hectares to 20,000 hectares due to this reallocation of project funds and an increased
focus on system improvement rather than on rehabilitation/restoration, to attain more sustainable solutions.
The number of


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



  schemes to be improved was reduced from 15 (original number at appraisal) to 6. The number of
  rehabilitated dams was reduced from 14 to 11 following priority setting on the basis of cost effectiveness.
  One dam was not considered a priority, and another one was not feasible given the small size of the dam,
  which served only a few hectares and farmers, and the service area’s high emigration rate. Under the AF,
  the project added Janjari and Mursi dams. Thus, the project included 13 dams. Another change in
  Component 1 was the elimination of the PPP schemes.

  Component 2. The AF expanded institutional support to address needs resulting from the new law
  decentralizing irrigation management to municipalities. The AF would allocate €6 million to finance (a)
  technical assistance for M&E of irrigation performance and benchmarking; (b) technical assistance for
  sustainable and performance-based management improvements for irrigation and drainage units (IDUs),
  financing, and investment planning at the municipal level; and (c) limited targeted specialized and just-in-
  time support to implement the new law on I&D at the national level and in support of institutional
  performance strengthening at the scheme and municipal level (for example, irrigation service fee setting
  mechanisms).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was US$77.29 million. This amount was revised downwards to
  US$70.66 million. According to the ICR Data sheet (page 2) the total amount disbursed was US$66.11
  million.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD loan in the amount of US$40.00 million and US$5.09
  from Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) trust fund (TF014255). The project
  also received an additional financing in 2018 through IBRD loan in the amount of US$27.20 million. The
  total financing amount was US$72.29 million, which was revised downwards to US$70.66 million. The
  actual disbursed amounts were: US$35.80 million, US$4.29 million, and US$26.01 million for the
  original IBRD loan, the SIDA Trust Fund and the AF, respectively. The total IBRD disbursed amount was
  US$66.11 million. The project was expected to receive US$5.00 million as co-financing from (SIDA) to
  finance integrated water resource management (IWRM) and project management, which would be
  separate from the activities that the Loan will finance. According to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) the project
  did not receive any co-financing from SIDA.

  Borrower Contribution. This project was fully financed through IBRD and SIDA with no borrower
  contribution.



  Dates. The project was approved on November 12, 2012 and became effective six months later on May 13,
  2013. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on January 31, 2017. While the PAD did not specify a
  date for the MTR, conducting the MTR 3.5 years into effectiveness was reasonable for this project. The
  project closed on May 31, 2021 which was three years later than the original closing date on May 31, 2018.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 30), the extension in the closing date was to accommodate the increase in
  scale under the AF and "to allow time for completing the final I&D scheme."




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



   The project was restructured four times, all of which were Level 2 except the second-which was a Level 1
   restructuring, as follows:

   1. On December 23, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$9.50 million, in order to introduce a change
   in Implementing Agency, change in Results Framework, change in components and cost, change in the
   financing plan, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, change in disbursements arrangements,
   change in institutional arrangements,
   change in financial management, and change in implementation schedule.

   2. On February 22, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$29.88 million, in order to approve
   an Additional Financing, revise the PDO, revise the Results Framework (RF), change in components and
   cost, extend the Loan closing date from May 31, 2018 to May 31, 2020, reallocate funds between
   disbursement categories, change in disbursements arrangements, change in procurement, and change in
   implementation schedule.

   3. On December 3, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$36.67 million, in order to extend the closing
   date for the SIDA trust fund (TF014255) to May 31, 2020, to ensure completion of activities aimed at
   establishing the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and in the two river
   basins.

   4. On February 12, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$44.09 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from May 31, 2020 to May 31, 2021.

   Rationale for Changes and Implication for Theory of Change (ToC). The introduction of a new law by
   the Government (Law No. 24/2017) which transferred water resources management (WRM) responsibility
   from the Ministry of Environment (MOE) to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), and
   later devolved responsibility for Irrigation and Drainage (I&D) operation and maintenance (O&M) to the
   MARD Drainage Boards (DBs) and Local Governments (LGs) meant that sustainability could no longer be
   attributed to project activities. This prompted the changes in the PDO and outcome indicators relating to
   sustainable I&D services (ICR, paragraph 32). This Review is in agreement with the ICR (paragraph 33)
   that "the changes in the PDO and outcome indicators had no significant implications for the ToC."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In Albania, flooding has worsened in recent decades as a result of deforestation,
overgrazing, and erosion, combined with a lack of maintenance of drainage canals and pumping stations. In
addition, river management programs were discontinued and water levels in reservoirs were lowered in
response to dam safety concerns, worsening the risk of flooding. Drought in summer and flooding in winter
is expected to be exacerbated as a result of climate change (PAD, paragraph 7). Also, Albania’s recent
rapid economic growth, increase in population and urbanization, seasonal water shortages and water

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



abundance have magnified serious weaknesses in the management of Albania’s water resources. The
main weaknesses in IWRM include the high level of fragmentation of water resources management in
Albania, with responsibilities for IWRM not clearly divided, duplicative and sometimes contradicting (PAD,
paragraph 8). This project aimed to lay the foundations for more rational and accountable water resources
management, and to improve the performance and financial viability of I&D.

Previous Bank Experience. According to the PAD (paragraph 11) "the Bank has been the main partner of
the GoA in modernizing the I&D systems and institutions, with three consecutive projects between 1994-
2009, amounting to US$112.4 million." These were: the Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (P008270; Board
Date: September 1994; Closing Date: June 2001; US$38.1 million), the Second Irrigation and Drainage
Rehabilitation Project (P043178; Board Date: June 1999; Closing Date: March, 2005; US$40.3 million), and
the Water Resources Management Project (P082128; Board Date: June 2004; Closing Date: December
2009; US$34.0 million) (PAD, paragraph 35). In addition, during the project preparation, the Bank
conducted a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) of the I&D sector in Albania. In
southeastern Europe, the Bank-funded IWRM projects were undertaken in Macedonia, Romania, Turkey,
Bulgaria and Serbia (PAD, paragraph 34).

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the original and revised PDOs were both in line with
Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY2011-FY2014) for Albania. Specifically, under Strategic
Objective 1: Accelerating the recovery in Albania’s economic growth through improved competitiveness, the
CPS identified the need to improve infrastructure services in irrigation, and to make these more sustainable.
The CPS refers to the Water Resources and Irrigation Project (WRIP) to support rehabilitation of the
national irrigation network, to address upstream safety and efficiency of irrigation reservoirs, to introduce
more efficient water distribution mechanisms and consolidate recent reforms in irrigation system
management and cost recovery. The PDO was also in line with the Bank’s “Europe and Central Asia (ECA)
I&D Strategy” that recommended prioritizing future Bank engagement to improve the financial viability of
I&D.

At completion, both the original and revised PDOs were in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Framework for Albania (CPF, FY2015–2019). The overall goal of the CPF was to support Albania's
aspiration to achieve equitable growth and integration into the EU. The CPF identified five priorities grouped
into three main focal areas. The PDOs were consistent with two focal areas. Specifically, under Focal Area
2, the PDOs were directly relevant to Objective 2e (Contribute to Increased Productivity and Sustainability
of Land Use). The CPF also emphasized Albania’s need to increase farm income to contribute to economic
growth. In this regard, the project was an important mechanism for irrigation rehabilitation, and
modernization. Also, under Focal Area 3 (Strengthening Public Sector Management and Service Delivery),
the PDOs were consistent with Objective 3a, which aimed to increase the efficiency of public service
delivery.

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the original PDO was in line with Albania’s
National Strategy for Development and Integration (NSDI, 2007) by contributing to two of its strategic goals,
first, integration in the EU and second, achieving sustainable economic development. The project would
assist the GoA in fulfilling conditions for EU accession, especially the EU WFD, and in supporting
investments that would increase agricultural productivity and economic recovery and reduce the country’s
vulnerability to severe flooding.

At completion, both the original and revised PDOs were in line with Albania’s Inter-Sectoral Strategy for
Agricultural and Rural Development (ISARD 2014–2020).The strategy


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



               highlighted interventions for the development of agriculture and rural areas to meet the challenges of the
               EU single market requirements and to adapt Albanian agricultural and rural development policies to the
               Common Agriculture Policy. The project complemented these objectives by restoring the productive value
               of land and improving irrigation performance (ICR, paragraph 35).

               The original statement of objectives included the term "in a sustainable manner" for improving the
               performance of irrigation systems was confusing as it was not clear how this would be achieved.
               Furthermore, after the institutional changes by the Albanian Government in 2015, the second objective of
               the original PDO was not relevant at completion because sustainability was not attributable to the project
               anymore. The revised PDO was more focused and clear relative to the original specifically in terms of the
               wording of the second objective.

               Overall, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. While, the original and revised PDOs were in line with
               the Bank strategies and Government priorities, the link to water resource management in the current CPF
               was not particularly strong, as water resources were barely mentioned, unlike other areas such as energy
               or private sector development.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To establish the strategic framework to manage water resources at the national level and at the level of the
                             Drin-Buna and Semani River basins.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support developing national and
                             basin-wide IWRM strategies, strengthen institutional capacities for IWRM, and establish a national water
                             resources database to facilitate rational IWRM planning and programming. Addressing weak governance and
                             institutions in the water resources & irrigation sector, as well as the deteriorating I&D infrastructure, would
                             help remove some of the obstacles to growth of the agricultural sector. These activities were expected to
                             result in establishing the water resource database and the strategic framework to manage water resources at
                             the national level and at the level of the Drin-Buna and Semani river basins. Anticipated long-term outcomes
                             included EU accession.

                             The ICR did not reflect the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective.
                             Nevertheless, the activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain.

                             Outputs


                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, unless referenced otherwise):

Capacity Building in IWRM
1.National IWRM Strategy was prepared and approved by GoA (target achieved).The strategy includes:
GoA’s long-term vision, mission, goals, and objectives for IWRM in Albania; analysis of the legal and
institutional framework for IWRM; a clear long-term strategy for achieving sustainable management and
development of water resources; and descriptions of medium-term priority actions with responsible
institutions, timelines, and financing requirements (ICR, paragraph 43).

2. Two River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs are important strategic documents that describe the current
situation in each basin regarding surface and ground water and detail proposals for implementing a WRD-
compliant monitoring program (ICR, paragraph 46) for Drin-Buna and Semani River basins were
prepared and approved by GoA (target achieved). The Semani RBMP was adopted by the Council of Minister
(CoM) on June 10, 2020, and the Drin- Buna RBMP was adopted by the CoM on November 4, 2020. The
RBMPs were important strategic documents that described the current situation in each basin regarding
surface and ground water and detail proposals for implementing a WRD-compliant monitoring program. The
plans included analyses of the physical status of water resources as well as an inventory of water resources
in the basin. The plans proposed an action plan for implementing a WFD-compliant monitoring program for
the Programs of Measurement (PoMs) for 2021-2027 (ICR, paragraph 45).

The afore mentioned two outputs/intermediate outcomes were actually listed as outcome indicators in the
results matrix.

3. Water Cadastre was established (target achieved). The national water cadastre was established in 2017,
and was approved in December 20, 2020 by the Council of Ministers (CoMs). However, by project completion
the NWRC was not fully populated because the various water management entities did not have sufficient
funds for water monitoring (ICR, paragraph 61).

4.Training was provided to central AMWR and river basin level staff in the use of Water Cadastre (no target
provided).

5. The project also supported the establishment of two river basin authorities (Office for the Management of
River Basins, OARBs) and provided capacity building for the OARBs in RBMP implementation. The project
provided on-the-job training to build capacity of the OARB staff by the end of the project (ICR, paragraph 48).

Outcome

The first PDO remained the same throughout the project period. The project completed two river basin
management plans (RBMPs) that were prepared through a consultative process (target achieved). The two
RBMPs were approved by the Council of Ministers (CoM) and the National Water Council (NWC).

The GoA through the CoM approved the National Integrated Water Resource Management Strategy
(NSIWRM) in 2018 (target achieved). According to the ICR (paragraph 43) the NSIWRM "currently guides all
actions and investments in Albania’s WRM sector." As indicated in the ICR (paragraph 43), the NSIWRM led
to an increased GoA budgetary support for IWRM, however, no evidence was provided on the IWRM budget
prior to the approval of the NSIWRM. The ICR (paragraph 44) claimed that strategic planning process
strengthened the capacity and commitment of participating agencies and stakeholders in IWRM.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



Overall, the project achieved its objective with the establishment of the strategic framework to manage water
resources at the level of the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins. This was expected to improve governance
and intra-sectoral and inter-sectoral co-operation. Supporting NSIWRM and establishing RBMPs were
important elements so that Albania could meet the EU Water Framework Directive requirements (ICR,
paragraph 47). Achieving the stated objective was expected to facilitate EU accession and also demonstrated
GoA’s commitment to involving stakeholder participation in the strategic planning process.

Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment and the evidence provided in the ICR, the
efficacy with which this objective was achieved was Substantial, with minor shortcomings.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Unchanged. As above.

Revised Rationale
See description and ratings as above.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve, in a sustainable manner, the performance of Selected Irrigation Systems.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support the preparation of a
national I&D strategy, rehabilitation or modernization of I&D systems in areas having intensive irrigated
agriculture, improvement in dam safety, and capacity building in managing I&D to ensure their financial
sustainability. These activities were expected to result in sustainable improvement in irrigation and drainage
(I&D) systems in the project area, increase the percentage of compliance to agreed seasonal water
distribution schedule, and to an increase in recovery of O&M costs as percentage of O&M chargers invoiced.
Anticipated long-term outcomes included: sustainable improvement in irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems
nationwide, reduced vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, and accelerated recovery in the the
national economy through improvements in agricultural productivity.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



Most activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However, the it
was not clear how sustainability would be achieved. Also, the ICR did not reflect the critical assumptions that
underpinned the achievement of the stated objective.

Outputs

The ICR did not report outputs under the original Objective 2. In a further communication the project team
explained that the original objective 2 did not fundamentally change during the successive restructurings
including Additional Financing.

Outcome

As part of the 2015 restructuring, and following GoA’s devolving responsibility for I&D to the local government
units (LGUs), both outcome indicators under the original PDO 2 were dropped (ICR, paragraph 62). The ICR
(paragraph 62) reported anecdotal evidence through interviews with 54 farmers in four project areas which
revealed that the improvements in irrigation allowed them to meet their seasonal needs for water. This
was not possible prior to the project. Also, discussions with the mayors from four project municipalities in
December 2021 (virtual) and January 2022 (field) revealed that the tariff charged to farmers had collection
rates ranging from 80% to 90%. However, these encouraging collection rates did not reflect sustainability of
the improved performance of the irrigation systems because the tariff accounted only for one part of the cost-
sharing arrangement for O&M (ICR, paragraph 62).

Based on the above-mentioned information, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated
Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve irrigation service delivery in selected irrigation systems.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support the the preparation of a
national I&D strategy, strengthen capacity at the municipal level for I&D management, rehabilitate dams to
meet international standards, and rehabilitate and modernize I&D schemes in the project area. These
activities were expected to increase the number of users provided with improved I&D services including
females, and increase the project area that benefits from establishing sustainable O&M arrangements.
Anticipated long-term outcomes included: sustainable improvement in irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems
nationwide, reduced vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, and accelerated recovery in the the
national economy through improvements in agricultural productivity.

The activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However, the
ICR did not reflect the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)




Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, unless referenced otherwise):

In a further communication, the project team explained that the majority of the outputs were completed on
time. However, the key outputs that were delayed included the rehabilitation and modernization of Janjari
irrigation scheme, which was the main activity added at the time of additional financing and the establishment
of the new National Agency-the Water Resources Management Authority (WRMA).

Infrastructure Rehabilitation:
1. Rehabilitation of 13 I&D schemes was completed (target achieved mostly on time). These include the
rehabilitation and modernization of 13 I&D systems covering an area of 40,000 hectares, thus reaching the
project target (ICR, paragraph 50). The schemes included improved water level control through duckbill weirs
and improved measurement capacity, with flume reorientation of canal layouts in specific cases. In one
scheme (Divjaka), there was a wholesale shift from surface irrigation to pressurized irrigation, which
substantially improves the system’s delivery efficiency and water productivity. In another scheme (Janjari), the
original design was modified to address farmers’ requests for more efficient storage to allow progressive
elimination of pumped water from the drainage canals (ICR, paragraph 50).
2. Rehabilitation of 13 dams meeting international safety standards was completed (target achieved mostly on
time). The project rehabilitated 13 dams to meet international dam safety standards. The T’Plan dam was
dropped due to the low population and high out-migration rate in the service area. All of the dams were single
purpose (irrigation). For each dam, the project improved its capacity or safety, installed a piezometer
(measures seepage), and secured spillways and outlets (ICR, paragraph 53). The investments resulted in
improved dam safety and lowered the risk of severe flooding.
3. Supply and installation of dam safety instrumentation and associated training was competed mostly on
time.
4. Drin Riverbank rehabilitation was completed mostly on time.
5. Detailed designs and ESMPs for infrastructure investments were prepared mostly on time.
Institutional Reform and Capacity building in I&D
1. I&D Strategy was prepared and approved by GoA (target achieved). The strategy specified the policy
objectives and strategic measures for four subsectors (irrigation and drainage, dams, reservoirs, and flood
protection) in line with the sector’s mission, guiding principles, and goals as well as GoA’s strategic objectives
defined in the NSDI and ISARD. As part of the I&D strategy, an action plan specified what should be done in
each subsector, identified the implementing institutions, estimates the costs of each action item in the
implementation schedule, and described the expected results. The strategy also had a dedicated section
explaining how the main responsible parties would be held accountable for performing their tasks (ICR,
paragraph 54).
2. Municipal I&D Unit staff training in I&D (no target). The assistance centered on the development of an
Irrigation and Drainage Management Information System (IDMIS) provided to 35 “agriculture intensive”
municipalities. The IDMIS supports integrated management of data related to I&D infrastructure, facilitates
communications among different entities, and provides access to I&D system reporting (ICR, paragraph 56).
3. On-the-job training and workshops on I&D were provided (no target).
4. Study tour (no target). In a further communication the project team explained that the study tour included
26 participants in total, of which 13 were from Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD) Head
Office, 6 from Drainage and Irrigation Boards and 7 from municipalities.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



Outcome

By project completion, 47,980 water users received an improved irrigation service (target: 35,000, target
exceeded) including 13,715 women (target: 4,000, target exceeded). The total number of direct project
beneficiaries reached 105,942 exceeding the target of 80,000. Among them, 50% were women (target: 50%).
According to the ICR (paragraph 50), "almost all project-financed I&D works, goods, and services were
successfully delivered."

Rehabilitation and modernization of the I&D systems restored the operation of reservoirs and irrigation canals
that were nonoperational or substantially damaged before the project (ICR, paragraph 51). While the project
monitoring system did not collect data on specific parameters that reflect improvements, the ICR (paragraph
51) mentioned that "the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) reported that the investments
in all 13 schemes resulted in reduced water losses, improved water pressure, and reduced time required for
farmers to irrigate their farms." The project also rehabilitated 13 dams to meet international dam safety
standards. These investments resulted in improved dam safety and lowered the risk of severe flooding (ICR,
paragraph 53).

As indicated in the ICR (paragraph 51), improved reliability of irrigation water had a positive impact on crop
quality and productivity, which was plausible. This also led farmers in 7 I&D schemes to switch to higher value
crops (HVCs) such as fruits and vegetables. By the end of the project, the farmers’ net family incomes had
increased by an estimated 35 to 63%, on average, depending on farm size and degree of diversification into
HVCs (ICR annex 4, table A4.3). According to the ICR (paragraph 52) 100% of 54 farmers in four schemes
interviewed by the project expressed satisfaction with the project and highlighted the increase in water
security and reliability during the dry season and reported some increase in production and productivity.

A National I&D Strategy was completed and approved by the Council of Ministers on May 22, 2019. The
implementation of the I&D strategy was well-harmonized with the Intersectoral Strategy for Agriculture and
Rural Development (ISARD), Albania’s main strategic document for the agriculture and rural development
sector (ICR, paragraph 55). The ICR also noted that the GoA’s new law on I&D was fully aligned with the I&D
strategy (ICR, paragraph 55).

The project also provided capacity building to municipalities for managing I&D infrastructure and related
services. By project completion, the Irrigation and Drainage Management Information System
(IDMIS) became the municipalities’ main tool for I&D system management and M&E (ICR, paragraph 56).
The project also financed a centralized GIS with I&D spatial information installed in each municipality and
uploaded into the IDMIS.


Sustainable arrangements for sharing O&M costs were introduced in 67%( target: 80%, substantially
achieved) of the area that received improved irrigation service. According to the ICR (paragraph 57), only 9%
of the project area was covered by such arrangements in 2019. It is worth noting that the irrigation tariff only
partially covered the cost of the I&D’s O&M. Other sources that contribute to the cost of I&D O&M included
transfers to municipalities from MARD and local municipal sources (land tax and permits). The share of O&M
costs paid by farmers was expected to increase with improvements in productivity and income. However, the
ICR did not detail the anticipated increments that farmers would incur in the future. Currently, the tariff covers
between 25% and 50% of the costs for irrigation O&M (ICR, paragraph 59).



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 26
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)




                              Finally, the project piloted institutional arrangements for sustainable O&M of irrigation schemes in project
                              municipalities. The national irrigation law stipulated that the farmers should be responsible for the tertiary
                              canals or pay the municipality to do the maintenance, while the municipality is responsible for maintaining the
                              primary and secondary canals. According to the ICR (paragraph 58) clear rules were designed regarding
                              the responsibilities of the different stakeholders, including the water masters, administrative units, and a
                              municipal I&D unit (IDU). Each municipality established the water tariff in agreement with the farmers. The
                              tariff was a factor of the service provided, area covered, and farm income, and must be approved by the
                              Municipal Council. According to the ICR (paragraph 59) "mayors of the four main project municipalities
                              confirmed significant improvement in tariff collection performance due to the new arrangement with water
                              masters."

                              Based on the above-mentioned assessment the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
                              Substantial. The project succeeded in improving irrigation service delivery and met or exceeded all of its
                              outcome targets, except for the target on O&M costs which was substantially achieved.




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy of the original objectives is rated Modest. The project achieved its objective with the
                            establishment of the strategic framework to manage water resources at the level of the Drin-Buna and
                            Semani River basins. Achieving the stated objective was expected to facilitate EU accession and
                            demonstrated GoA’s commitment to involving stakeholder participation in the strategic planning process.
                            However, the objective of improving, in a sustainable manner, the performance of selected irrigation systems
                            was only modestly achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The project achieved its first objective with the establishment of the
                            strategic framework to manage water resources at the level of the Drin-Buna and Semani River

                                                                                                                                 Page 14 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



  basins. Achieving the stated objective was expected to facilitates EU accession and demonstrated GoA’s
  commitment to involving stakeholder participation in the strategic planning process. The second objective
  which aimed to improve irrigation service delivery in selected irrigation systems was substantially achieved.
  The project succeeded in completing the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure for 13 irrigation schemes,
  and 13 dams were rehabilitated to meet international safety standards. The project also piloted a new
  approach for irrigation management and substantially achieved its target on O&M cost recovery.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

     The overall economic rate of return (ERR) of the project was estimated at 23.7% at appraisal. The NPV
      was estimated at US$63.2 million, at a discount rate of 10%.
     Three out of the four project components (excluding the institutional support for IWRM, component 3)
      were included in the costs of each of the assessed schemes, weighted by their relative importance in the
      direct rehabilitation costs. O&M of the irrigation systems after rehabilitation or modernization was
      assumed to be 2% of the rehabilitation or
      modernization costs.
     The analysis assumed that: improvements in production to be achieved by 2017 and will continue to
      improve; only 70% of the command area in the project schemes
      were assumed to take advantage of the improved irrigation system; and diversification towards high
      value crops (HVCs) like vegetables, vineries and fruit trees were assumed to increase from 22 to 31% of
      the area in summer, while wheat and alfalfa areas would be reduced from about 88 to 78% in winter as
      orchards expand.
     Sensitivity analysis was conducted under different scenarios: a 20% increase in construction costs; a 20
      and 30% decrease in food prices given the current high prices of food in comparison to long term
      averages; a 20% reduction in the number of farms adjusting their farming practices in response to the
      improved availability of irrigation; and several combinations of the afore mentioned situations. The
      analysis concluded that in all cases the ERR remained above 12%, which suggested that the project was
      generally robust
      against most probable risk factors.

ex-post

     The economic analysis was based on a cost-benefit analysis approach similar to that used at appraisal.
      The overall ERR at completion was estimated at 28.8%. The net present value (NPV) was $109.2 million,
      and the benefit to cost (B/C) ratio was 1.72, calculated at a 6% discount rate. The calculations of the
      ERR, NPV, and B/C ratios were based on net incremental benefits. Net benefits were calculated as the


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 26
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



         difference between benefits in the scenarios with and without the project. The analysis considered 20
         years for the stream of benefits.
        The ICR (paragraph 66) claimed that "the rehabilitation and modernization works were cost-effective."
         However, there was no direct evidence provided to support this claim such a comparison of the project
         costs to costs of similar projects. It is also worth noting that the project received an additional financing in
         2018 through IBRD in the amount of US$27.20 million because the cost of rehabilitation of irrigation
         infrastructure was grossly underestimated at appraisal (see below).
        The financial impact of the project on farmers’ revenues was assessed using crop and farm models that
         show average farming situations. Similar to those used at appraisal, the models and budgets used for the
         analysis were developed using FARMOD software. The return to family labor was estimated to have
         increased with the project from about US$29–US$42 to US$45–US$55 per day.
        A sensitivity analysis assessed the exposure of the project to risks and opportunities under different
         scenarios including: a smaller production growth throughout the years by 10–13%; no new benefits after
         the first years following project completion (by schemes); a 10% reduction of production and
         10% increase in production costs; a 20% reduction in production and 20% increase in production costs,
         and an increase in production by 10%. In the worst-case scenario, the ERR was 10.6%, still above the
         6% discount rate, suggesting that the project was robust under different scenarios.
        Implementation efficiency suffered from several operational (procurement related delays and inaccurate
         cost estimates of schemes) combined with other external factors (flooding in 2015, institutional reform
         and COVID- 19 among others) caused implementation delays and a slight negative impact on overall
         efficiency (ICR, paragraph 68). This prolonged the project implementation, and benefits materialized at a
         later stage than originally planned and affected the time of incidence of benefits and cost. This
         resulted in a lower overall NPV and ERR than at the AF stage (ERR of original project +AF was
         estimated at 30%).

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post ERR was estimated at 28.3% which was higher that the
23.7% for the ERR at appraisal. However, the ex-post ERR was slightly below the original project + the AF ERR
which was estimated at 30%. According to the ICR (paragraph 68) this slight drop was attributed to
implementation delays. It is also worth noting that some delays were due to external factors beyond the project
control. Based on the implementation delays, the under-estimation of costs that eventually necessitated an
additional financing to make up the gap, and the fact that the estimated ex-post ERR was actually lower than ex-
ante, and the absence of any evidence of cost-effectiveness of the rehabilitation/modernization works,
Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                  Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          88.00
 Appraisal                                                     23.70
                                                                                           Not Applicable


                                                                                                          Page 16 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



                                                                                  93.00
ICR Estimate                                             28.80
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Modest. While the project achieved
its objective to establish a strategic framework to manage water resources at the level of the Drin-Buna and
Semani River basins, the objective aiming to improve, in a sustainable manner, the performance of selected
irrigation systems was modestly achieved. Efficiency was rated Modest. The ex-post ERR was estimated at
28.3% which was lower that the 30% for the ERR at appraisal, taking into account the Additional Financing.

Based on the above-mentioned ratings, Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Post Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project achieved its
objective to establish a strategic framework to manage water resources at the level of the Drin-Buna and
Semani River basins. The project also succeeded in improving irrigation service delivery in selected irrigation
systems. The rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure for 13 irrigation schemes was completed and 13 dams
were rehabilitated to meet international safety standards. Efficiency was rated Substantial despite
implementation delays. The ex-post ERR was estimated at 28.3% which was higher that the 23.7% for the ERR
at appraisal.

Based on the above-mentioned ratings, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Split Rating

                                                    Post restructuring
                         Pre-restructuring
                                                    (AF)
Relevance of
                         Substantial                Substantial
Objectives
Efficacy                 Modest                    Substantial
Efficiency               Modest                    Modest
                                                   Moderately
Outcome                  Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                   Satisfactory
Numerical Value of
                         3                          4
Outcome Rating
Disbursement (US$
                         US$29.88                   US$36.22
million)
Share of
                         45%                        55%
disbursement


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



Weighted Value of
                         1.35                         2.2
Outcome Rating
                                                      Moderately
                                                      Satisfactory
Final Outcome Rating
                                                      1.35+2.20=3.55,
                                                      rounds to 4

Note: Highly Unsatisfactory (1); Unsatisfactory (2); Moderately Unsatisfactory (3) Moderately Satisfactory (4);
Satisfactory (5); Highly Satisfactory (6).

Therefore, the final outcome based on a split rating is Moderately Satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed two main risks as follows:

1. The risk related to the Government approval and implementation of the national strategies for
IWRM and I&D. According to the ICR (paragraph 104) the client’s satisfaction with the this project led the
GoA to assign a higher priority to the WRM and I&D sectors than it has in the past. The
Government is seeking EU or other bilateral assistance to support implementation of the new strategy and
basin plans. In addition, the GoA has initiated a follow-up Bank-financed project, the Albania-Climate
Resilience and Agricultural Development Project (P178715), to be jointly implemented by the Water Global
Practice and Agriculture and Food Global Practice, and has requested continued Bank support in applying
for a grant from the Western Balkan Investment Fund to undertake prefeasibility studies for 431 dams and
associated I&D networks. The Albanian government already secured €1.5 million for these studies, which will
include assessment and evaluation of dam safety and potential for existing reservoirs to improve irrigation to
enhance resilience to climate change.

2. The risk related to cost recovery for O&M needs. Cost recovery for O&M needs continued attention for
the future of the I&D investments under the WRIP. According to the ICR (paragraph 105) "there is a low risk
that the positive performance during the past three years will not continue." By the end of the project, 67% of
the area that received improved I&D service was covered by sustainable cost-recovery arrangements for
O&M. Arrangements for cost recovery included: transfers from the national budget to LGs; municipal
revenues, especially the land tax and permit fees; and farmers’ annual irrigation fees. Farmers' share of
O&M costs is expected to increase as their productivity and incomes increase due to better accessibility to a
properly functioning irrigation system. This review is in agreement with the ICR (para 105) that further
financial support to the municipalities is needed till water users could assume a larger share of O&M costs.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PDO of the WRIP was in line with the Bank strategies and reflected the Government priorities for
  integrated water resource management (see section 3 for more details). The project design benefited
  from the Bank’s long history in financing I&D projects, and from the earlier projects in Albania.

  Notable lessons reflected in the project design included: the critical need to involve a range of
  stakeholders in project design and implementation to ensure success; the need to address continued
  deterioration of hydraulic infrastructure through structural and non-structural measures; and the need to
  take climate change and hydrological variability into account in designing sectoral support. However,
  design could have benefited from incorporating lessons to implement measures to improve O&M cost
  recovery (ICR, paragraph 78). Recommendations from a study on climate change in Albania (2012) were
  also reflected in the project the project design. These included: improved institutional framework and
  enhanced capacities for managing water resources, investments in dam safety, and investments to
  improve the reliability of I&D schemes (ICR, paragraph 77).

  The project design was comprehensive and featured the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure,
  including dams, combined with institutional reforms and capacity building activities. The design of the
  institutional strengthening components incorporated the priorities of the country in the water sector and
  reflected its aim to achieve EU status. A notable design shortcoming was the gross underestimation of
  infrastructure costs, which consequently affected the scope of the original project (see section 5 for more
  details). The original cost for rehabilitating 15 I&D schemes and 13 dams was estimated at US$29.38
  million. Only 6 I&D schemes could be financed with the available funds under the original project. At the
  end of the project, the cost increased to US$60 million minus the cost of mitigating the flood damage
  (€8.4 million). According to the ICR (paragraph 79) "this substantial increase complicated the
  procurement process by having to relaunch the tender and led to the need for the AF and time to achieve
  project objectives."

  Seven risks were identified at appraisal with an overall rating of Substantial. Key risks related to project
  design, implementation capacity, governance and stakeholders. According to the (ICR, paragraph 98)
  "risk assessment was realistic and included appropriate measures for reducing or managing risks." The
  project design emphasized addressing gender, with measures to be taken to facilitate women’s
  participation in consultations on the strategies, providing feedback on proposed I&D investments, and
  project-related training (ICR, paragraph 98).

  Finally, the original results framework suffered from shortcomings that undermined project monitoring
  and reporting, specifically, some of the outcome indicators could have been better aligned with the PDO
  (ICR, paragraph 99) (see section 9 a for more details).

  Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The Bank should have been more diligent in
  estimating the costs for the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure, and more attention should have been
  given to M&E to ensure that the indicators were better aligned with the PDO.



                                                                                                     Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Over the nine years of project implementation, four Task Team Leaders supervised the
 project. Supervision missions included multidisciplinary teams for the field visits (including the SIDA
 team). Special technical missions helped resolve technical issues that arose during implementation.
 Missions also included environmental and social safeguard specialists to follow up on any safeguard
 requirements. TTLs also monitored the work of the M&E consultants. During the COVID pandemic, weekly
 missions were held virtually with the client and contractors. Also, two virtual supervision missions were
 organized to ensure successful project completion (ICR, paragraph 101).

 The ICR (paragraph 102) noted however that "the Bank team could have been more diligent in revising the
 results framework during project restructuring." Also, the PDO could have been modified at the time of the
 2015 restructuring because the main outcome indicator addressing sustainability was dropped.

 Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The Bank team managed to overcome
 implementation delays and the underestimation of project costs through approving an additional financing
 to avail enough funds to successfully complete the envisioned activities.

 Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory. While Quality at Entry had significant shortcomings,
 Bank Supervision managed to steer the project towards a successful outcome after the AF despite the
 delays.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR (Annex
        7a & 7b) included an ex-post ToC for the original and revised PDO that was constructed based on
        the PDO, the project activities and the results indicators as reported in the PAD and the
        Restructuring Paper. Overall, the two ToCs in the ICR were sound and reflected the relation
        between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes. However, both ToCs did
        not reflect the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objectives.
       The original PDO was to be assessed through five PDO outcome indicators: 1. Preparation of a
        National IWRM strategy; 2. Preparation of two agreed River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) for

                                                                                                Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



          the Drin-Buna and Semani River basins; 3. Establishment of a Water Resources Database
          (National Water Resources Cadastre); 4. Compliance with agreed seasonal water distribution
          schedules (target: 75%); and 5. Increase in recovery of O&M costs as percentage of O&M charges
          invoiced (target: 70%). These outcome indicators were not comprehensive enough to capture the
          project achievements. Specifically, the impact of the project investments on irrigation improvements,
          crop yields and cropping patterns were relevant elements that should have been monitored. The
          ICR (paragraph 84) acknowledged that "shortcomings in the original results framework undermined
          project monitoring and reporting."
         The original RF included 21 intermediate outcome indicators. Most of which were quantitative.
          However, the RF lacked critical intermediate outcome indicators that could measure improvements
          in the irrigation service, for example, improved conveyance, improved delivery to tail ends, and
          improvements in the time needed by farmers to irrigate their fields.
         Restructuring and changes to the RF. Outcome indicators and targets were revised as a result of
          both the 2015 restructuring and the 2018 restructuring/AF. Also, 12 intermediate outcome indicators
          were dropped as a result of GoA’s new irrigation law, lack or causality, or redundancy (ICR,
          paragraph 28). The PDO was also revised as part of restructuring and the AF in 2018. The change
          in wording for Objective 2 namely, dropping the reference to sustainable improvements in
          performance, provided a closer connection between the objective and indicator. Also, the AF added
          one new PDO outcome indicator.
         While the changes in the PDO and outcome indicators under the AF were improvements over those
          in the original project, these changes fell short as the RF remained deficient and did not
          comprehensively capture the project achievements in terms of specific improvements in irrigation
          services.
         Overall, M&E design was deficient and undermined the project monitoring and reporting.



b. M&E Implementation
       Each ministry PMT had one dedicated staff for the M&E system. According to the ICR (paragraph
         84) "the arrangements for M&E were appropriate for a project with two implementing agencies."
        A project-financed consultancy set up the MIS and consultants monitored the progress in project
         implementation and safeguard compliance. M&E consultants also coordinated their reporting with
         the dam safety and I&D supervision consultants to consolidate on a semi-annual basis the
         safeguards-related data documented by the supervision consultants.
        Inputs from baseline surveys were completed during project preparation and additional surveys
         carried out for the mid-term and end-of-project reporting. The data collected were presented in
         semiannual progress reports shared with the Bank and SIDA prior to their joint implementation
         support missions (ICR, paragraph 86).



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 88) "Bi-yearly progress reports formed the basis for discussion
          during supervision missions, the MTR, and endof- project assessments." M&E reports
          provided information on the project implementation status and achievement of project objectives.



                                                                                                   Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



        M&E reports were used by the Bank and SIDA team as a basis for discussion with MARD on
           progress in achieving project objectives, and where to focus attention. No specific example were
           provided in the ICR on how M&E guided the project management.

  Summary of M&E Quality. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Modest. M&E design suffered from significant
  shortcomings relating to the original RF, which according to the ICR (paragraph 84) "undermined project
  monitoring and reporting." Despite restructuring the project twice during implementation, the RF
  remained deficient and lacked critical indicators to measure improvements in the irrigation service. The
  ICR (paragraph 89) acknowledged that M&E design was deficient and that the ICR relied on "additional
  evidence to better justify some of the outcomes." Finally, M&E utilization relied on the project monitoring
  reports. While M&E monitoring reports could have been comprehensive, utilization could have benefitted
  from a more focused M&E design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental category B (partial assessment) due to the nature of project
   activities and the fact that there would be no new dams or expansion of the
   irrigation schemes, compared to the originally designed schemes. It triggered five safeguard policies at the
   appraisal of the original project as follows: Environmental Assessment (OP BP 4.01), Pest Management
   (OP 4.09), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects in
   International Waterways (OP/BP 7.75). The Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Framework
   Document (ESFD) and a number of draft site specific Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMPs)
   for the first year of project implementation, which involved rehabilitation of dams and the immediate
   ancillary works around the reservoirs. A Resettlement Policy Framework was also prepared on October 9,
   2012.

   According to the ICR (paragraph 91) "all project works complied with the Environmental and Social
   Management Framework dated October 1, 2012."

   Compliance with environmental safeguards. Construction was in the footprint of existing canals and no
   construction was near residential areas or national roads. Throughout project implementation, there were no
   major environmental issues of concern (ICR, paragraph 91).

   Compliance with social safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 92) "there was no land acquisition
   during implementation of either the original project or AF." A social development/safeguard specialist joined
   missions to ensure that there were no other potential issues that could pose a social risk.

   Compliance with OP/BP 4.37 (Dam Safety). According to the ICR (paragraph 93) "the project met all
   requirements under this policy."




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



   Compliance with OP/BP 7.75 (Projects in International Waterways). According to the ICR (paragraph
   94) "the project met the exception conditions under OP/BP 7.75", since the project would not adversely
   affect the quality or quantity of water flowing to other riparians and would not be adversely affected by other
   riparians’ water use.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). Both implementation agencies had qualified staff to handle FM in
   accordance with the Bank's requirements. Financial audits were contracted on time, with few exceptions,
   and the Bank’s approval of the final audits was unqualified. According to the ICR (paragraph 97) "Fiduciary
   management was carried out in full compliance with the World Bank rules."


   Procurement. The two implementing agencies had experienced procurement specialists familiar with the
   Bank's procurement rules and regulations. While, there were some delays with contract processing, the
   ICR (paragraph 96) noted that "there were no serious problems." According to the ICR (paragraph 96)
   "procurement management was carried out in accordance with World Bank rules."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   During implementation, the management of irrigation at the municipal level changed as water masters
   replaced Water User Organizations (WUOs). As a result, water masters became the primary beneficiary of
   the project financed capacity building activities. This ultimately strengthened the water master system and
   dramatically reduced, or unintentionally eliminated, the role of the WUOs in the project areas (ICR,
   paragraph 76).



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To avoid cost overruns during implementation, it is important that projects involving
infrastructure activities use robust and realistic cost estimates for civil works that reflect
market prices at the time of appraisal. The World Bank appraisal team should be responsible for
ensuring that appraisal costs reflect market prices within the country, regionally, and internationally
with appropriate levels of price and physical contingencies. A difference of 20% is acceptable and
can be covered by contingencies. In the case of the WRIP, the failure
to obtain reasonable cost estimates led to the relaunching of several contracts, not having sufficient
funds for implementation of more than half of the schemes, and subsequent implementation delays
and processing of additional finance and time to implement the original project.

2. Irrigation projects designed to increase agricultural productivity must include support to
farmers in agricultural marketing to avoid price declines due to increased
productivity. Interviews with the men and women who own small farms and sell their products
along national roads expressed satisfaction with the newly improved irrigation. However, they are
now concerned about how and where to sell the increased volume of products they are now able to
grow. The experience of WRIP emphasizes the importance of including agricultural marketing to
enable farmers to sell their increased volume of products otherwise project areas might experience
excess supply and depressed prices.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

3. To ensure a satisfactory outcome of a complex irrigation project, design and preparation
need to include a sound analysis of the implementation environment and realistic cost
estimates. The project faced two critical challenges during implementation, first, the Government
changed the irrigation law which deemed some aspects of the project irrelevant. A transparent
dialogue with the Government during the preparation stage would have allowed the team to forsee
such changes. Second, the cost estimates of the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure were highly
underestimated at appraisal, despite the project-financed feasibility studies. This necessitated
additional financing to complete the envisioned activities. To accommodate price increases within
contracts, cost estimates need to be realistic and account for domestic, regional, and global
estimates with traditional physical and price contingencies, including projected rates of foreign and
domestic inflation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain



                                                                                                    Page 24 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)



  The project had a deficient M&E design that did not comprehensively capture the achievement of the PDO.
  Also, the project introduced institutional changes and replaced Water Users Organizations (WUOs) with water
  masters in managing irrigation at the municipal level. Therefore, an assessment is warranted to further verify
  the project results and assess the performance of water masters as an alternative to WUOs in managing
  irrigation at the municipal level. An assessment will also provide an opportunity to generate more lessons from
  the project experience that could be useful for future similar operations.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that the Results Framework was deficient (see section 9a).The
ICR relied on external data, which at times was anecdotal, to assess the project outcomes.

Quality of Analysis: The ICR provided clear linking to the extent possible between evidence and findings
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on
outcomes. However, the impact of the project on improving service delivery was not fully captured due to the
absence of relevant indicators in the RF.

Results Orientation: The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. However,
discussion on outcomes could have been more balance between reporting on the achievement of outcome
indicators and what the project actually achieved on the ground. The reversed order of discussing the
achievement of outcomes was not helpful.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. Discussion
of outcomes was undermined by a poor M&E design. efficiency analysis provided an acceptable justification for
the robustness of the project investments. The ICR reported some costs in Euros and others in US dollars,
which created needless confusion.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and candidly
reported on shortcomings. The reporting on safeguards included an explicit statement on compliance. The
ICR commented on the status of the final audit reports for the project. However, the discussion of M&E design
could have benefited from further details with regards to the RF shortcomings, and the ToC could have
benefited from including the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the objectives. The ICR
could have benefitted from including an Annex with a map to reflect the project areas and dam locations.
Finally, the ICR did not discuss the risks that materialized during implementation and the no targets were
provided for the reported outputs in Annex 1.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 25 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
WATER RESOURCES AND IRRIGATION (P121186)




                                                                        Page 26 of 26
