     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022875

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P127086                                  SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa              Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16748,TF-16970                        30-Jun-2019                                         10,198,450.43

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Apr-2014                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,200,000.00                                 10,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,200,000.00                                 10,200,000.00

 Actual                                         10,198,450.43                                 10,198,450.43




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Victoria Alexeeva           Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Trust Fund and Cooperation in International Waters in
   Africa (CIWA) Trust Fund Grant Agreement (p.7) dated January 15, 2015, and the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, p.4), the project objective was “to support sustainable management of groundwater at
   national and transboundary levels across Southern African Development Community (SADC) Member
   States.”



                                                                                                Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



   SADC is an inter-governmental organization established in 1980. SADC’s main objectives are to achieve
   development, peace and security, and economic growth, to alleviate poverty, enhance the standard and
   quality of life of the peoples of Southern Africa, and support the socially disadvantaged through regional
   integration, built on democratic principles and equitable and sustainable development. The inter-governmental
   organization also aims at fostering cooperation and mutual benefit from shared waters among its 16 member
   states—Angola, Botswana, Comoros, Democratic Republic of Congo, Eswatini, Lesotho, Madagascar,
   Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the grant agreement (p.7), the project consisted of four components:

   A. Operationalizing the SADC Groundwater Management Institute (GMI). (Appraisal cost: US$2.80
   million; revised cost at the first restructuring: US$3.70 million; actual cost: US$3.70 million)

   This component included five activities: (a) Strengthening coordination and administration functions of the
   GMI; (b) raising awareness, knowledge management and communication to inform, engage, and maintain
   dialogue with key stakeholders in member states; (c) facilitating the establishment of national level
   partnerships and ownership of the project through the provision of subgrants to selected focal points in
   member states; (d) building the capacity for groundwater management at the regional level through the
   provision of training to technical underground practitioners, students and decision makers in member states;
   and (e) mobilizing funding, developing and implementing a plan for sustainable development of the GMI as
   a regional center of excellence.

   B. Strengthening Institutional Capacity for the Sustainable Management of Groundwater in SADC.
   (Appraisal cost: US$1.50 million; revised cost at the first restructuring: US$1.60 million; actual cost:
   US$1.60 million)

   This component included five activities: (a) Analysis of legal, policy, and regulatory framework to identify
   and address gaps in groundwater management both at the SADC regional and member states level; (b)
   strengthening the compliance and advocacy of groundwater governance; (c) developing guidelines,
   standards and related management tools; (d) strengthening the capacity for groundwater monitoring and
   data management; and (e) facilitating transboundary cooperation to enhance integration and harmonization
   on groundwater management across the SADC region.

   C. Advancing Knowledge on Transboundary and National Groundwater. (Appraisal cost: US$3.00
   million; revised cost at the first restructuring: US$1.90 million; actual cost: US$1.90 million)

   This component included three activities: (a) Facilitating transboundary aquifer management through the
   cooperation of member states and regional basin organizations in data collection and sharing, and joint
   management of groundwater issues; (b) facilitating research on groundwater challenges to enable

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



  information exchange on findings and implementation of solutions, and (c) facilitating information and
  communication technologies for knowledge sharing platforms.

  D. Promoting Groundwater Infrastructure Management and Development. (Appraisal cost: US$2.90
  million; revised cost at the first restructuring: US$3.00 million; actual cost: US$3.00 million)

  This component included four activities: (a) carrying out a program of activities to develop infrastructure
  design for improved groundwater management; (b) carrying out a program of activities to develop and
  disseminate manuals for groundwater infrastructure development; (c) strengthening the capacity for impact
  monitoring and evaluation, progress, trouble-shooting and reporting of results related to groundwater
  infrastructure; and (d) developing partnerships and mobilizing funding for groundwater infrastructure
  development.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$10.20 million. On June 30, 2021, the
  project closed with a total cost of US$10.20 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant was estimated at US$8.20 million,
  and the Cooperation in International Waters in Africa Trust Fund (CIWA) grant at US$2.00 million. The
  project fully disbursed the funds.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
  project closing.

  Restructurings: There were two project restructurings:

        First Restructuring (Level 2 – February 1, 2019): The project closing date was extended by 18
         months from June 30, 2019 to December 31, 2020 to allow time for the completion of the project
         activities that were delayed during the first two years of project implementation because of the slow
         progress of administrative processes for the establishment of the GMI as a not-for-profit company
         hosted by the University of Free State in South Africa (UFS). Funds were allocated between
         components according to the priorities, especially regarding the operationalization of the GMI (see
         revised project costs under each component above). The ICR (p.6) states that one intermediate
         indicator was dropped at this restructuring, but the restructuring paper does not report on this
         (Restructuring Paper, Report No.: RES28614). The target values of two other intermediate indicators
         were revised down (see section 9.b M&E Implementation)
        Second Restructuring (Level 2 – November 24, 2020): The project closing date was further
         extended by six months from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2021 to compensate for the delays
         caused by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.

  Dates: The project was approved on April 24, 2014. The Grant Agreement was signed on January 15,
  2015 and the project became effective on June 30, 2015. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in March
  2019. The original closing date was June 30, 2019. It was extended by two years, and the project closed on
  June 30, 2021. The reasons for closing date extensions were outlined in the project restructuring entries
  above.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was relevant to the regional context in southern Africa. Around 250 million people
depend on water, including groundwater, that is shared between multiple states in the SADC region.
Sustainable management of groundwater is vital for the well-beings of the population, industrial production,
and commercial activities. The project and its objective are aligned with the priorities set in the SADC
Regional Strategic Action Plans (RSAPs) on Integrated Water Resources Development and Management
Phase IV (2016 -2020). It corresponds to Sub-Program 6.2: Groundwater Development and Management
that aims the institutionalization of GMI, strengthening institutional capacity in the SADC member states,
advancing knowledge on transboundary and national groundwater management, and promoting
groundwater infrastructure management and development.

The project objective was aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Africa Regional
Integration Strategy Update, Fiscal Years 2021-2023. The project sought to address the development
problem of insufficient transboundary and national cooperation for sustainable management for
groundwater to enhance water security in the region. The project was to address this problem through
technical assistance to GMI and national governments with the goal of strengthening their institutional and
technical capacities in groundwater management. These objectives correspond to Focus Area 4,
“Transboundary water and natural resource management,” under the “Strategic Pillar 4: Reinforcing
Resilience” of the World Bank’s Africa Regional Integration Strategy.

The project objective was aligned with the focal areas of GEF and CIWA. The project supported the GEF-5
focal area’s two objectives: to catalyze multi-state cooperation in balancing conflicting water uses in
transboundary surface and groundwater basins while considering climactic variability, and to support
foundational capacity building, portfolio learning, and targeted research needs for joint, ecosystem-based
management of transboundary water systems. The project also supported the CIWA objective to strengthen
cooperative management and the development of international water resources.

The 2000 Revised SADC Protocol considers groundwater as a part of watercourses faced with
management issues of control of abstraction, pollution control, protection of recharge area, and shared
management. However, surface water priorities often supersede the operationalization of commitments to
groundwater. To support SADC and the member states in groundwater management, the World Bank first
implemented the SADC Groundwater and Drought Management Project. That project supported the
establishment of GMI by the SADC council, the preparation of its first business plan, and the initial
registration of GMI as a non-for-profit company in South Africa. The project under this review is a follow-on
project that aimed at further supporting GMI to become a fully operationalized entity as a subsidiary of
SADC hosted by the University of Free State, which were expected to lead transboundary and national
coordination of groundwater management in the SADC region. While the project objective was more
challenging, it was overly ambitious for a technical assistance project that primarily targeted the
operationalization of GMI and some capacity strengthening to address the issues related to sustainable
management of groundwater at the transboundary and national levels in the SADC region. Sustainability
aspect of the project objective or how it would be achieved was not clearly defined.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



               Overall, the relevance of the objective is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support sustainable management of groundwater at national and transboundary levels across SADC
                             Member States.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project’s theory of change (ToC) indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., grants, were to be used under
                             four components to finance the provision of (i) consultant services and technical assistance; (ii) goods,
                             equipment and non-consulting services, including equipment for purposes such as monitoring, mapping,
                             computers, vehicles and office equipment; (iii) works; (iv) operating costs, (v) training and capacity building;
                             (vi) audits; and (vii) sub-grants for limited pilot investments. According to the ToC presented in the ICR (p.3),
                             these activities were to be expected to result in the following four groups of outputs:

                                        MoU between the SADC and the University of the Free State (UFS) is signed to host GMI at UFS;
                                         GMI provides seminar and workshop activities and training for groundwater practitioners; GMI meets
                                         member states’ demands in groundwater management; and funds and revenues are secured to
                                         sustain the operation of GMI.
                                        Groundwater national focal points are established; interns are seconded with the regional internship
                                         program at GMI; guideline notes on policy and legislation for transboundary and national aquifers are
                                         developed; Transboundary Diagnostics and Joint Strategic Plans are developed; and training activities
                                         are implemented for the strengthening of legal policy and institutions for groundwater management.
                                        Advanced scientific studies on groundwater are completed; operational support manuals for
                                         groundwater infrastructure development are developed; documents on financing of construction and
                                         maintenance of groundwater infrastructures are produced; trainings activities on groundwater data
                                         collection, management and sharing are implemented.
                                        Sub-grant pilot groundwater management projects are completed at SADC member states; and
                                         training activities on infrastructure solutions are implemented.

                             These outputs would be expected to lead to the four main outcomes defined in the ToC:

                             Outcome 1: GMI is developed into a regionally recognized center of excellence (Group A outputs).



                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



Outcome 2: Transboundary and national institutions are strengthened to improve regional cooperation (Group
B outputs).

Outcome 3: Capacity for sustainable transboundary and national groundwater management in the ministries
and departments responsible for groundwater in SADC member states is enhanced (Group C outputs).

Outcome 4: Infrastructure solutions for development and management of groundwater resources are
demonstrated and promoted (Group D outputs)

These outcomes were expected to contribute to the achievement of the project objective of sustainable
management of groundwater at national and transboundary levels across SAC member states.

Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to expected results were broadly valid and direct. The outcomes
achieved could be broadly attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the link between the expected
outcomes and how they would contribute to the sustainable management of groundwater is not clear. The
expected outcomes are the operationalization of GMI, some capacity strengthening at the national level in
groundwater management, and demonstration of infrastructure solutions. It is not clear how these outcomes
would lead to the sustainable management of groundwater in the regions and to what extent such sustainable
management of groundwater could be attributable to the project’s intervention. Since the indicators in the
result framework do not capture the outcomes relevant to the sustainable management of groundwater, they
are insufficient to test these links in the ToC.

Outputs

Following indicators measured the achievement of the project outputs.

      MoU Signed between SADC Secretariat and the University of the Free State. Hosting agreement
         was signed in May 2017.
        GMI obtains Subsidiarity Status of SADC. The subsidiary status of GMI was approved at the 38th
         SADC Summit in August 2018, but the subsidiary status could only be obtained in August 2020. The
         target was to obtain the subsidiary status in 2017.
        Number of manuals produced which provide operational support for groundwater
         infrastructure development. The project financed the production of the following guidelines as
         planned: (a) O&M Manual for GW Infrastructure; (b) Guideline on Preparation of ESS Close-out
         Reports; (c) GMI ESS Reporting Protocols for Small Grant Infrastructure Projects; (d) Simplified ESMP
         template; and (e) Training Manual & Guidelines for Preparation of GW project proposals.
        Number of guideline notes on policy and legislation for transboundary and national aquifers
         developed and disseminated. The target was 10. The project developed and disseminated 16
         guideline notes, such as groundwater data collection and management framework, guidelines on
         groundwater infrastructure O&M, policy development, strategic finance, establishment of national focal
         points, and integration of national databases (ICR, p.30).
        Improved strategic analyses conducted and knowledge products developed. Following four
         reports were prepares as planned: SADC Drought Risk Assessment, Big Data Analytics, Groundwater
         Assessment and Malawi Deep Aquifer Study.
        Number of research studies completed on groundwater management challenges selected by
         SADC Member States. The following seven studies were completed surpassing the target of nine: 1.
         Groundwater Data Collection and Management; 2. Groundwater Infrastructure Operation and

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



     Maintenance; 3. Groundwater Resilience; 4. Conjunctive Water Management Report; 5. Regional Gap
     Analysis and Action for Policy, Legal and Institutional Development for Groundwater Management in
     the SADC Member States; 6. Sixteen National Gap Analyses & Action Plans for Policy, Legal and
     Institutional Development for Groundwater Management in the SADC Member States; 7. Prioritization
     of groundwater priority intervention areas; 8. Updating groundwater drought risk and population
     vulnerability map; and 9. Hydrogeology of the Eastern Karoo Transboundary Aquifer report.
    Advanced scientific knowledge enabling sustainable transboundary groundwater management
     among SADC Member States. Six transboundary aquifer scientific studies were completed against
     the target of four: Shire, Eastern Kalahari, Tuli Karoo, Ramotswa, Stampriet, and Khakea
     transboundary aquifers.
    Number of joint activities conducted with international groundwater organizations. Twenty-one
     activities were implemented with other organizations, such as conferences, meetings, trainings, and
     exchange visits. Thirteen memoranda of understanding were concluded with various national and
     international organizations. The target was to conduct 25 activities. (ICR, pp.24-25)
    Number of people received training dedicated to groundwater data collection, management
     and sharing. Two-hundred and ninety-three people from member states and river basin organizations
     were trained on review and validation of data gap analyses reports, QGIS, groundwater modelling,
     and data collection, processing and storage under the groundwater information portal, groundwater
     literature archive and datacom projects. The target was 120 people.
    Number of people receiving training in infrastructure solutions in priority areas of Member
     States. A total of 354 people received training against the target of 180. The breakdown is as follows:
     (a) 80 trainees from miscellaneous training workshops; (b) 23 trainees from the training on proposal
     writing; (c) 40 trainees from O&M of groundwater infrastructure training; (d) 30 participants from the
     Chimbiya Village Water Management Committee in Malawi training; (e) 45 participants from the
     Whunga and Dite community garden livelihood projects in Zimbabwe; (f) 10 Mochocolate Village
     Water Committee members from Mozambique; and (g) 126 from the training on project proposal
     development.
    Number of trainings dedicated to providing guidance to stakeholders on identifying solutions
     for strengthening legal, policy, and regulatory tools. Ten trainings were conducted as planned: 1.
     International Water Law and Gender (100 participants from 12 Member States); 2. Droit international
     de l'eau et les instruments des Nations Unies, y compris des articles sur les eaux souterraines (5
     participants from DRC); 3. A lei internacional sobre a água e os instrumentos das Nações Unidas
     incluindo artigos sobre as águas subterrâneas (6 participants from Mozambique); 4. Training on
     Negotiation skills in transboundary surface and ground water resources management (3 participants
     from Tanzania sponsored by GMI); 5. Two validation workshops on National and Regional Gap
     Analyses; 6. Workshop in Dodoma, Tanzania on Roadmap development; 7. Workshop in Dodoma for
     validation and adoption of Roadmap; 8. All Stakeholders’ Meeting for the Development of the Kingdom
     of Eswatini Roadmap; 9. SADC WRTC training and advocacy workshop on PLI products.
    Percent of participants satisfied with seminars and workshops conducted on knowledge
     transfer with ‘excellent’ outcome. The level of satisfaction was 78 percent, slightly lower than the
     target of 80 percent. It was measured through questionnaires at the end of each training event.
    Percent of trained groundwater practitioners who deemed training and manuals satisfactory.
     Similar to the previous indicator, the level of satisfaction was 78 percent, slightly lower than the target
     of 80 percent. It was measured through questionnaires at the end of each training event.
    Number of people learning applied skills from demonstration/pilot groundwater infrastructures.
     A total of 65 people were trained consisting of 33 people from sub-Grantees and Member States, 23
     from the training on proposals and 9 from a telemetry installation training. The target was 60.

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)




      Number of Interns seconded with the regional internship program at GMI. A total of 65 people
       attended internships in the SADC Data Collection and Management project, SADC-GIP and SADC-
       GLA projects. The target was 45.
      Financial resources sought and secured for long-term sustainability and/or expansion of
       operations. Additional financial resources amounting to about $9Million secured from the new CIWA
       project starting in 2021. A grant of about $310k was received from JRS Biodiversity Foundation to
       implement a biodiversity project in Khakea/Bray TBA. The balance of the actual funds raised was
       sourced from conferences, trainings as well as rendering professional services to other institutions
       such as GIZ, UNESCO-IHP and IWMI. An additional grant amounting to $5Million from GEF is under
       preparation.
      Sub-grant Manual Implemented. The manual was implemented starting from 2017 and reviewed and
       updated in 2020.
      Number of visitors to SADC GMI website. The target was 20,000 visitors annually by project
       closing. The actual number of visitors at project closing was 241,430.

Outcomes

Following indicators capture the achievement of outcomes:

      Transboundary institution strengthened to improve regional cooperation. The project outputs
       resulted in the SADC Groundwater Management Institute (GMI) becoming a fully operational entity
       and fulfilling its role as an interlocutor and regional integration contributor in managing groundwater.
       Its financial plan is being implemented. Transboundary cooperation is further improved through the
       singing of MoUs between GMI and five river basin organizations. The GMI engages with these river
       basin organizations through groundwater technical committees and provision of technical assistance
       on transboundary aquifers, training and capacity building. However, currently GMI implements
       activities only in five transboundary aquifers out of 30. This is a limited achievement for the project
       implemented in eight years.
      Development of the GMI to a recognized center of excellence. GMI supports the implementation of
       the regional groundwater strategy, facilitates the meetings of the SADC Subcommittee on
       hydrogeology, develops research programs, manages and disseminates knowledge about
       groundwater raising awareness, and engages and maintains dialogue with key stakeholders (ICR,
       p.8). The institute has the tools to fulfill its role. It disseminates information through SADC
       Groundwater Information Portal and SADC Grey Literature Archive developed under the project.
       Direct linkages have been established between GMI and the SADC member states that facilitate the
       sharing of best management practices and tailored solutions to the local conditions in groundwater
       management. The ICR (p.8) reports that GMU satisfactorily fulfilled 94 percent of requests from
       member states and stakeholders compared to the target of 80 percent, but it is not clear how this
       achievement was measured.
      Enhanced capacity for sustainable transboundary and national groundwater management in
       the Ministries and departments responsible for groundwater in SADC Member States. The
       project outputs achieved through training, information sharing, development of studies and guidelines,
       implementation of pilot projects, preparation of action plans for each of the 16 SADC member states
       should be expected to have a positive impact on enhancing the capacity at the national authorities
       responsible for groundwater. According to the ICR (p.9), GMI conducted “a capacity needs
       assessment for groundwater management in the member states to assess the priorities for capacity
       strengthening to ensure that interventions are demand driven. Based on the data, the ICR reports

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



                                   (p.21) that the capacity needs of national ministries and departments were met by 81 percent against
                                   the target of 70 percent. But the ICR does not report what those capacity needs were, how they were
                                   met, and how they led to enhanced capacity.
                                  Percentage of time on demand technical assistance requests from SADC Member States met.
                                   According to the annual feedback of the member states, 83.40 percent of technical assistance
                                   requests were met. The target was 80 percent.
                                  Strengthened transboundary institutions with improved analytic tools, knowledge products,
                                   data, forecasting, and/or capacity for improved water and climate risk management. Five RBOs
                                   were strengthened in various ways, viz LIMCOM, ZAMCOM, ORASECOM, OKACOM and
                                   CUVECOM, which include training on specific topics, technical assistance on undertaking
                                   groundwater initiatives, knowledge transfer in Groundwater Committees, support in undertaking
                                   groundwater assessments and preparing groundwater strategies. However, the evidence is
                                   insufficient how these achievements led to a capacity increase at the transboundary institutions, if any.
                                  Number of people directly benefitting from demonstration/pilot groundwater infrastructures.
                                   The project financed 13 national pilots in ten states under the sub-grant component. The types of
                                   interventions were groundwater monitoring, groundwater database integration, deep aquifer
                                   exploration and monitoring, and groundwater development for water supply. One project in Zimbabwe
                                   addressed groundwater depletion and quality deterioration through the establishment of a
                                   groundwater monitoring system. Approximately 3,600 community members are reported to have
                                   benefited from this intervention. The number of beneficiaries was higher in groundwater development
                                   for water supply projects. Only in Chongwe, Zambia, 137,461 inhabitants benefited from access to
                                   clean water because of three boreholes drilled to augment the existing water reticulation system.
                                   Similarly, the rehabilitation of the water supply infrastructure in Tsetsebjwe and Bojojango in Botswana
                                   benefited around 7,000 people, as reported, by providing access to safe and adequate water. At
                                   appraisal, the target for this indicator was set at 3,000. The project team commented in their June 13,
                                   2022 email rather than using the funds for demonstration projects, some members states, as
                                   explained above, used the funds to develop groundwater resources to supply villages, towns, and
                                   community gardens; hence, the number of people benefitting from these sub-projects was significantly
                                   higher than the target value.

                            Overall, the project achieved the outputs expected from the technical assistance activities and pilot
                            investment projects, and these outputs should be expected to contribute to the achievement the outcomes
                            defined in the ToC section, but evidence is weak to fully assess the achievement of the project objective in
                            sustainable management of groundwater. Hence, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project objectives
                            is rated Substantial but with moderate shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



  The project provided necessary tools to the GMI to function as a center in groundwater management and
  cooperation among the SADC countries. The project also supported the SADC member states in developing
  action plans and technical knowledge in groundwater management. However, implementation of pilot projects
  was limited to ten member states although all 16 were targeted. The sustainability aspect of the project
  objective was not sufficiently captured.

  The overall efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective to support sustainable management of
  groundwater at national and transboundary levels across SADC member states is rated Substantial with
  moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

The project activities were mostly focused on technical assistance, research, international cooperation, capacity
building, regulation and monitoring, and institution building. While the project, under Component D, was to
support SADC member states in developing pilot infrastructure solutions to strengthen the management of
groundwater for human and productive use, it was not found feasible at appraisal “to assess the exact value of
… any small demonstration civil works under the project” because they were expected to have limited direct
beneficial impact on people and economic activities (PAD, p.15 and ICR, p.43). Regarding the socio-economic
value of groundwater in SADC, case studies were conducted on four aquifers, i.e., Namibia, South Africa,
Botswana, and Tanzania, in 2011 as part of the previous SADC Groundwater and Drought Management Project.
The PAD (p.15) states that the Usangu Alluvial Aquifer in Tanzania has a present value of around US$735
million at a discount rate of 16 percent over 25 years, the socio-economic contributions stemming from irrigation,
regulation of groundwater dependent ecosystems, fishing in reservoirs, hydropower generation and tourism.

Groundwater is a fundamental resource for socio-economic and environmental sustainability across the 16
SADC member states. At appraisal, groundwater was the primary source of water for 70 percent of the 250
million people living in the region. Availability of groundwater is critical for human wellbeing, livelihoods, food
security, ecosystems, natural habitats, industries, and growing cities. Therefore, the project was deemed to be
economically viable at appraisal.

An economic analysis was not attempted at project closing, neither for selected sub-projects no for technical
assistance activities that could have clear measurable benefits such as improved efficiency and faster
processing/time reduction in approvals, for example.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

There were three task team leader changes without any adverse impact on project implementation, as reported.
The project funds were fully disbursed. Project’s financial aspects were efficiently managed by UFS through
which the funds were channeled. However, procurement was adversely affected by the delays in hiring staff


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



within GMI. A procurement specialist could only be appointed in December 2017 after which the Sub-Grant
Manual was developed. Furthermore, project implementation was delayed by 24 months because of the slow
progress of administrative processes for the establishment of the GMI as not-for-profit company hosted by UFS
in South Africa. Limited implementation capacity within the SADC Secretariat and the UFS also contributed to
the delays (ICR, p.13). As a result, project milestones could be achieved with delays. The onset of COVID-19
pandemic slowed down project implementation resulting in a further 6-month extension of project closing date.

Overall, while the project was deemed beneficial in terms of its contribution to the sustainable management of
groundwater in SADC member states where it is a vital source of water for the population in the region, there
were significant shortcomings in the administrative and operational efficiency of the project that delayed the
achievement of the project milestones and resulted in the extension of the project closing date by almost two
years. This is a significant delay considering that the project was a follow-on project to the SADC Groundwater
and Drought Project that supported the SADC to start the formal establishment of GMI in South Africa.
Therefore, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective to support sustainable management of
groundwater at national and transboundary levels across SADC member states is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was substantially relevant to the regional context and the World Bank’s regional strategy
for Africa where transboundary and national groundwater sources are vital for the well-being of around 250
million people, industrial production, and commercial activities. Hence, the relevance of project objective is rated
Substantial. The project successfully supported the institutionalization and operationalization of GMI, contributed
to some capacity strengthening at the transboundary and national levels, and financed pilot projects in
groundwater management with minor shortcomings. However, there were gaps in evidence at the outcome
level. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to support sustainable management of
groundwater in national and transboundary levels across SADC member states is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings for insufficient evidence at the outcome level. Because of the significant delays during
the first 24 months of project implementation, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated
Modest. Overall, per the Bank guidance, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Insufficient funds could weaken GMI’s interlocutor role in ensuring transboundary cooperation in
groundwater management. GMI has developed a Financial Sustainability Plan. This plan includes
fundraising mechanisms, systems, and procedures (ICR, p.17). While the GMI is a fully operationalized
institute, the long-term sustainability of its works depends on how well those fundraising channels would be
utilized to secure sufficient funds for the institute. The World Bank continues to support the operationalization
of the Financial Sustainability Plan through the Sustainable Groundwater Management for SADC Member
States Phase 2.

Varying levels of institutional capacity, lack of funding for water resources monitoring, water
infrastructure maintenance and effective sector coordination mechanisms in SADC member states
pose a moderate risk for the sustainable management of groundwater in the region. The project
supported institutional capacity building at both the transboundary and national levels. The SADC member
states started implementing policies and strategic plans related to water resources management and
development. GMI will play a pivotal role in the development, implementation, and coordination of plans at
the national level. But the success of the regionwide sustainable groundwater management will depend on
how well member states will be able to address the risks stemming from insufficient institutional capacity and
lack of funding (PAD of the Financial Sustainability Plan through the Sustainable Groundwater Management
for SADC Member States Phase 2, pp.29-30).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goal to foster cooperation and mutual benefit from shared water among its member
  states was of high strategic importance for SADC, since 250 million people living in southern Africa
  heavily depended on groundwater and transboundary aquifers (PAD, pp.2-3). The project design
  benefited from the experience gained and lessons learned during the implementation of the SADC
  Groundwater and Drought Management Project between 2005 and 2011. The project’s approach to
  support the sustainable management of groundwater across SADC member states through technical
  assistance activities with the aim to operationalize the GMI, strengthen institutional capacity at national
  level, and demonstrate pilot groundwater investment projects was appropriate. Limited environmental
  impact expected from the implementation of pilot investments was adequately addressed and the
  requirements of the Projects in International Waterways safeguard policy were satisfied. Project-related
  risks were identified, and mitigation measures were listed. However, the risk that the GMI might be slow
  to operationalize and rapidly meet the role of an interlocutor of groundwater issues in the region and
  implement the project was not adequately identified. The project was not fully ready for implementation.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



  The efforts made by the SADC Secretariat, the University of the Free State (UFS, the hosting agency of
  GMI) and the World Bank during project preparation were insufficient to consolidate the readiness of GMI
  so that it could take project implementation responsibilities quickly. Administrative delays in establishing
  GMI and the limited implementation capacity within SADC and UFS delayed project’s actual start by 24
  months (PAD, p.12). The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements was overall sufficient to
  measure the project’s outputs and outcomes, but there was a shortcoming in the Results Framework in
  capturing the sustainability aspect of the project objective.

  Overall, because of the moderate shortcomings in project preparedness and shortcomings in the M&E
  design, the Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Formal supervision missions were held twice a year. The project team was based in the region and
 frequently contacted the project implementation entities. There were three task team leader changes during
 project’s seven-year implementation period, but according to the ICR (p.13) these changes were smooth.
 The project team’s supervision of financial management and safeguards aspects of the project was
 sufficient. The project team supported GMI to address delays in procurement through advanced
 recruitment of procurement staff and establishment of management systems (ICR, p.15). The performance
 reporting in the Implementation Status and Result Reports (ISR) and Aide Memoires was candid and
 adequate, as reported by the ICR. However, while the significant delays and lack of progress in the first 24
 months of project implementation were documented, they were not adequately reflected in the ISR ratings
 (ICR, p.13). The project was restructured in February 2019, five months before the original closing date in
 June 2019. The shortcomings in the M&E design were not addressed to adequately capture the outcomes
 of technical assistance and investment activities, and the sustainability aspect of the project objective.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was clearly specified. The theory of change was clearly presented in the ICR The
 indicators were sufficient to capture the outputs related to the development and operationalization of GMI
 and the delivery of trainings and production of studies and guidelines for national institutions in charge of
 groundwater management. However, the results framework had significant shortcomings in capturing the

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



 outcomes of the technical assistance activities in achieving institutional and technical strengthening at the
 transboundary and national levels that were to be expected to lead to sustainable management of
 groundwater. The sustainability of groundwater management was not directly captured by the results
 framework. The large number of intermediate results indicators were overly sufficient to capture the
 project’s activities and outputs. They were specific, measurable, achievable, and relevant. Because most of
 the activities were technical assistance activities, baselines were either “zero” or “no.” Targets were
 available for every indicator. M&E data were to be collected from progress reports and surveys. GMI was to
 be responsible for M&E, but this was delayed because of the delays in hiring staff by GMI.



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicators in the results framework were adequately measured and reported, but they were mostly at
  the output level. The shortcomings in the results framework in capturing the project’s outcomes and the
  sustainability of the groundwater management were not addressed during project implementation. An
  M&E specialist within GMI was responsible for collecting M&E data and reporting the findings. Based on
  M&E data, GMI reported progress in project activities and achievement of outputs. There were no major
  revisions to the indicators during project implementation. The ICR reports that the indicator “Running of a
  fully integrated data management system: stores, connects, collects and makes available information
  from groundwater initiatives and data sources” was deleted at the first project restructuring in February
  2019 and will be implemented in the second phase of the project, but the restructuring papers do not
  include any information related to that. The project team confirmed in their email dated June 13, 2022
  that “[t]he indicator was deleted and has been picked up in the new phase 2 project.” At the first
  restructuring, the number of transboundary institutions to be strengthened was decreased from seven to
  five, and the number of policy notes from 20 to 10.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to project’s stakeholders and used to steer project’s course
  through two restructurings and allocation of resources to achieve project outputs and outcomes. The
  M&E data are insufficiently used to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes such as the
  sustainability aspect of the project objective. The M&E data and findings influenced the subsequent
  Sustainable Groundwater Management in SADC Member States Project – Phase 2 (P175355).



  Overall, the M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the progress at the
  output level, however there was a shortcoming in the Results Framework in fully capturing the
  sustainability aspect of the project objective.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
  Physical Cultural Heritage (OP/BP 4.11), the Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12), and the Projects in
  International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) safeguard policies.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
  expected limited environmental impact of the pilot 15 or less sub-projects to be financed by the project, such
  as managed aquifer recharge (e.g., small water retention structures such as sand dams, river bank
  infiltration, and infiltration ponds), pollution control, well drilling and exploration practices, groundwater
  monitoring stations, operation and management of groundwater wells, and aquifer stations (PAD, 18). A
  simplified Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
  were prepared and disclosed on the Bank’s InfoShop and in the member countries. The project benefited
  from the safeguards experience gained during the implementation of pilot-schemes of the previous SADC
  Groundwater and Drought Management Project (PAD, p.18).

  During implementation, site-specific EMPs were prepared. An environmental consulting firm was hired for
  monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the EMPs in all SADC member states. The ICR (p.15)
  states the project remained fully compliant with this safeguard policy.

  Instead of a project-wide grievance mechanism, each sub-project had a separate grievance mechanism.
  The project recorded one grievance in Zimbabwe and another in Botswana. These grievances led to the
  adjustment of site-specific designs and were closed after the approval of the respective communities (ICR,
  p.15).

  Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this policy because of the possibility that pilot
  project activities might affect some persons. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) was prepared and
  disclosed on the Bank’s InfoShop and the SADC member states. During project implementation, the pilot
  projects did not affect any persons.

  Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50): The project triggered this policy because of “the
  planned investments relating to diagnostics of select transboundary aquifers within the SADC region” (PAD,
  p.18). Some pilot projects were also expected to take place over transboundary aquifers within SADC
  member states. The riparian notification process was deemed satisfied because all riparian SADC member
  states were project beneficiaries and involved in project preparation through the Project Steering
  Committee. Because of the GEF requirement, 13 member states had already submitted GEF Endorsement
  letters acknowledging awareness of the key design elements and components of the project (PAD, p.19).



  The ICR does not provide information about the implementation of the Physical Cultural Heritage (OP/BP
  4.11). In the email dated June 13, 2022, the project team commented that “None of the sub-projects under
  the Phase 1 project triggered OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Heritage due to the small scale of the interventions
  and due to the screening checklist not mentioning any likely known cultural heritage significance in the sub-
  project footprints."




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   Project’s quarterly interim financial reports and annual financial statements submitted to the Bank by
   University of Free State were acceptable. These reports were acceptable to the World Bank. Audit reports
   were unqualified. The UFS was assessed to have the financial management capacity with an overall risk
   rating of low. Flow-of-funds arrangements were adequate. Funds were channeled through UFS, and
   payments were made from the designated account directly to the providers of goods, works, and services.
   No issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project are reported in the ICR. All project
   funds were accounted for at the time of project evaluation. Project’s financial management performance
   was rated Satisfactory through to project closing.

   Procurement

   Procurement was delayed because of the delays in hiring staff within the GMI. A procurement specialist
   could only be appointed in December 2017, after which the Sub-Grant Manual was prepared, and
   procurement improved. Overall, procurement was conducted according to the relevant World Bank
   procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               IEG concurs with the ICR’s
                                                                               modest rating for Efficiency. IEG
                                                                               assesses the Efficacy as
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               substantial with moderate
                                                                               shortcomings for insufficient
                                                                               evidence at the outcome level.
                                                                               There were moderate
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings both in Quality at
                                                                               Entry and Supervision.
                                                                               Weaknesses in M&E design that
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                               were not addressed.



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



 Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

Two lessons are taken from the ICR with modification of language.

Dependence of transboundary organizations on their own financial basis can adversely affect
the sustainability of their institutional capacity and operations because of lack of sufficient
funds. According to the agreement establishing GMI, member states will not finance the institution.
GMI has to build its own long-term financial basis to finance its operations and maintain institutional
capacity. During project implementation, the institute successfully generated income from project
management fees and training events and conferences, but it relied on grants to cover more than 80
percent of its costs. Since sourcing grants is not a feasible option for long-term financing, the
institute’s operations and institutional capacity can be adversely affected if mechanisms for a strong
and financially sustainable institution are not fully developed and operationalized.

Complex institutional set-up and administrative processes to establish a new entity that has
a central role in project implementation can result in significant delays. The GMI was to be
established as a not-for profit company according to South Africa laws and act as project
implementation entity, as well, which was a complex set up. The involvement of 16 SADC member
states, which was not avoidable, and the placement of the GMI within the University of Free State
further complicated the establishment of the institute. Such complications resulted in a delay of 24
months in early stages of project implementation. This led to a project restructuring and extension of
project closing date.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. The ICR, including its annexes (especially Annex 1.
Results Framework and Key Outputs), does not present a sufficient evidence base to support the achievements
of outcomes. While the report tries to focus on what occurred as a result of the project, and the Theory of
Change is adequately presented in the ICR, all the indicators and plausible outcomes are not reported. There is
a logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report, but it is not sufficiently outcome oriented. The
report follows majority of the guidelines. However, the Outcome is erroneously rated as Satisfactory rather than
Moderately Satisfactory because the ratings for Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy, and Efficiency were High,
Substantial, and Modest, respectively, and a Modest rating for Efficiency results in a Moderately Satisfactory
rating for Outcome. The ICR does not provide information about the implementation of the Physical Cultural
Heritage (OP/BP 4.11). The ICR did not attempt a cost-benefit analysis of selected sub-projects or technical
assistance activities that could have clear measurable benefits. The sections on Quality of Supervision,
Procurement, and M&E could have benefited from a more detailed discussion in line with the guidelines. The


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SADC Sustainable Groundwater Mangmt (P127086)



lessons are sufficiently based on evidence and specific experiences of the project, but they are mostly in the
form of findings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
