     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022837

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P168630                                     Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89150                                  30-Jun-2020                                      1,000,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Dec-2018                                 30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         1,000,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          1,000,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      1,000,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Christopher David             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD
 Krishnamani                 Nelson



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation as stated
in the Program Document (PD, page 4) is:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



" Enabling financial inclusion, private sector development and strengthening fiscal management for
inclusive growth in Egypt ".

For the purpose of this evaluation, the individual objectives are identified as follows:

PDO 1. Enabling financial inclusion for inclusive growth.

PDO 2. Enabling private sector development for inclusive growth.

PDO 3. Strengthening fiscal management for inclusive growth.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDOs were to be achieved under three pillars/policy areas (PD, page 4):

Pillar 1. Financial Inclusion and Access to Finance.

Pillar 2. Private Sector Development.

Pillar 3. Strengthening Fiscal Management.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. This operation was financed by an IBRD loan of US$1.0 billion. The operation design was changed
during preparation from a US$1.0 billion one tranche operation to two-tranche operation of US$500.0 million
each for stronger monitoring of the reform process. The first tranche was fully disbursed on completion
and verification of prior actions. The second tranche was fully disbursed on completion and verification of specific
policy-related second tranche release conditions (STRCs).

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on December 4, 2018. It became effective on February 18, 2019 and
closed as scheduled on June 30, 2020.

Other changes. The following changes were made during implementation.

      During the release of STRC on May 2019, the Bank requested a waiver of two of the four STRCs after
       consulting with the Government. STRC 3 (adoption of the Executive Regulations Law) was replaced due
       to a change in market structure caused by the merger of the two largest ride-sharing companies in Egypt
       (Uber and Careem). This merger had an unexpected impact on the ride-sharing market in the whole
       region. The main concern was reducing competition, and the merger was subject to regulatory approval in
       Egypt. As this would have delayed this operation, STRC 3 was replaced by the enactment of legislation
       on regulating the use of noncash payments and promoting a digital economy.
      STRC 4 was amended as part of the waiver. During implementation, the Government made changes to
       the institutional arrangements to strengthen Egypt's public debt management. Given this changes, the
       language of STRC was changed to reflect the new institutional set-up.
      A change in the structure of the Egyptian Cabinet took place in 2019 and as a result the main
       implementing entity and coordinating ministry - the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



      was transformed into the Ministry of International Cooperation. The General Authority for Investment and
      Free Zones (GAFI) continued to operate as a separate entity. This change was important for the
      operation as the Ministry of Investment and GAFI was responsible for the implementation of: (a)
      improving the country's overall investment climate; (b) the reforms related to starting a business; and (c)
      setting up of investor service centers across governates (discussed in section three).
     In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government enacted measures to mitigate the
      socioeconomic impact of the crisis. The ICR (paragraph 14) notes that the pandemic had limited impact
      on implementation of reforms.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context. Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in Egypt grew at 5.3% in 2018 as compared to 4.7% in
 2017, following the the reforms implemented over the past three years to enhance macroeconomic stability.
 The reforms, included introducing Value-Added Taxes (VAT), phasing energy subsidies, containing civil
 servant's wage bill and exchange rate reforms for fiscal consolidation and enacting new investment and
 industrial licensing laws for private sector development.

 Despite these reforms, about a third (30%) of Egypt's population were classified as poor and there
 were spatial variations. Across the 27 governates of Egypt, poverty rates ranged from 7% in Port Said, 18% in
 Cairo, and as high as 66% in the Upper Egypt governates. Unemployment among the youth and females
 was high, with youth and female unemployment around 30% and 22% respectively, as compared to the overall
 unemployment rate of 10%. Private sector investment as a share of GDP was only 11.4% the 2010-2016
 period, about 7% lower than in other emerging economies. While the private sector accounted for 78% of
 jobs, 76% of these jobs were informal jobs with low pay.

 Government strategy. The PDO's were well-aligned with the Government program "Egypt Takes
 Off" endorsed by the Parliament in 2018. The program articulated the need for building a competitive and
 diversified knowledge-based economy and promoting financial inclusion. Two of the five key themes of
 this program were directly relevant to this operation; (i) Economic development and improving government
 performance; and (ii) Job creation. The PDOs were relevant to the Government's new National Structural
 Reform Program (NSRP) launched in April 2021, on . This program focused on sustainable inclusive growth.
 Specifically the key areas of the program included enhancing business environment, financial inclusion,
 access to finance, job creation and development of the private sector across all areas of focus (agriculture,
 communication and Information Technology (IT) and the manufacturing sector.

 Bank strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank Strategy. The PDOs were relevant to the thee pillars
 of the Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) " Unlocking Egypt's Potential for Poverty Reduction and
 Inclusive Growth" that was updated in 2022 namely, private sector-led job creation, spatial integration and
 inclusive growth. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
 2015-2019, extended to 2021. This CPF identified the need for improving opportunities for private sector job
 creation as a key priority area in Focus Area Two and outlined "enhanced access to finance" as a key
 objective (Objective 2.5). The cross- cutting objective of the CPF highlighted the need for addressing the
 gender gap.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Previous Bank experience. The Bank has a long history of engagement with Egypt including through the: (i)
The Upper Egypt Local Development Program-for-Results (PforR); (ii) The Catalyzing Entrepreneurship for
Job creation Investment Project Financing (IPF); and (iii) supporting the first wave of reforms enacted in
Egypt before appraisal of this operation through the First, Second and Third Bank-financed Sustainable
Energy and Competitiveness DPF series. The current DPF build on the previous DPF series and aimed to
move the reform agenda forward. This operation added reforms in similar pillars from the previous operation
(fiscal consolidation and private sector development) and introduced new reforms aimed at financial inclusion
and improving access to firms for small and medium size enterprises (SMEs).

The Bank team at appraisal determined that the macroeconomic situation at appraisal was robust enough for
supporting a DPF operation. When this operation was implemented, Egypt had a Extended Fund Facility (EFF)
of US$12.0 billion with the IMF approved in November 2019. The prior actions of this operation were based on
sound analytical underpinnings (discussed below).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1. Financial Inclusion and Access to Finance. Reforms in this pillar addressed the constraints faced by
SMEs in accessing finance from the financial sector.

The Bank's Enterprise Survey (2016) identified access to finance as one of the top three investment climate
constraints in Egypt. At appraisal, only 7% of the Egyptian firms had access to finance from the financial
system, as compared to an average of 28% for countries in the Middle East and North Africa region. There
were three prior actions (PAs) and one second tranche release condition (STRC) for this pillar.

PA 1. Improving access to finance for subsistence entrepreneurs. As a prior action, the Financial
Regulatory Authority (FRA) - the authorized entity for supervising non-bank financial institutions - issued
decisions allowing mobile payments for microfinance activities and electronic payments for microfinance
institutions.

SMEs, especially women-led enterprises, faced challenges in accessing credit from the financial system due to
the limited range of financial products. According the Bank's Financial Inclusion Index (FINDEX) 2017 survey,
27% of women of age fifteen and above had an account with a financial institution, as compared to 39% for
men. Penetration of microfinance institutions was low in the frontier governates (Red Sea, Sinai and New
valley), with active borrowers less than three percent of the total microfinance customers in these areas. This
prior action was based on sound analytical underpinnings such as the Bank's Financial Stability Report (2017)
and the IBRD Technical Assistance on "Inclusive Regulations for Microfinance" (P149677).

Increasing the geographical coverage of microfinance institutions to cover women-led enterprises and lagging
regions could be expected to increase the financial inclusion of these groups. Therefore, the relevance of this
prior action is satisfactory.

PA 2. Electronic collateral registry for security interests in moveable property operationalization. As a
prior action, the Financial Regulatory Authority (FRA) - the designated entity responsible for regulating non-



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



bank financial markets - operationalized the electronic collateral registry for security interests in moveable
property.

Banks in Egypt, for the most part, continued to lend based on immoveable collateral (such as property).
This narrowed the base for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), which were more likely to
own moveable collateral (such as, inventories and receivables). The type and value of collateral needed to
secure loans compared to the total loan size hampered the SMEs ability to access credit from the financial
system. This prior action aimed to create a moveable collateral registry that would enable the financial
institutions to lend against moveable collateral. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action based on the
International Finance Corporation's technical assistance (TA) (Egyptian Secured Transactions and Collateral
Registry P601560). This prior action addressed an important constraint facing SMEs. Therefore, this prior
action is satisfactory.

PA 3. Encourage fairer and more efficient capital markets for broadening the investor base. As a prior
action, the President amended the Capital markets law in 2018 to broaden access to finance to SMEs
through efficient capital markets.

After 25 years of the enactment of the Capital markets law in 1992, securities firms faced multiple restrictions
on selling investment fund products to investors. The role of Institutional investor's (such as, asset managers,
insurance companies and pension funds) was limited to 35% of the trading activities. The bank's securities
portfolio mainly consisted of government securities. Money laundering was emerging as a global concern,
and the capital markets needed to adhere to stricter disclosure and Anti-Money Laundering
(AML) requirements. The existing law needed amendments to reflect the new instruments introduced at the
global level (such as Islamic finance/sukuks, contracts and derivates).

This prior action sought to ensure that the capital markets provided an array of investment and risk
management products. Better functioning capital markets were likely to help in channeling Egyptian savings into
private firms, thereby enabling private-sector led growth. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were
based on the work conducted by the IMF, the Bank's Financial Sector Assessment Report of 2017, and the
Bank's analytical work of 2007 (Does the Egyptian financial sector contribute to growth and shared
prosperity?). This prior action addressed an important constraint of limited financial products to private sector
enterprises in Egypt from the financial sector. The relevance of this prior action is satisfactory.

STRC 1. Use of noncash payment to promote the digital economy and improve financial inclusion. This
STRC required the Government to enact the Non Cash Payment Law, requiring the Government, public
institutions and private companies to use digital solutions when channeling payments above certain thresholds.

In the absence of modern payment systems, Egypt remained a cash-based economy (with 98% of the
payments in cash). This law specified the payments that could be made electronically: (i) taxes, custom duties,
fines and fees to utility companies and other public entities; (ii) dues to suppliers, contractors and private
service providers; (iii) dividend distribution; and (iv) proceeds of land and real estate transactions. The law also
required the e-services to be priced the same as cash transactions. The analytical underpinnings of this SRTC
came from the Bank's Financial Inclusion Global Initiative (IBRD P176443). This condition represented a critical
step for addressing informality and enhancing digitization of the economy and was directly aligned with the
operation's objective of financial inclusion. Therefore, this pillar is satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Pillar No 2. Private sector development. Reforms in this pillar aimed to support development of new and
unconnected firms and encourage the informal firms to formalize. There were five prior actions and two STRCs
for this pillar.

PA 4. Strengthening corporate governance and minority shareholder protection. As a prior action, the
Government issued a Ministerial Decree on February 8, 2018, amending the Executive Regulations of
Companies to strengthen corporate governance and protect minority shareholders.

Egypt ranked low on the "Starting a Business" and "Protecting Minority Investors' topics in the Bank's 2018
Doing Business Report. Although the Companies Law had been amended several times since its introduction in
1981, many of its provisions needed to be modernized for improving governance and protecting minority
shareholders. The analytical underpinnings of this operation were sound and based on the Bank's 2018
Investment Climate Assessment. Improving corporate governance and providing stronger protection of minority
interests was expected to encourage the activities of private equity and venture capital firms and facilitate
access to finance for new MSMEs. This pillar was appropriate. Therefore, this prior action is satisfactory.

Improving the business environment.

STRC 2. The Government issued a ministerial decree aimed to reduce the number of steps required for
establishing a company.

Despite the overall improvement of Egypt's ranking in the Bank's Doing Business Report of 2019, Egypt's
specific rating on Starting a Business slightly declined from 103 in 2018 to 109 in 2019. It took on average
eleven days to complete the six procedures required for establishing a company in Egypt (as compared to nine
days on average for completing 4.9 procedures in the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) countries).

This STRC was a continuation of the "Enhancing the Business Environment" pillar of the previous DPF series.
While the previous operation focused on simplifying the industrial licensing process, this operation aimed
to reduce the number of steps and the average number of days for starting a business. The analytical
underpinnings of this STRC were based on the Bank's Doing Business report. Reducing the number of days for
starting a business would likely facilitate entry of private MSMEs. Therefore, this prior action is satisfactory.

STRC 3. The Government issued a Ministerial Decree establishing investor facilitation services in two
governates in Upper Egypt.

Following the enactment of the Investment Law in 2017, the General Authority for Investment and Free Zones
(GAFI) established five Investment Service Centers (ISCs) for facilitating entry of new firms in the main urban
centers of Cairo, Alexandria, Ismailia, Asyut and Tenth of Ramadan city. However, frontier governates (with the
exception of Asyut) remained poorly served. Firms in these governates often had to travel distances and spend
additional time, money and efforts to conduct basic services related to their businesses.

This STRC was a continuation of the "Enhancing the Business Environment" pillar of the previous DPF, which
sought to strengthen the offering of ISCs and monitoring the average number of firm registered at GAFI. This
STRC focused on expanding ISCs in two underserved lagging regions of Egypt. The analytical base of this
STRC was sound and based on the Bank's Equal Access and Simplified Environment for Investment
project (P153487). This prior action sought to expand the reach of ISCs and was appropriate for for enhancing
private sector participation in lagging regions. Therefore, the relevance of this STRC is satisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



PA 5. Strengthening the entrepreneurship ecosystem. As a prior action, the Government issued a
Ministerial Decree on October 18, 2018, for developing the " Fekretak, Sherketak " (Your Company, Your Idea)
initiative, a program for promoting private sector entrepreneurship.

Start-ups and SMEs faced challenges relating to funding and business development support services. The
legislative framework was not conducive for venture capital and private equity fund operations. According to
2017 Global Entrepreneurship Monitoring Report, the capacity to produce and retain start-ups in Egypt was
limited, mainly due to the weakness of the system to support business needs.

The Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation (MIIC) launched the Fekretak Sherketak initiative in
September 2017 to encourage start-ups and promote entrepreneurial atmosphere in Egypt. This initiative was
developed by private sector professionals and fund managers to provide seed financing and business support
services to entrepreneurs. This prior action formally endorsed this initiative. This prior action addressed an
important impediment facing potential start-ups and entrepreneurs. Therefore, this prior action is satisfactory.

PA 6. Promoting and facilitating SMEs' participation in public procurement. As a prior action, the
Government enacted a new public procurement law for facilitating SMEs' participation in public procurement.

The Public Procurement Law that was used when this operation was prepared, suffered from deficiencies in
critical areas. One of the deficiency of the law was that it excluded SMEs, which performed a large proportion of
public procurement. As a result, the legal framework remained fragmented and only partially covered public
procurement. This prior action aimed to correct this deficiency and mandated e-procurement and allocation of
20% of the public procurement budget for SMEs. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based
on the Bank's completed TA for developing a new public procurement law and the Bank's ongoing TA in public
procurement. This prior action was appropriate and would help in creating a level playing field for new
entrants. Therefore, this prior action is satisfactory.

PA 7. Streaming and simplifying the property registration process. As a prior action, the Government
submitted for adoption a new draft to the parliament and the President enacted a new law to govern and
simplify the property registration process in the new urban communities.

Egypt has parallel property registration systems: The title registration system in rural and agricultural areas and
the deed registration system in urban areas. Both the systems were outdated and ineffective. The registration
systems resulted in long delays in registering property and lack of trust by individuals and businesses. The poor
and the vulnerable were especially impacted by the uncertain property rights.

Reforms in this area aimed to simplify and provide a more transparent and reliable registration systems. The
Bank's TA to Egypt's Ministry of Justice provided the analytical base for reforms in this area. The prior action
was weak because there was a significant risk that the Parliament may not adopt the law. Therefore, the
relevance is moderately satisfactory.

Pillar No 3. Strengthened fiscal management. The overarching objective of this pillar was to support fiscal
consolidation. There were three pillars and one STRC in this area. Specifically the reforms aimed at ensuring
that there was no crowding out of private investment due to government borrowing from the financial system.

PA 8. Simplifying tax payments. The Government issued a ministerial decree on May 22, 2018, mandating
electronic filing of tax returns for entities with legal personalities.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



At appraisal, taxpayers in Egypt for the most part filed their annual tax returns manually, which were filled in
paper forms and submitted in person to the Egyptian Tax Authority (ETA). Electronic filing of taxes would
benefit both the taxpayers and the tax administration. As the tax returns can be filed electronically, taxpayers
can file taxes anywhere regardless of the ETA's working hours. Filing taxes electronically would save the costs
of data entry and physical space to the tax administration. The analytical underpinnings of the prior action came
from the Bank's Public Resource Management for Fiscal Consolidation (P163373), the Bank's Programmatic
Governance TA (P162146) and the Bank's 2015 "Public Financial Management Strategy Report"

Given that this was an important step towards modernizing the tax administration and in line with the
Government's objectives of promoting a digital economy, the relevance of this prior action is satisfactory.

PA 9. Reduction of energy subsidies. As a prior action, the Government issued a ministerial decree on June
4, 2018, on annual electricity adjustment and the Prime Minister issued decree on June 13, 2018 on fuel price
adjustment for reducing energy subsidies and thereby creating fiscal space for human capital investment.

This prior action was a continuation of the gradual phasing of electricity tariffs in Egypt. The government's
commitment to phasing out electricity subsidies was demonstrated by the fact that this tariff adjustment in 2018
was the fifth annual tariff adjustment for electricity and petroleum products in Egypt. The analytical
underpinnings of this prior action were based on Egypt's the Energy Strategy for 2035, the Bank's
Programmatic Support to energy sector (P156023) and the Bank's TA on capacity building ad strategic
communication on reforms. This prior action aimed at fiscal consolidation was a continuation of phasing energy
subsidies. This prior action is satisfactory.

STRC 4. Medium Term Debt Management (MTDM) strategy. The Government issued a ministerial decree for
adopting and publishing a MTDS for Fiscal Year (FY) 2018/2019 to FY2020-2021.

The latest strategy covering FY 2015/2016 to FY 2017 -2018 was published in 2015. The objective of this
strategy was only partially realized as the macroeconomic environment proved challenging, due to a sharp
increase in interest rate and large exchange rate depreciation. Unlike the previous strategy, the expanded
strategy for 2018/2019 to 2020/2021 was to provide specific targets for interest rate, exchange rate and
refinancing risks, provide guidance for domestic and external borrowings, include debt data of significant state-
owned enterprises (SOEs), and the MTDS was to be publicly-disclosed on a regular basis.

The analytical basis of this STRC was based on the Bank's ongoing TA to Egypt's Ministry of Finance, and this
reform was also supported by IMF. This STRC aimed at fiscal consolidation and was appropriate. The
relevance of this prior action is satisfactory.

PA 10. Formula-based allocation system for governates and districts. As a prior action, the Government
issued a joint ministerial decree on October 2021, 2018, specifying the process for adopting and applying a
formula-based capital allocation system for governates and districts.

Although Egypt's 2014 constitution envisioned gradual administrative, financial and economic decentralization,
sub-national local entities had limited powers and currently played a limited role in providing services. This
limited role resulted from the substantial legal, fiscal, administrative and capacity constraints. These constraints
included thee limited mandates of the sub-national entities for planning, executing and managing capital
expenditure and infrastructure investments.

This prior action aimed to gradually move towards the constitutional requirements of decentralization in a
phased manner. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on the Bank's 2012 Public

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



 Expenditure Review for Egypt and a World Bank working paper "Strengthening Fiscal Centralization and
 Intergovernmental Fiscal Systems in Egypt. Current Practices, International Experience and Options" (2012).
 This prior action was weak as the plans prepared by the sub-national entities might not be adopted by the
 national government. This prior action is moderately satisfactory.

 The PDOs were relevant to the Government and Bank Strategy at the time of preparation and remained so
 beyond the operation's closing date. The prior actions of this operation were based on sound analytical
 underpinnings and complemented one another. Enhancing access to finance from the financial sector can be
 expected to enhance private sector participation in the economy. Likewise, improving fiscal management can
 increase market confidence and perceptions of fiscal sustainability, and this can aid in reducing crowding out of
 private sector investments.

 The prior actions, were for the most part, appropriate along the results chain for realizing the intended
 objectives. Of the nine prior actions, seven were satisfactory and two were moderately satisfactory. The four
 STRC were satisfactory. Assuming equal value to each prior action and STRCs, the relevance of design is
 rated as satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar 1. Financial Inclusion and Access to Finance. There were four results indicators (RIs).

RI 1. This indicator measured the number of microfinance beneficiaries using mobile payments (including
the number of women-led enterprises and enterprises in lagging regions outside Cairo and Alexandria).
This indicator was measurable. The number of beneficiaries was a direct measure of the pillar's
achievement and fundamental to progress in extending financial access to a broader section of the
population. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI 2. This indicator measured the number of published collateral registrations used by MSMEs. This
indicator could be verified and directly signals the legal strengthening for addressing a constraint faced by
these sectors. Importantly, the indicator also aligned with the intention to shift banks and financial
intermediaries towards broadening the expectations around collateral. Therefore, this indicator
is satisfactory.

RI 3. This indicator measured the number of new coded investors. This indicator could be verified. Given
that new financial products are required for the financial inclusion of MSMEs, this indicator directly
measures the project's achievement. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



RI 4. This indicator measured the number of digital transactions when the operation closed in June 2020.
This indicator could be verified and directly measures the project's achievement regarding promotion of a
digital economy. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

Pillar 2. Improving the business environment.

RI 5.This indicator measured the value of the extent of shareholder index in the Bank's Doing Business
Report when the operation closed in June 2020. This indicator was verifiable and measures the project's
achievement on enhancing private sector development. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI 6. This indicator measured the number of days needed for starting a business in 2020. This indicator
could be verified and appropriate for facilitating SMEs. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI 7. This indicator measured the average number of firm registrations per month at the new Investment
Service Centers (ISC) in two lagging regions in Upper Egypt. This indicator could be verified and was
appropriate for the intended outcome of private sector development in lagging regions. Therefore, this
indicator is satisfactory.

RI 8. The Fekretak Sherketak initiative was to support 1.000 start-ups by 2000, and the outcome indicator
measured the non-government financing as percentage of total financing under this initiative when the
operation closed. This indicator could be verified and directly measures the project's achievement.
Therefore this indicator is satisfactory.

RI 9. This indicator measured the number of SMEs participating in public contracts following the adoption
of the new procurement law. This indicator could be verified. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is
satisfactory.

RI # 10. This indicator measured the percentage of property registration offices in the "new urban
communities" implementing the more transparent procedures for deed registration. This indicator was
verifiable and was a direct outcome of the reforms. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

Pillar 3. Strengthened fiscal management.

RI # 11. This indicator measured the number of companies filing annual tax returns electronically. This
indicator was verifiable and was a direct outcome of the reforms. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 12. This indicator measured the reduction in energy subsidies as a percentage of GDP. This indicator
could be measured and could be directly traced to the reforms. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 13. This indicator required the Government to publish an updated and expanded MTDM strategy for
2018/2019 to 2020/2021. This indicator was appropriate. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 14. This indicator measured the number of governates and districts preparing their FY 2020/2021
capital investment plans in accordance with the formula-based systems. This indicator could be
measured. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs) and the Second Tranche Release
Conditions (SRTC) they support. baseline, target values, actual change in RI relative to target and
RI achievement rating.

                                                                                Actual
                                       Baseline       Target                  change in
                                                                Actual value                   RI
                 Associated     RI    (including   (including                 RI relative
     RI 1                                                        as of target             achievement
                    PAs     relevance units and     units and                      to
                                                                     date                    rating
                                        dates).      dates).                   targeted
                                                                                change
                      PDO 1. Enabling financial inclusion for inclusive growth
                                                                    Actual
                                                  Target (June
                                                                 (December
                                                      2020):
                                                                    2020):
  RI # 1. The                                       600,000.
                                                                648,936. (out
  number of                                       (out of which
                                                                   of which
 Microfinance                          Baseline      40% are                     Target
                   PA 1.      S.                                   59% are                     S
 beneficiaries                        (2018): 0. women, and                   exceeded.
                                                                 women, and
 using mobile                                     20% outside
                                                                51% outside
  payments.                                          Greater
                                                                Greater Cairo
                                                    Cairo and
                                                                      and
                                                   Alexandria
                                                                  Alexandria
  Number of
   published                                            Target (June     Actual
   collateral                             Baseline       2020): 20,0 (December      Target
                   PA 2.         S.                                                                S
  registration                            (2018): 0           00       2020): 41, exceeded.
    used by                                             registrations.    633.
   MSMEs.
                                                    Target (June Actual (June
Number of new                             Baseline
                                                    2020): 9,000 2020): 12,000 Target
    coded          PA 3.       S.          (2018):                                                 S
                                                     new coded new coded exceeded.
  investors.                                9,300.
                                                      investors.    investors.
                                                    Target (June
                                                                      Actual
                                        Baseline     2020): 170                  4.7 times
   Number of                                                       (December
                                      (2018): 58.9      million                  increase
     digital      STRC 1.      S.                                 2020): 274.7                     S
                                         million    transactions                relative to
 transactions.                                                        million
                                     transactions. (2.9 times                   the target.
                                                                 transactions.
                                                      increase).
                  PDO 2. Enabling private sector development for inclusive growth.
Strengthening                           Baseline Target (June
                                                                  Actual (June
  corporate                             2018: 6.3 2020): 7 out
                                                                  2020): 7 out
 governance                            out of 10 in     of 10 in                  Target
                   PA 4.       S.                                of 10 in Doing                    S
 and minority                            Doing           Doing                   realized.
                                                                    Business
shareholders                            Business       Business
                                                                      Report.
  protection.                            Report.        Report.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



                                          Baseline
                                                                       Actual (June
                                           (2018):
                                                                          2020):
  Number of                                             Target (June
days needed to                            11 days in       2020):                   Target not
               STRC 2.           S.                                     12-13 days               Negligible.
    start a                                 Doing                                    realized.
                                                                       using Doing
  business.                               Business        3 days.
                                                                         Business
                                          Report in
                                                                       Methodology.
                                            2019.
      Average
     number of
  registrations                        Baseline
  per month at                        (2018): 0. Target (June Actual (June Target
                  STRC 3.      S.                                                                     S
       the new                                     2020): 20.    2020): 27. exceeded.
       Investor
        Service
      Centers.
         Non-
  Government
 financing as a                                   Target (June
                                                               Actual (June
 percentage of                         Baseline     2020): 50                 Target
                   PA 5.       S.                               2020): 81%                            S
 total financing                      (2018): 0.     percent                exceeded.
                                                                 increase.
under Fekretak                                      increase.
     Sherketak
      Initiative.
   Percentage
                                                     Target.   Actual (June
increase in the                        Baseline
                                                  (June 2020):     2020):
     number of                          (2018):                             62.5 of the
                   PA 6.       S.                                                                 Modest.
         SMEs                                                                 target.
                                                       20%          12.5
participating in                     No increase.
                                                    increase.    increase.
public tenders.
 Percentage of
       property
    registration                                  Target (June Actual (June
                                       Baseline
  offices in the                                      2020):       2020):     Target
                   PA 7.      MS.     (2018): 0                                                       S
    “new urban                                                               realized.
                                       percent.
  communities                                          10%.         20%.
       for deed
   registration.
                   PDO 3. Strengthening fiscal management for inclusive growth.
                                                                   Actual
     Number of
                                       Baseline Target (June
    companies
                                                      2020):   (June 2020): Target
   filing annual   PA 8.       S.                                                                     S
                                      (2018): 0      30,000                 exceeded.
    income tax
                                     companies. companies.        196,859
 electronically.
                                                                companies.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



                                                                         Target
                Reduction in                             Baseline                        Actual
                  energy                                  (2018):
                                                                       (June 2020):                    Target
               subsidies as a     PA 9.         S.                                    (June 2020):                   S
                                                                                                     exceeded.
               percentage of                              3.8% of
                                                                         2.5% of
                   GDP.                                    GDP.                       1.9% of GDP.
                                                                          GDP.
                                                                                         Actual

                                                                                 (June 2020):
                                                                                     The
                                                                                 Government
                    The
                                                         Baseline     Target     published an
                Government
                                                                   (June 2020): expanded
                publishes an
                                                       (June 2018): publication medium term Target
                updated and      STRC 4.        S.                                                                   S
                                                                       of an     debt strategy realized.
                 expanded
                                                        No updated updated        which was
               Medium Term
                                                         strategy.   strategy. adopted and
               Debt Strategy.
                                                                                 published on
                                                                                the Ministry of
                                                                                   Finance
                                                                                  website on
                                                                                 May 7, 2019.
                                                                      Target

                                                                       (June 2020):
               The number of                                                             Actual
                                                                       All 27
                 governates
                                                                    governates
               preparing their                                                        (June 2020):
                                                          Baseline   and 188
               FY 2020/2021
                                                                       district
                    capital                                                           The formula-
                                                         (2018): no  prepared                       Target
                 investment      PA 12.        MS.                                    based system                   S
                                                          formula-      their                      realized.
                   plans in                                                            was applied
                                                           based    2020/2021
                 accordance                                                             by the 27
                                                          system. investments
                   with the                                                            governates
                                                                          in
               formula-based                                                            and 188
                                                                    accordance
                   system.                                                              districts.
                                                                      with the
                                                                     formula-
                                                                       based
                                                                      system.

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Enabling financial inclusion for inclusive growth. PA 1 -3: STRC 1: RIs 1- 4

Rationale
Theory of change. Reforms aimed at enabling mobile payments and electronic payments by microfinance
operations (including for women-led enterprises and enterprises in lagging regions), electronic collateral
registry for moveable property, increasing the range of financial products and digitalization of the economy
were likely to expand financial inclusion. The intended outcomes were likely to contribute to inclusive growth.

Outcomes (ICR. pages 23 - 26).

648,936 microfinance beneficiaries were using mobile payments as of December 2020, exceeding the target
of 600,000. 59% of the beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 40%. 51% of the beneficiaries
were in the region outside Greater Cairo and Alexandria, exceeding the target of 20%. The increase in the
number of e-payment beneficiaries was due to the large number of licenses issued by the Financial
Regulatory Authority (FRA) to allow Non-Governmental Organization-Micro Finance Organizations to use e-
payment through prepaid cards or point-of-sale machines.

The Egypt Collateral Registry (ECR) was officially launched in March 2018, with I-Score (Egypt's Private
Credit Bureau) as registrar. The number of published collateral registrations used by micro, small and
medium size enterprises (MSMEs), corporate, individual debtors and syndicated loans increased to
41,633 registrations by December 31, 2020 from a 0 baseline. This exceeded the specified target of 20,000
registrations.

Following the amendment of the Capital Market Law in 2018, the number of new coded investors increased
from 9,300 at the baseline on December 31, 2018 to 29,888 new coded investors by December 2019.
According to the data received from the FRA, the number of newly coded investors was 29,888 in 2019,
28,368 in 2020 and 11,877 investors from January until March 2021.

The number of cashless transactions increased from 58.9 million transactions on December 31, 2015, to
274.7 million by December 31, 2020 (representing a 4.6 times increase). This exceeded the specified target
of 170 million transactions (representing a 2.9 times increase) by June 30, 2020. This outcome was realized
with a delay of six months. Transactions using e-money increased eightfold from 11 million in 2015 to 84
million in 2020. Total card transactions (excluding cash withdrawals) increased from 33 million in 2015 to 179
million by 2020, demonstrating a significant increase in the use of digital transactions throughout the
implementation of this operation.

Given that the targets were realized (although one with delays), efficacy of this objective is satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Enabling private sector development for inclusive growth. PA 4-7: STRC 2 and 3: RI 4-10.

Rationale
Theory of change. Reforms aimed at reducing the number of procedures and the days required for
establishing a company, improving title registrations, amending the law to strengthen corporate governance
and protect minority shareholders, providing Investment Service Centers (ISCs) in frontier governates and
providing financing and TA for entrepreneurs under the " Fekretak, Sherketak " initiative and facilitating
MSMEs participation in public procurement were likely to contribute to private sector development in the
economy and thereby aid in the PDO of inclusive growth in Egypt.

Outcomes. (ICR, pages 26 - 29).

The value of the extent of shareholder governance index using the Doing Business Methodology in December
2019 was 7 out of ten as targeted (as compared to 6.3 out of ten in Doing Business Report of 2018). The ICR
(paragraph 59) notes that the Government took further steps in strengthening the protection of minority
investors by requiring shareholder approval when listed companies issue new shares.

The number of days needed to start a business did not decrease to three days as targeted. The number of
days required to start a business actually increased to twelve days as compared to 11 days in December 31,
2018. This outcome was therefore assessed as negligible and is illustrative of the marginal progress made in
enabling the private sector.

27 firms were registered on average per month at the new Investor Service Centers (ISRs) in the lagging
regions in Upper Egypt governates. This exceeded the target of 20 firm registrations on average but remains
quite low in the context of stimulating firms to emerge in the sector.

Non-government financing as a percentage of total financing under the Fekretak Sherketak/Egypt Venture
initiative increased to 81%, exceeding the target of 50%. The target was achieved in December 2019, and
had been exceeded since then. In 2020, the initiative had 85,958 beneficiaries and 1,315 monitoring sessions
for potential entrepreneurs. The ICR notes that the TA side of the program is still being implemented by the
authorities.

There was a 12.5% increase in the number of SMEs that were awarded contracts under the new procurement
law. This was well short of the target of a 20% increase.

As of April 2021, 20% of the new urban communities had offices that were implementing the procedures in
the law regarding registrations by dispositions. This exceeded the target of 10%. However, the ICR notes that
the Title Registration Bill has not yet been adopted and is still under discussion by the Parliament.

Of the five indicators for this PDO, three were realized, one was rated as modest and one negligible.
Therefore, the overall rating is moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                Page 15 of 21
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)




                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Strengthening fiscal management for inclusive growth.
                      PA 8-10: STRC 4: RIs 11-14.

                      Rationale
                      Theory of change. Reforms aimed at electronic filing of tax returns, electricity price adjustments for reducing
                      energy subsidies, publishing and publicly disclosing an expanded updated medium term debt strategy and
                      formula-based capital allocation system for sub-national entities (governates) were likely to aid in fiscal
                      consolidation and reducing crowding out of the private sector from the financial sector due to government
                      borrowing.

                      Outcomes (ICR, pages 29 - 30).

                      The number of companies filing annual tax returns electronically increased to 196,859 by December 31,
                      2019, exceeding the target of 30,000 by June 30, 2020. According to the Egyptian Tax Authority, 55,996
                      companies filed taxes electronically as of April 2019. This significantly increased to 196,859 as of December
                      31,2020 (The ICR notes that this could be partly due the COVID-19 pandemic). 5,256,284 Value Added Tax
                      (VAT) declarations were filed online from November 2018 to November 2020, with an average of 210, 251
                      monthly VAT declarations. The ICR (paragraph 65) notes that the Ministry of Finance added a new provision
                      starting from January 1, 2022, where receipts for payments made in cash will no longer be acceptable when
                      applying for a VAT refund or deduction, making only electronic payments acceptable when applying for a VAT
                      refund or deduction.

                      Energy subsidies as a percentage of GDP reduced from 3.8% in 2017/2018 to 1.9% of GDP by June 2020.
                      This exceeded the target of 2.5% of GDP.

                      The Ministry of Finance published on its website an expanded and updated Medium Term Debt Strategy for
                      2018/2019 to 2020/2021 on May 7, 2019, as targeted. The strategy outlined key reform steps to prolong debt
                      maturity, diversify sources of funding and widening the investor base. The ICR notes that a Bank's TA
                      operation is ongoing to improve the efficiency of tax administration.

                      The 27 governates and 188 districts prepared FY 2020/2021 capital investment plans in accordance with the
                      formula based system, although with a delay by January 2021. This formula was applied to the governates
                      and districts with support from the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local
                      Development.

                      Given that the outcomes were realized, although one with delays, efficacy is satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                                       Page 16 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Rationale

Efficacy of the first objective is satisfactory based on the satisfactory ratings for increasing the geographical
coverage of microfinance institutions, increase in the number of public collateral registrations, increase in the
number of new coded investors and increase in the number of digital (non cash transactions).

Overall efficacy of the second objective is moderately satisfactory based on the satisfactory ratings of three
results indicators (value of shareholder index in Doing Business Report, increase in the number of firms
registered at the Investor Service Centers (ISCs) in lagging regions, non-government financing as percentage of
total financing under the Fekretak - Sherketak initiate), modest rating for the number of SMEs awarded contracts
under the new procurement law) and the negligible rating for the number of days needed to start a business.

Efficacy of the third objective is rated as satisfactory based on the satisfactory rating for the increase in the
number of companies filing tax returns electronically, the reduction in energy subsidies as a percentage of GDP,
the publication of an expanded Medium Term Debt Strategy and the number of governates and districts preparing
FY 2020/2021 capital investment plans in accordance with the formula based system.

Taking these ratings into account, overall efficacy is satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDOs were relevant to the Government and Bank strategy for Egypt. The prior actions which had strong
analytical underpinnings, were appropriate first steps along the results chain for realizing the intended
objectives. The results indicators were a direct measure of the pillar's achievement and could be verified. Of the
fourteen results indicators, twelve were realized (though some with delays), one was modest and one negligible.
Significantly, progress made in terms of enabling the private sector were modest and there is little evidence any
significant gains were made in this area. Thus, the overall outcome rating is moderately satisfactory as
achievement against the objective had moderate shortcomings.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/ownership. The risk to development outcome due to the lack of government
commitment is moderate. This was the second generation of reforms, which was intended to build on earlier
reforms. The Government's commitment was demonstrated by its continued commitment to phasing out

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



energy subsides. Further, the ICR (paragraph 96) notes that the prior actions of this operation continued to
be implemented beyond the closing date of the DPF, illustrating the Government commitment to reforms.

Macroeconomic risk. During the final months of this operation, Egypt's robust growth performance was
interrupted by the disruptive repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. Growth declined from 3.6% in
FY2019/2020 to 3.3% in FY2020/2021. However, exposed sectors that were contracting due to the
pandemic (tourism, manufacturing, extractive and the Suez Canal) started rebounding during April - June
2021. Given this, the macroeconomic risk is moderate.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank prepared this operation based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed DPF series
Lessons incorporated at design included; (i) focusing on implementation support suited to the country
context; (ii) ensuring monitoring of reforms at the highest levels of Government (the Prime Ministerial
level); (iii) focus on concrete actions to achieve tangible results for the beneficiary population (such as
actions like the rollout of collateral registry, mobile payments for microfinance companies and online tax
filing; (iv) TA both for implementing the recommended prior actions; and (v) and (v) focusing on
homegrown reforms based on the Government's long-term objectives to ensure Government Commitment
and ownership. As discussed in Section three, the prior actions were based on sound analytical
underpinnings.

The Bank prepared this operation in coordination with international donors and in close coordination with
the IMF, since this operation complemented the structural reforms supported by the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) in Egypt (such as supporting the Government's fiscal consolidation efforts through phasing out
energy subsidies, publishing Egypt's Medium-Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) and supporting private sector-
led growth).

Several risks were identified at appraisal, including country and social risks as Egypt was recovering from
a period of political and economic transition when this operation was prepared. The mitigation measures
incorporated at design proved to be adequate. The risks associated with the uncertainty in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic was unknowable when the operation was prepared.

There were modest shortcomings during preparation. The design of the DPF changed from a one tranche
operation to two tranche operations at a relatively late stage in preparation (discussed in Section 2). A two
tranche operation was expected to enable stronger monitoring of the reform process. This process
however had limitations, because having two STRCs approved by the Board significantly limited the
flexibility to take into account the evolving country and sector dynamics. In this operation, two of the four
STRCs had to be revised, triggering the need for a waiver and amendments.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR (paragraph 92) notes that two multi sectoral supervision missions were held (one at the end of 2019
and one at the end of 2020), for measuring the progress of reforms. The supervision team included highly
qualified staff in both the country office and at headquarters, and the supervision team included specialists in
financial sector development, financial management, procurement and social safeguards. The supervision team
ensured that TA was provided for implementation of the prior actions.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory because of the moderate shortcoming during
preparation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Two of the prior actions of this operation were primarily focused on the lagging and poor regions in Upper Egypt
(expanding the geographical reach of microfinance institutions and expanding Investment Support Centers in
these areas). The outcomes would be expected to contribute to reducing the incidence of poverty in these
regions, though no specific evidence of this is reported.



b. Environmental



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



The analysis conducted by the Bank to determine whether the specific reforms supported by the DPF are likely to
cause significant effects on Egypt's environment and natural resources concluded that the supported policies are
not likely to have negative impacts on Egypt's environment or its natural resources.



c. Gender

Expanding mobile payments for microfinance institutions would help in reducing the gender gap.



d. Other

There were no observed unintended impacts.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written. It provides a clear rationale for the chosen prior actions and second tranche release
conditions. The theory of change provided in the text clearly illustrates the causal links between the prior
actions, the results indicators and the intended outcomes. The ICR provides ample evidence for the ratings and
draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

One minor shortcoming with the ICR is its length. The main body of the text at 35 pages is more than twice the
recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR could have benefitted from better editing.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                      Satisfactory
Indicators


                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pvt Sector Dev for inclusive growth DPF (P168630)



Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.

1. A careful assessment of the government commitment can help in determining the success of a DPF
operation. In this operation, the reforms were aligned with the Government program. Strong ownership was
demonstrated through the commitment of the various participating government entities and involvement of high
level government officers including the Prime Minister.

2. Close cooperation with the IMF will be useful in a DPF operation. This is particularly so when some of the
prior actions of this operation (like phasing energy subsidies and private sector development) were also
supported by the IMF.

3. Technical Assistance activities both in the preparation and supervision phase can ensure
implementation of reforms. The prior actions in this operation had strong underpinning. This together with
technical assistance during implementation helped in ensuring that the reforms moved forward.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
