     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022945

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P159351                                 DR DPL with a Cat DDO

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Dominican Republic                      Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-87870                              28-Feb-2021                                        150,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Sep-2017                             28-Feb-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     150,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Fernando Manibog            Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The development objectives of this Development Policy Operation (DPO) as stated in the Program Document
(PD, page 1) is to support the Government of the Dominican Republic in:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



a. Strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors; and

b. Establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public investment and
construction works.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The development objectives were to be achieved through reforms under two policy areas/pillars. The two
pillars are worded exactly the same as the PDOs. There were three prior actions under each of the two
pillars.

Pillar A. Strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors.

Pillar B. Establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public
investment and construction works.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. An IBRD loan of US$150.00 million financed this DPO with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option (CDD - DDO). The loan was fully disbursed.

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on September 28, 2017, and it became effective on August 28, 2018.
The operation closed as scheduled on February 28, 2021.

Other changes. The main changes during implementation were as follows:

      In 2019, there was a change in the Ministry of Education, with the General Directorate for Rehabilitation
       (DIGRE) absorbed by the General Directorate of School Infrastructure Maintenance (DGMIE). This
       change created delays in the progress of the rehabilitation program in schools.
      In March 2020, the Government declared a state of emergency due to the COVID- 19 pandemic. The
       Government faced fiscal and physical constraints and was unable to mobilize the necessary resources
       needed for achieving the results for the indicators on rehabilitation of schools and the number of
       watershed basin studies.
      The Presidential Elections in July 2020 resulted in changes within the government. This affected the
       operation's progress and monitoring the related indicator in the water sector.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context. Due to its geographical location, the Dominican Republic (DR) is highly exposed to natural
 hazards such as earthquakes, hurricanes and tropical storms. According to the World Bank 2018 Country
 Disaster Risk Profile (CDRP) for DR, average annual losses from earthquakes and hurricane-related events
 amounted to US$642 million. The frequency and severity of such hazards was further expected to be


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



exacerbated by climate change factors. Given that shocks created by adverse natural events have regressive
distribution effects as the poor are more vulnerable to such shocks, mobilizing resources quickly in the event
of a natural catastrophe and strengthening the disaster risk management (DRM) and climate change
adaptation (CCA) systems were important to the Government strategy.

Government strategy. The National Development Strategy (END) approved in 2012, identified reducing
vulnerability to climate and disasters as priorities. The 2013 National Plan for Comprehensive Disaster Risk
Management operationalized selected aspects of the END for facilitating disaster preparedness and
implementing early warning systems. In 2015, the Government adopted the National Climate Change Policy
aimed at strengthening the National Planning System for promoting a "low-emission and climate-resilient"
system. More recently, the Dominican Republic's National Strategy for Development for 2030 (NSD) and the
National Multi-Sector Public Sector Plan for 2020-2024 (NPSP) called for recalibrating the economic growth
path towards one that is green, inclusive, innovative and resilient to climate shocks.

Bank strategy. The Bank financing for this operation intended to provide the DR with a fiscal buffer for: (i)
reducing the impact of future disasters; (ii) providing bridge financing for immediate response, since disasters
disproportionately impact the poor; and (iii) ensuring that budget resources are not diverted from other
development programs. At appraisal, the PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for 2015 - 2018, which had the strategic goals of eliminating poverty and promoting shared
prosperity. The CPS acknowledged that the high vulnerability to climate change was key for sharing
prosperity. This CPF was extended to 2019. The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
2022 - 2026 reiterated the need for strengthening the government's institutional and financial capacity to
manage the DR's exposure to natural shocks. The objective 3.3 of the CPF explicitly referenced the need for
improving DRM in DR.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has a long history of engagement with DR. This was the first Bank Cat
DDO in the Caribbean and the first Cat DDO to include health emergencies as a trigger. This operation was
designed based on the Bank's technical assistance work aimed at mainstreaming DRM and CCA in territorial
planning, public investment and public finances in DR between 2011 and 2015. The Bank team determined
that the macroeconomic situation was adequate at appraisal to support a DPF operation. The prior actions of
this operation were based on solid analytical underpinnings (discussed below).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar A. Strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority
sectors. Reforms in this area aimed to mainstream DRM and CCA policies in three priority sectors: fiscal
management, school infrastructure and water resource management. This pillar had three prior actions.

Prior Action 1. The Government established new institutional structures for quantifying and pricing contingent
liabilities associated with disaster and climate risks by: (i) establishing an interinstitutional body for assessing
and quantifying the economic and fiscal impacts of natural disasters; and (ii) mandated the Ministry of Finance's
(MH in Spanish) General Directorate for Fiscal Analysis and Policy to assess the impacts of disasters on fiscal
accounts as part of managing contingent liabilities and the MH's General Directorate of Public Credit to manage
the contracting of financial instruments for risk transfer.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



The DRM entities in the DR before appraisal, neither had the mandate nor the expertise to assess the fiscal and
economic impacts of disasters. The knowledge gap limited the ability to quantify the economic and fiscal
impacts of disasters. This prior action aimed to remedy this deficiency by mandating MH to respond to disasters
and climate impacts through developing a cost-effective strategy, and authorizing the General Directorate for
Fiscal Analysis and Policy to explicitly assess contingent liabilities as part of the MH's broader risk management
strategy.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were sound and based on: (1) The World Bank's 2017 study "
Open and Nimble: Funding Growth in Small Economies", which concluded that exposure to natural disasters
not only increases external volatility but also exposes small states to two common challenges: fiscal
mismanagement and low saving rates: and (2) " Improving the Assessment of Disaster Risk to Strengthen
Financial Resilience ", a joint G20 publication by the Government of Mexico and the World Bank, that
highlighted the need for quantifying contingent liabilities.

This prior action, which aimed at institutional strengthening that in turn would increase the fiscal capacity to
respond to natural disasters and climate change factors, was based on sound analytical underpinnings.
Therefore, the relevance of PA 1 is satisfactory.

Prior Action 2. This prior action sought to incorporate safety standards in school infrastructure through: (i)
creating a General Directorate for Risk Management in the Ministry of Education (MINERD); (ii) creating a
General Directorate within MINERD for rehabilitating and retrofitting the existing school infrastructure; and (iii)
centralizing the supervision of school infrastructure construction under the Ministry of Public Works (MOPC) for
enforcing safety standards in new schools.

The capacity to incorporate risk analysis in designing and constructing schools was limited in the DR at
appraisal. The decision-making process regarding locating schools in the past had been driven mainly by
availability of land. This had resulted in building schools in flood-prone areas, as evidenced during the heavy
flooding in the northern part of DR in 2016. The inadequate institutional framework hampered quality control of
existing schools and enforcing regulations in building new school infrastructure.

Reforms in this area aimed to create a new institutional framework for: (i) developing a risk informed
management system for rehabilitating and retrofitting existing schools; and (ii) incorporating mandatory safety
standards in new schools. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were sound and based on the: (1)
United Nations: Safe School Selected Reports; (2) An Independent Assessment on disaster risk reduction in
DR by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR); and (iii) a report by the Japan
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), which provided the first comprehensive risk assessment of school
infrastructure in the San Cristobal Province of the DR.

This prior action, which aimed at enhancing safety standards in existing schools and in the construction of new
schools, was appropriate and could be expected to contribute to the intended outcome. Therefore, this prior
action is satisfactory.

Prior Action 3. Reforms in this area aimed to enhance flood and drought reduction. As a prior action, the
Government established an interinstitutional structure to coordinate and facilitate the works of the institutions
responsible for Integrated Water Resources Management.

Floods and droughts are the most frequent and recurring disasters in DR. When this operation was prepared,
DR lacked a comprehensive framework encompassing the many of actors in water management. This prior
action sought to strengthen the institutional set-up of the water sector through creating the Water Resource

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



Coordination Board (WRCB) in the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Development (MEPyD) in 2016. This
prior action was appropriate, given that water resource management in the DR was viewed as a cross-sectoral
issue.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on: (1) World Bank (2013) study " Resilient Coastal
Cities: The Economic, Social and Environment Dimensions of Risk ". This study identified public investment in
flood protection as one of the most important adaptation tools in coastal cities. and (2) World Bank (2017) study
"Overview: Shaking up economic progress: Aggregate Shocks in Latin America and the Caribbean ". This
study noted that lack of information on relevant risk constrains the ability of private and public agents to price
risks.

The analytical underpinnings for this prior action were strong and given that establishing the Water Resource
Coordination Board would help in coordinating the work of the many water sector entities, this prior action is
satisfactory.

The prior actions, based on solid analytical underpinnings, were good steps for realizing the intended
objectivities. However, all the prior actions in this pillar, focused on upstream activities such as establishing new
institutions or assigning new tasks to them, that were carried out in 2016 or 2017. Given that the ICR is dated
February 2022, the ICR could have provided more evidence related to the operational effectiveness of those
institutions or the beneficial impact of their processes and products.

Pillar B. Establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public investment
and construction works. Reforms in this area aimed to create and enforce standards for assessing and
including disaster risks in the National Public Investment System (SNIP), health infrastructure and the building
sectors respectively.

Prior Action 4. As a prior action, the Government established mandatory technical standards for incorporating
disaster and climate risk analysis while designing Public Investment projects (PIPs).

Although the Government had enacted legislation establishing technical standards for PIPs in 2010 and 2013,
they were not mandatory and hence not effective in enforcing the critical resilience measures in PIPs. Unlike in
the past, the current technical guidelines were mandatory. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were
based on the " 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. From Shared Risk to Shared
Value: The Business Case for Disaster Risk Reduction ", a publication from the United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction. This report looked at how regulations shape disaster risk.

Mandatory technical standards for PIPs were an essential step for reducing the human and economic impact of
disasters over the long term. However, the effectiveness of this prior action could be undermined by lax
enforcement of the standards. Therefore, this prior action is moderately satisfactory.

Prior Action 5. The Government issued mandatory technical regulations for granting operating permits to
health facilities by: (i) requiring compliance with the Ministry of Public Health's (MSP) guidelines for designing
and constructing health facilities; and (ii) an assessment of the health facilities build before 2011 using the
Hospital Safety Index.

A large percentage of health facilities in DR are highly vulnerable and exposed to climate and disaster risks.
This prior action aimed to assess all major public health facilities in DR with the Hospital Safety Index (ISH)
proposed by the Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO). The ISH
provides a snapshot of the probability that a hospital or health facility will continue to function in the aftermath of

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



 an adverse natural event based on the assessment of structural, nonstructural and functional factors. The
 analytical base for this prior action was provided by the WHO's 2015 "Hospital Safety Index for Evaluators".

 The prior action of establishing mandatory technical standards in the health sector directly supported the
 mainstreaming of disaster risk assessment for health infrastructure. Therefore, the prior action is satisfactory.

 Prior Action 6. As a prior action, the Government sought to strengthen the technical regulations for inspecting
 and supervising of construction works, by requiring such works to comply with all applicable building
 regulations.

 The large majority of new construction works in DR were not systematically inspected and supervised, and
 enforcement of building codes was limited. This prior action aimed at strengthening the enforcement of building
 codes. The analytical underpinnings for this prior action came from the technical assistance (TA) from the
 Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and a World Bank TA operation in DR (DR Improving
 Competitiveness P155562). This prior action was based on sound analytical underpinnings and could be
 expected to contribute to the intended outcome. Therefore, the relevance is satisfactory.

 The selected prior actions were for the most part the relevant ones in achieving the objectives of the two pillars
 along the results chain to the achievement of the Program's overarching objectives. Assigning equal value to
 each prior action, the simple average of the two Pillars is five. Therefore, the relevance of design is rated as
 satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar A. Strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors.
There were four results indicators for this pillar.

Results Indicator number one. The Ministry of Finance publishes and incorporates contingent liabilities
associated with natural disasters and climate change events in its Medium-Term Fiscal Framework. This
results indicator is a direct measure of financial risks and resilience, in support of the pillar's institutional
strengthening goals. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is substantial.

Results indicator number two and results number three. Results indicators two and three measured
the pillar's institutional strengthening goals in the education sector. Results indicator two measured the
percentage of the existing public schools for which a disaster risk assessment has been completed.
Results indicator three measured the percentage of public schools, for which a disaster risk assessment
had been completed, and which were included in a rehabilitation/retrofitting program. The indicators could
be verified, and directly measured the increase in the public schools' resilience through the preparation of



                                                                                                         Page 6 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



risk assessments, which supports the pillar's institutional strengthening goals in the education sector.
Therefore, the relevance of these indicators is substantial.

Results indicator number four. This indicator measured the number of risk-prone areas in main
watershed basins that had been prioritized by the hydrological and hydrometerological studies to undergo
improvements in water management. This indicator was appropriate for measuring the achievement of
risk reduction outcomes in the water sector. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is substantial.

Pillar B. Establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public
investment and construction works.

Results indicator number five. This indicator measured the number of public investment projects that
complied with the mandatory technical standards after they came into effect. This indicator was
appropriate and measures the development outcome related to reducing risks in public investments
through compliance with set standards. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is substantial.

Results indicator number six. This indicator measured the number of existing health facilities that were
assessed using the Health Safety Index methodology. This indicator could be verified and appropriate for
monitoring the outcome. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is substantial.

Results indicator number seven. This indicator measured the percentage of private buildings with a
building permit that were inspected. This indicator is a direct measure of the climate and disaster risk
reduction, through inspection and enforcement actions, in support of the pillar's institutional strengthening
goals. Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is substantial.

Of the seven results indicators, the first four indicators can be expected to measure the intended outcome
of strengthening institutions for improving climate and disaster resilience in the priority sectors. The
remaining three indicators can be expected to measure the intended outcome of strengthening institutions
for reducing climate and disaster risk in public investment and construction works. Therefore, the overall
relevance of the results indicators is satisfactory.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs) they support, baseline values, target
values, actual change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                                                      Actual
                                              Baseline    Target                    Most
                                                                    change in                      RI
                       Associated     RI     (Including (including                 recent
         RIs                                                        RI relative               achievement
                          Pas.    relevance. units and units and                    value
                                                                   to targeted                   rating.
                                               dates).     dates.                  (2021).
                                                                     change.
PDO 1. Strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors.
RI I. The Ministry of    PA 1.    Substantial Baseline     Target The Ministry The Ministry Satisfactory
       Finance                                 (2016);    (2020):   of Finance of Finance
    incorporates                                        Document incorporates incorporated
contingent liabilities                         Did not        is    contingent contingent
in the Medium-term                              exist.   published liabilities liabilities in
 Fiscal Framework.                                        at least associated the Medium-
                                                           since   with natural     Term
                                                           2019.   disasters in Fiscal Fram

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



                                                                 the Medium- ework for
                                                                  Term Fiscal 2021-2025.
                                                                  Framework
                                                                   for 2019 -
                                                                   2023 and
                                                                  2020-2024.
                                                       Target
                                                       (2020):
RI 2. Percentage of
                                                       15% of
   existing public
                                                       existing 16.15% of
schools for which a                        Baseline                             Target
                      PA 2     Substantial           schools as existing                Satisfactory.
    disaster risk                          (2016): 0                          exceeded.
                                                     of 2015 (of schools.
 assessment was
                                                      6,500 of
    conducted.
                                                         total
                                                     schools).
 RI 3. Percentage of
  public schools with
                                                          Target
      a disaster risk
                                             Baseline    (2020). 12% of the 40% of the Moderately
  assessment which      PA 2. Substantial
                                            (2016): 0 30% of the schools         target.  Satisfactory
    are included in a
                                                        schools
   rehabilitation and
retrofitting program.
     RI 4. Number of
                                             Baseline     Target
  risk-prone areas in
                                              (2016):    (2020):     Status
     main watershed
                                              Studies    Studies    (2021):
    basins that were
                                           conducted conducted Studies in 23
       prioritized by                                                          46% of the Moderately
                        PA 3. Substantial in 10 of the in 50 of   of the 140
    hydrological and                                                             target.  Satisfactory
                                                140      the 140   identified
hydrometeorologica
                                            identified identified risk-prone
l studies to undergo
                                           risk- prone risk-prone    areas.
    improvements in
                                              areas.      areas.
water management.
PDO 2. Establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public
investment and construction works.
RI 5. The number of
   PIPs approved in
 the National Public                                      Target     Status
 Investment System            Substantial Baseline (2020): All (2021): All       Target
                        PA 4.                                                             Satisfactory
     (SNIP) after the                        (2016):0      PIPs       PIPs      realized.
 technical standards                                   approved. approved.
 came into effect on
      July 20, 2017.
     RI 6. Number of    PA 5. Substantial Baseline        Target     Status    88% of the Satisfactory
      health facilities                     (2016): 0 (2020): 25 (2021): 22 of   target.
 assessed using the                                    of the 164   the 164
     Hospital Safety                                      public     public
           Index.                                       hospitals hospitals

                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



                                                                           were        assessed
                                                                         assessed      using the
                                                                         using the       ISH.
                                                                          ISH in
                                                                           2016.
                 RI 7. Number of
                                                                                          Status
               construction works
                                                                           Target       (20211):
                 with a building
                                                            Baseline       (2020):     All private
                permit that were                                                                     Target
                                      PA 6.    Substantial (2016): 0       80% of     works with a               Satisfactory
                inspected by the                                                                   exceeded.
                                                          inspections.     private       building
                Ministry of Public
                                                                           works.     permit were
                    Works and
                                                                                       inspected.
                Communications.

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors.
               PA 1 -3: RIs 1-4.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. Incorporating contingent liabilities in the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework and
               incorporating new institutional structures for quantifying and pricing contingent liabilities were aimed at
               strengthening the institutional framework for addressing disaster and climate risks. These activities were likely
               to strengthen the fiscal framework for responding to natural disasters and climate change events. Conducting
               disaster risk assessments and incorporating safety standards in school infrastructure were aimed at
               incorporating safety standards for school infrastructure. Such standards were likely to strengthen the
               institutional framework for incorporating safety standards in the education sector. Conducting assessments of
               disaster-prone areas were likely to aid in identifying disaster prone areas. Such assessments were likely to
               improve the institutional framework for responding to disasters and climate change events in the water sector.
               The combination of these reforms were likely to contribute to improving the institutional framework for climate
               and disaster resilience in the priority sectors identified by the Government.

               By 2020, the Ministry of Finance (MH) had incorporated contingent liabilities for quantifying and pricing
               contingent liabilities associated with disasters in the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework for 2019 - 2023 and
               2020 - 2024 and 2021-2025. During 2017 - 2018, the MH through its General Directorate of Analysis and
               Fiscal Policy (DGAPF), developed the first Fiscal Report. This report included the Country Disaster Risk
               Profile, identifying and quantified the costs and potential losses from disasters. While the documents were not
               published, the 2020 Budget Law Report (which was published) included an assessment of contingent
               liabilities associated with disasters. The Multi-Year Budgetary Policy also included an assessment of



                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



contingent liabilities. The targets were for the most part realized. Therefore, efficacy of this PDO is
satisfactory.

By the end of 2020, disaster risk assessment had been completed in 16.5% of the 6,500 total existing public
schools in DR, exceeding the target of 15%. (The General Directorate for Environmental and Risk
Management (DIGAR) conducted 759 assessments in public schools with a rapid visualization tool based on
the World Bank's Global Program for Safe Schools methodology and 217 assessments using the Safety
Index for DR schools (ISCERD). The target was slightly exceeded. Therefore, efficacy of this PDO is
satisfactory.

By February 2021, 12% out of 470 schools with a disaster risk assessment were included in a
rehabilitation/retrofitting program. This was short of the target of 30% of schools. Given that 40% of the target
was realized, efficacy of this PDO is moderately satisfactory.

Studies were conducted for 23 of the identified risk-prone areas in 2020, as compared to 10 at the baseline in
2016. This was short of the target of 50 identified risk-prone areas. The ICR notes that the target could not be
realized for a combination of factors, including lack of human and financial resources within the Ministry and
impact of COVID-19 which precluded the necessary field visits by ministry officials to conduct the required
studies. Given that only 35% of the specified target was realized, efficacy of this PDO is moderately
satisfactory.

Of the four results indicators, two were satisfactory and two moderately satisfactory. However, the indicators
such as disaster risk assessments, studies and publications of the contingent liabilities focused on upstream
activities. The ICR provides little evidence on concrete development outcomes at the level of
beneficiaries. Therefore, the overall efficacy of this PDO is moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public investment and
construction works.
PA 4 - 6: RIs 5 - 7.

Rationale
Theory of change. Reforms aimed at establishing mandatory regulations for in public investment projects, in
the health sector and construction works were aimed at climate and disaster risk reductions in the sectors
prioritized by the Government. While establishing mandatory standards in public investment projects, safety
standards in the health sector and for construction works would help, the extent to which they would help in
reducing climate and disaster risk in the respective sectors would depend on how these standards are
enforced.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



                      All Public Investment Projects approved in the National Public Investment System (SNIP) complied with the
                      mandatory technical standards of incorporating disaster and climate risk analysis as targeted. Therefore,
                      efficacy of this PDO indicator is satisfactory.

                      By 2020, twenty two of the 164 public health facilities built before 2011 received an operating permit after
                      having been assessed through the Hospital Safety Index, as compared to the specified target of twenty five
                      hospitals. Given that this represented 88% of the target, efficacy of this PDO indicator is satisfactory.

                      All private works with a building permit were supervised and inspected by 2021. This exceeded the target of
                      80%. Efficacy of this PDO indicator is satisfactory.

                      The three indicators in PDO 2 were rated as satisfactory. Therefore, efficacy of PDO 2 is satisfactory.

                      Drawdown of the Cat DDO. On March 20, 2020, the Bank received a request from the Government to
                      withdraw US$150 million from the Cat DDO following the declaration of emergency related to the COVID - 19
                      pandemic. In response to the request, the Bank released the funds. The funds were used to support the
                      Government's efforts to manage the economic and social costs of the pandemic.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Of the four results indicators for PDO 1, two were rated as substantial (the percentage of existing public schools
for which a disaster risk assessment was completed and incorporating contingent liabilities in the Medium-Term
Fiscal Framework). The remaining two results indicators were rated as modest (the the percentage of public
schools included in a rehabilitation/retrofitting program and the number of studies completed for the risk-prone
areas in main watershed basins).

The three results indicators for PDO 2 were rated as substantial (the number of construction works with a building
permit that were inspected, the number of public investment projects approved in the National Public Investment
System and the number of facilities assessed using the Hospital Safety Index).

Overall efficacy is moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



6. Outcome

Rationale

The prior actions were appropriate along the results chain for realizing the intended objectives. The seven
results indicators were a direct measure of the two Pillars' achievement.

The operation's efficacy is moderately satisfactory. The Cat DDO achieved the development objective with only
minor shortcomings by strengthening institutions for improved climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors
and to establishing mandatory regulations for climate and disaster risk reduction in public investment and
construction works. The operation also quickly mobilized resources in the aftermath of a disaster, including
public-health related events. In 2020, the Cat DDO provided immediate liquidity support to the Government's
efforts to implement emergency measures to contain the spread of the COVID - 19 pandemic and manage the
impact of the pandemic.

However, the operation did not achieve all of the agreed results under the policy matrix. The pandemic in
particular, directly affected the achievements of at least two results indicators RI 3 on school rehabilitation
programs and RI 4 on water studies, as it prevented officials from undertaking the necessary field works, and/or
inspections, and the impact caused the Government to shift resources from planned investments towards the
COVID -19 emergency response. Therefore, overall outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The risk to development is low, given that the new Government which came into
power when this operation was being executed, continued to express its strong commitment to enhance the
DRM program. While two of the institutional developments (discussed in section two) supported under the
Cat DDO were affected by the changes, in practice the changes did not affect the continuity of the mandate.
The current Government is continuing the objective of mainstreaming risk management in the public
investment and territorial planning processes.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


This operation was prepared based on the Bank's technical assistance work aimed at mainstreaming DRM
and CCA in territorial planning, public investment and public finances in DR between 2011 and 2015, and
the lessons from previous Bank-financed Cat DDOs in Panama, Philippines, Sri Lanka and Bolivia. The

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



key lessons incorporated at design included: (i) actions and activities of a Cat DDO needs to be
aligned with government priorities; (ii) DRM policies need to be based on adequate risk identification
(including fiscal and physical risks); and (iii) DPLs with a Cat-DDO needs to be part of a broader financial
protection strategy against disasters and climate-related shocks.

The prior actions were based on sound analytical underpinnings (discussed in section three), and the prior
actions were designed based on consultations with the Government, private sector academia and civil
society. The operation was prepared in close consultations with other donors financing complementary
DRM policies in DR such as the European Union (EU), the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).

Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with institutional capacity
and sustainability of the program over the medium and long run. Mitigation measures incorporated at
design included, proactive engagement of the Ministry of Finance to support DRM-related reforms. With
mitigation measures, the overall operation risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PD, paragraph 83).



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank conducted regular implementation supervision missions to assess progress on the expected results
and the achievement of the development objective. The implementation capacity of the Government to advance
the DRM agenda was adequately assessed by the Bank, which facilitated the implementation of this operation.
The Bank mobilized a significant technical assistance program to support the Government in implementing this
program. Activities under this program supported the Ministry of Finance (MH) and the Ministry of Economy,
Planning and Development (MEPyD) in the implementation of policy reforms included under this operation.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The Bank's sustained involvement during the design and implementation stages helped significantly in
developing policy tools to improve the resilience of public investments and also support the financial and
fiscal resilience to climate and disaster risks in the DR.


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)




Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

This Cat DDO directly supported the DR's more vulnerable populations by contributing to the adoption of
mechanisms to increase the Government's fiscal resilience and capacity to mobilize resources in the aftermath
of a disaster. Similarly, reducing disaster risk in critical infrastructure besides reducing the burden of recovery on
the Government, also minimizes the human costs of recovery (ICR, 43).



b. Environmental

Reforms in this operation were not expected to have adverse environmental impacts, as the reforms were primarily
aimed at strengthening the institutional framework and improving regulations for increased resilience and reduction
of disaster and climate-related risks (PD, paragraph 73).



c. Gender

Reforms in this operation were not specifically directed towards women.



d. Other

The ICR (paragraph 46) states that this operation did not have significant unintended outcomes.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written. The ICR provides a clear description of the country context when the Bank prepared
this operation. The ICR provides a good description of the Cat-DDO instrument. The quality of evidence
provided in the ICR is adequate to assess the performance of this operation. The ICR draws suitable lessons
from the experience of implementing this operation.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR DPL with a Cat DDO (P159351)



One shortcoming of the ICR is that it does not articulate a theory of change showing the causal links between
the prior actions, the chosen results indicators, and the intended outcomes.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

1. In addition to providing immediate liquidity in the aftermath of a natural disaster, a Cat DDO
instrument can help in enhancing long-term policy, while providing technical and capacity support. The
Cat-DDO helped in providing immediate liquidity in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, it also
enhanced the Government's understanding of contingent liabilities and pricing climate and disaster risks.

2. Technical Assistance activities to support the Cat DDO can be useful in improving policy dialogue
and implementation. Technical assistance provided by the Bank alongside this operation helped the
Government in advancing key disaster risk management topics.

3. Strong coordinating/implementing agencies can be useful in advancing robust reform programs. In
this operation, the Ministry of Finance had a good understanding of the Cat DDO and this helped in
implementing this operation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
