     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022925

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149005                                   Education System Improvement Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Kosovo                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57260                                31-Dec-2019                                           6,597,008.39

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Sep-2015                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          11,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             7,515,200.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         6,597,008.39                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt     Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the November 20, 2015 Financing Agreement between the government and IDA (Schedule 1, p.
   5), the project development objective (PDO) was "to strengthen selected systems that contribute to quality,
   accountability, and efficiency improvements in education in the Republic of Kosovo.” The design document
   presented the same statement (Project Appraisal Document/PAD, p. 4 and Annex 1).




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



   The PDO statement did not change throughout the project’s life. However, PDO-level indicators and targets
   were revised as a part of the project’s restructuring in April 2019, reflecting a substantial reduction in the
   overall scope and ambition of the project. Consequently, a split rating methodology is warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Apr-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Component 1: Enhancing strategic planning, financial management, monitoring and decision-
   making in the education sector. Original estimate: US$5.20 million; revised estimate at
   restructuring; US$3.13 million; actual cost: US$3.34 million (64 percent of original allocation/106
   percent of revised allocation)

   1.1: Strengthening strategic planning and financial management capacities to improve spending
   efficiency and accountability. Central-level activities for pre-university education included: (i) review of
   national allocation formula for education grants; (ii) review of local (municipal-to-school) budgeting
   processes; (iii) development of annual monitoring procedures for national and local budgeting and resource
   allocation processes, based on the revised per capita financing formula; and (iv) development of education
   spending indicators to assess and monitor spending efficiency. Municipal-level activities included training
   and on-the-job support for municipal education directorates and schools on the use of the formula and
   applications of guidelines. School-level activities included financial management capacity strengthening of
   school directors for expanded school financial autonomy. A few municipalities would also be given support
   to develop and implement school rationalization plans. At the university level, planned activities included: (i)
   development of criteria and programs for achieving full institutional financial autonomy; (ii) definition of
   norms and standards through bylaws under the new higher education law; and (ii) development of
   procedures for assessing performance of leaders and management.

   1.2: Enhancing existing education management information system (EMIS) to facilitate the use of
   data analysis for sector monitoring and management. Planned activities included: (i) establishment of
   rules and procedures; (ii) enhancing data availability through critical registries; (iii) development of a
   platform to integrate existing information systems and databases; (iv) enhancing existing EMIS capabilities
   to expand indicators and statistical analysis; and (v) training and capacity building for schools, municipal
   education districts, universities, and central government on these systems’ use.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



1.3: School development grants. Aimed at strengthening school capacity to plan and manage resources
and promote local-level participation, planned activities included: (i) strengthening the school development
planning system; (ii) training and other support to selected primary schools to prepare, implement, and
evaluate multi-year school development plans (SDPs); and (iii) financing of school development grants
(SDGs) for selected primary schools, ranging between $10,000 and $15,000.

Component 2: Strengthening management capacity and accountability to enhance quality of
education. Original estimate: US$5.00 million; revised estimate at restructuring US$3.72 million;
actual cost: US$2.55 million (51 percent of original allocation/69 percent of revised allocation)

2.1: Teacher career system. Envisaged support to the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
(MEST) aimed to: (i) implement a career system for teachers’ professional development, performance
assessment, and promotion; and (ii) provide policy support to strengthen, complement, and systematize the
teacher career system and licensing scheme. Specific activities included: (i) development and
implementation of a teacher performance assessment plan; (ii) development of a competency-based
teacher licensing and promotion scheme, defining competencies for each license type and links to financial
incentives; and (iii) establishment of an induction program and other supports for new teachers to improve
and institutionalize performance assessment and professional development.

2.2: Strengthening capacities for monitoring educational outcomes and assessment of student
learning. Aiming to revise and upgrade the current system of national student assessment and examination
in grades 5, 9, and 12, planned activities included: (i) setting up a model national assessment program,
aligned with international best practices; (ii) developing feedback systems on learning outcomes for
decision-makers and schools; (iii) establishing an integrated information communication technology system
for processing results; and (iv) participating in international student assessments and results
analysis. Support also envisaged capacity strengthening of MEST’s Division for Standards, Monitoring and
Evaluation (DSME) to design, administer, and process high-quality examinations and student assessment
surveys.

2.3: Improving higher education accountability and quality assurance through the development of
key professional licensing statutes in priority economic fields. Aimed at strengthening MEST capacity
to carry out professional licensing and improved accountability mechanisms for learning outcomes, planned
activities included: (i) development of a national strategy, including bylaws, on professional licensing; and
(ii) piloting of licensing activities in one or two key professions to provide quality assurance to the labor
market of graduates’ knowledge and skills.

Component 3: Implementation and communications support. Original estimate: US$0.80 million;
revised estimate at restructuring: US$0.66 million; actual cost: US$0.71 million (89 percent of
original allocation; 108 percent of revised allocation). Project implementation support included the
financing of training, services, and operating costs for the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and
communications support (workshops, materials, and outreach events in beneficiary communities).



Revisions to Components

Following its mid-term review, the project was restructured in April 2019 to scale back and simplify the
original design, which was deemed too ambitious, given the country’s capacity.


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



  Under Component 1, Component 1.1 (planning, financial management, and decision-making capacity)
  was dropped due to limited policy and implementation progress, but the project did support a small technical
  assistance that recommended updating of the original per capita school financing formula, whose
  implementation was ultimately carried out under Component 1.3. Component 1.2 (enhancing the existing
  EMIS) was dropped. Component 1.3 (SDGs) was maintained and its cost increased by US$1 million (from
  US$2 million to approximately US$3 million).

  Under Component 2, two subcomponents were revised and simplified. Component 2.1 (improvement to
  teacher career system) limited its teacher career system to two areas: (i) a strategic framework on teacher
  development; and (ii) the teacher performance assessment pilot. In addition, school-based teacher training
  programs were supported through SDGs. The simplified scope of Component 2.2 (monitoring education
  outcomes and assessment of student learning) included: (i) the development and adoption of the National
  Student Assessment Framework; (ii) piloting of the reformed Grade 12 Matura exam; (iii) capacity building
  of MEST staff; and (iv) support to Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) results analysis and
  report writing. The project also supported the design and piloting of the school report card. Component 2.3
  (quality assurance of higher education) was cancelled due to limited institutional commitment and capacity
  to implement higher education activities.

  Component 3 was maintained as originally designed.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The actual cost of the project at closing was US$6.60 million, 60 percent of the original estimate
  (US$11.0 million) and 88 percent of the revised estimate at the time of project restructuring (US$7.52
  million). The actual cost of Component 1 was 64 percent of the original estimate; Component 2’s actual cost
  was half (51 percent) of the original estimate; and Component 3‘s actual cost was closest to its original
  estimate, at 89 percent.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was 100 percent financed by an IDA Credit, whose
  original approved amount was 7.9 million SDRs (US$11.0 million equivalent). A total of 2.5 million SDRs
  was cancelled at the time of restructuring, leaving an adjusted amount of 5.4 million SDRs (US$7.5 million
  equivalent). Actual disbursements amounted to 4.72 million SDRs, which was 60 percent of the original
  credit and 87 percent of the adjusted credit at restructuring. Actual disbursements were equivalent to
  US$6,597,008 (ICR, p. vi). No Borrower contribution was planned or provided.

  Key Dates. The project was approved on September 10, 2015 and became effective on May 13, 2016. On
  the basis of its mid-term review conducted in November 2018, the project was restructured on April 25,
  2019, including the cancellation and simplification of subcomponents, changes to the results framework, a
  cancellation of part of the IDA Credit (2.5 million SDRs), and the reallocation of funds across disbursement
  categories. The project closing date was extended twice. An initial (12-month) extension was approved on
  October 10, 2019 and a second (six-month) extension was approved on December 7, 2020, both to allow
  the time needed to complete project activities, as restructured. The actual closing date was June 30, 2021,
  18 months after the original closing date of December 31, 2019.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO (and its associated targets after restructuring) was substantially relevant to country
conditions. While some gains have been made in recent years, formidable challenges to improved
educational quality, accountability, and efficiency persist. There is still a mismatch between the quality and
relevance of education services, on the one hand, and the needs of Kosovo’s labor market for skilled
manpower, on the other. At the pre-university level, there have been some improvements in assessing
learning outcomes and in using assessment results to improve quality, but much more remains to be done,
including improvements to the teacher career system and the development and application of quality
standards more responsive to labor market needs. At the university level, institutional commitment and
capacity to improve higher education quality and relevance fall short of needs. In particular, the
development of licensing standards and exams in key professions and sectors and the development of
systems for tracking learning outcomes need to move forward. Notwithstanding some improvements in
recent years, sector-wide systems and capacities, essential for improving accountability and efficiency, are
in need of further strengthening. These include systems and capacities for strategic planning, budget
allocation, and financial management, and integrated information systems for improved monitoring,
evaluation, and evidence-based management and decision-making.

All of these above-cited challenges would indicate a high relevance of the PDO. However, a moderate
shortcoming in the relevance of the PDO was the missed opportunity to include equity among the project’s
longer-term, higher-order objectives (improvements to quality, accountability, efficiency). This moderate
shortcoming is identified because the issue of grave inequities is prominent in government and Bank
strategic documents, both cross-sectoral and sector-specific. There was ample opportunity to make
important headway in better documenting and addressing equity issues as a part of the systems-
strengthening, capacity-building approach to improved sector performance. IEG’s follow-up discussion with
the TTL (June 1, 2022) clarified that some elements of equity were indeed factored into systems
strengthening activities (see sections on Efficacy and Lessons), but the non-inclusion of equity among the
other higher-level objectives of quality, accountability, and efficiency resulted in less systematic
measurement and reporting on the links between systems strengthening activities and their contributions to
equity.

The PDO was substantially relevant to the development priorities of the country. Kosovo’s National
Development Strategy (NDS) 2016-21 (a new NDS is currently under preparation, according to the
TTL) supports four thematic pillars: (1) human capital development; (2) good governance and rule of law;
(3) development of competitive industries; and (4) development of infrastructure. The human capital
development pillar includes interventions aimed at improving the efficiency of public spending in the
education sector, increasing mechanisms and practices to strengthen sector accountabilities, strengthening
the assessment of student performance and learning outcomes, and improving the quality of teaching. The
PDO addressed these sector-specific elements of the human development pillar of the NDS and was also
aligned with the Kosovo Education Strategic Plan (2017-2021), whose strategic objectives include improved
management of the education system, enhanced quality assurance, improved teaching and learning, and
strengthened quality and competitiveness of higher education. The first of its seven strategic objectives,
improved participation and inclusiveness, is not captured in the PDO, even though the systems and
activities targeted under the project are important vehicles for contributing to improved equity. The



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



               PDO's focus on accountability and efficiency was also highly relevant to the government's efforts to improve
               governance, captured in the second pillar of the NDS.

               The PDO is highly relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2017-
               2021) (a new CPF is currently under preparation, according to the TTL). The CPF’s support to Kosovo’s
               NDS is organized around three focus areas: (1) enhancing conditions for accelerated private sector growth
               and employment; (2) strengthening public service delivery and macro-fiscal management; and (3)
               promoting reliable energy and stewardship of the environment. The PDO's main thrust is highly relevant to
               the second focus area, particularly its education-specific objective of “strengthening selected systems to
               improve quality, accountability, and efficiency in the delivery of education.” The PDO's focus on education
               quality is also substantially relevant to the CPF’s first focus area, particularly its employment-specific
               objective of “enhancing employment opportunities and inclusion for youth and women.” Additionally, the
               PDO is relevant to the CPF's focus on the cross-cutting issue of citizen engagement, especially its focus on
               strengthening local and school-level management, efficiency, and accountability with and through the
               participation of teachers, parents, and communities in the planning, implementation, and monitoring of
               school activities. While the CPF includes improved equity as a health sector objective, it is not articulated as
               an education sector objective (CPF, p. 95).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen select systems that contribute to quality improvements in education in Kosovo

                             Rationale
                             As originally designed, the project aimed to strengthen systems and capacities in eight critical areas
                             culminating in eight outcomes that would contribute to higher-order, longer-term goals of improved sector
                             quality, accountability, and efficiency. While many of these expected outcomes were poised to contribute to
                             more than one of the three high-order goals, for ease of presentation they are clustered around the goal that
                             they would most affect.

                             The contribution to improved education quality was to be effected primarily through the achievement of two
                             systems strengthening outcomes:

                                        Outcome #4: Improved monitoring of pre-university education quality through student assessments,
                                         including MEST capacity building to strengthen the quality, quantity, and use of student performance
                                         and learning assessments; and



                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




      Outcome #7: Improved monitoring of higher education quality through the piloting and assessment of
       a licensing mechanism in priority economic fields.

In addition, Outcomes #3 (improved education data collection, management, and utilization) and #5 (school-
based information dissemination on student performance and sources/uses of funds), while categorized as
primary contributors to accountability (see immediately below), were also expected to contribute to quality
improvements.



Outputs and intermediate results for Outcome #4: Improved monitoring of pre-university education quality
through student assessments:

With the support of a special twinning firm to help build capacity:

      The Kosovo National Framework for Student Assessment was developed, approved, published in
       three languages (Albanian, Serbian, and English), and disseminated.

      The original intermediate result to revise Grades 9 and 12 examinations in line with the Kosovo
       Curriculum Framework (KCF) and to evaluate them after piloting was partially achieved. The Grade
       12 Matura examination was revised and piloted, and its results evaluated against KCF. The revision,
       piloting and evaluation of Grade 9 examination were not undertaken, because of changes introduced
       during restructuring.
      Four large-scale student learning assessments were undertaken, fully achieving the target of four.
             o The report on PISA 2015 national results, containing in-depth analyses with policy
               recommendations, was completed in 2017 and published and disseminated to all relevant
               stakeholders.
             o The report on PISA 2018 national results was prepared in 2019, followed by the preparation in
               2020 of an in-depth report with policy recommendations. These results and in-depth report
               were also disseminated to all relevant stakeholders. During a June 1, 2022 exchange with IEG,
               the TTL noted that the report assessed learning equity across the country, among other
               issues.
             o The project also supported the analysis, dissemination and use of results of the international
               assessment studies on math (TIMSS) and reading (PIRLS).

Outputs and intermediate results for Outcome #7: Improved monitoring of higher education quality
through the piloting and assessment of a licensing mechanism in priority economic fields:

      No action plans were prepared and no policy discussions were held. This was due in large part to
       limited institutional commitment and capacity, resulting in the dropping of subcomponent 3 (quality
       assurance in higher education) and associated targets and indicators at restructuring.
      The intermediate result indicator specifying the development and approval of bylaws on professional
       licensing was not achieved.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



Outcomes:

      Outcome #4 was substantially achieved. The project succeeded in strengthening the capacity of
       MEST, enabling the DSME to design, administer, and analyze high-quality examinations and large-
       scale student assessments. The DSME is also now capable of developing testing instruments that are
       comparable across years, as demonstrated by the revision to the Matura Grade 12 exam, which
       piloted new subject items and is now aligned with competency-based curricula. These outcomes
       contribute substantially to the longer-term, higher-level objective of improved quality of pre-university
       education.
      Outcome #7 was not achieved. Licensing exams were not piloted, as originally planned, following the
       decision to cancel university-level activities. The project, therefore did not contribute to the long-term,
       high-level objective of improving higher education quality.



The project’s overall contribution to education quality improvements against original targets and
expected outcomes is rated modest. Outcome #7 (higher education quality monitoring) was negligibly
achieved; and Outcome #4 (strengthened student assessments) was substantially achieved. Two other
contributing outcomes (Outcome #3, improved data collection, analysis, and use; and Outcome #5, school-
based dissemination of information on student performance) were negligibly achieved, and a third contributing
Outcome (#6, schools’ use of funds, detailed under accountability) was substantially achieved, as detailed
below under Objective 2. The ICR does not report on any effects of SDG investments in the quality of
teaching and learning.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen select systems that contribute to quality improvements in education in Kosovo

Revised Rationale
The restructured design maintained the original PDO statement "to strengthen select systems that contribute
to quality, accountability, and efficiency improvements in education in the Republic of Kosovo,” but its scaled-
back scope and ambition focused on the achievement of only four of the eight systems and capacity-related
Outcomes included in the original design.

Under the simplified theory of change, the project’s critical path to improved education quality:

      retained its focus on Outcome #4 (improved monitoring of pre-university education quality through
       student assessments), and
      dropped its support to Outcome #7 (improved monitoring of higher education quality).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




Outputs and intermediate results for Outcome #4:

With the support of a special twinning firm to help build capacity, outcomes and intermediate results are the
same as those reported under the original Objective 1, with one caveat. The revised, less ambitious
intermediate outcome target (the revision and piloting of the Grade 12 Matura examination and the evaluation
of its results against the KCF) was fully achieved.



Outcomes:

      Outcome #4 was substantially achieved, as detailed under the original Objective 1.



Over and above the substantial achievement of Outcome #4, two other contributing outcomes (#5, school-
based dissemination of information on student performance, and #6, schools’ use of funds) were
substantially achieved under the restructured project, as detailed below under Objective 2. The ICR does
not report on any effects of SDG investments in the quality of teaching and learning.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen select systems that contribute to accountability improvements in education in Kosovo

Rationale
The contribution to improved sector accountability was to be effected through the achievement of four
systems strengthening outcomes:

      Outcome #3: Improved education data collection, management, and utilization, including the
       strengthening of the EMIS and the integration of various education information systems;
      Outcome #5: School-based information dissemination on student performance and sources/uses of
       funds;
      Outcome #6: Strengthened school-level accountability mechanisms through information dissemination
       on the uses of funds for school level intervention; and
      Outcome #8: Improved accountability of higher education institutions for learning outcomes.

In addition, Outcomes #1 (transparent budget allocation) and #4 (improved monitoring of pre-university
education quality through student assessments), while categorized, respectively, as primary contributors to
efficiency and quality, were also expected to contribute to improved sector accountability.


                                                                                                Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




Outputs and intermediate outcomes for pre-university education accountability, supported by
Outcomes #3, #5, and #6:

Outcome #3: Improved education data collection, management and utilization

      With support from Bank specialists, analytical work, guidelines for legal and institutional structures
       within MEST, and development of technical specifications for the core central systems supporting
       integrated information management were completed in 2017.
      However, activities to improve education data collection, management, and utilization suffered due to
       failure to complete bylaws, as well as delays and lack of transparency of procurement bid
       evaluations. Critical, time-sensitive milestones agreed with the government (adoption of minimal
       legislation and completion of procurement processes for the work) were not reached, leading to the
       dropping of subcomponent 1.2 (enhancing EMIS) at restructuring.
      After restructuring, MEST expressed interest in a scaled-back version of the EMIS upgrade, including
       a national student registry with links to the EMIS, and a sub-registry for Grade 12 Matura exam
       entrants. However, a one-time shortfall in the government's budget for the project (2021) resulted in a
       lack of funds to carry this out.
      Two intermediate results indicators, dropped at restructuring, were not achieved:
             o 80 percent of schools and providers updating student-level data twice a year, up from a
                baseline of no student-level data in the EMIS; and
             o the integration of EMIS, and the automation of data exchange across four databases: teacher
                licensing, student assessment, school map, and expenditures.

Outcome #5: Information dissemination on student performance and sources/uses of funds

      With project support and under the guidance of the pre-university Director of MEST, the school report
       card (SRC) concept and design were completed by the SRC working group in 2020, incorporating
       learning assessment results, school statistics, and municipalities’ averages for comparison purposes.
      Even after the restructuring dropped EMIS upgrading, MEST manually generated SRCs from the
       existing EMIS and piloted them during the month of March 2021 in the 160 schools that received
       SDGs in 2018-19. The pilot tested the template design, administrative instructions, and a user manual
       with indicator definitions.
      Following the pilot, the Learning Assessment Unit worked on automation of the data to populate the
       SRCs using software. In a follow-up exchange with IEG on June 1, 2022, the TTL noted that, for the
       years ahead, MEST is committed to using the software program for automated production of the
       SRCs for all schools.
      Schools’ feedback on the pilot noted its facilitation of greater collaboration within the community and
       among schools. They also noted that SRCs, coupled with school development plans, inform and
       inspire school improvement goals and schools' efforts to achieve them, with improved focus on
       learning outcomes and other school statistics, and enabling comparisons to municipal averages.

Outcome #6: Information dissemination on uses of project funds for school-level intervention

      240 schools received SDGs, exceeding the original target of at least 150. A first round of grants to
       160 schools (in 26 municipalities) already exceeded the target. Of these, 140 were disadvantaged

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



        schools (selected on the basis of low socio-economic characteristics and low student performance),
        and 20 were competitively selected against pre-defined criteria. A second round of SDGs was
        provided to 80 additional schools (in 21 municipalities) on a competitive basis. Despite the timing of
        the second round (February 2020 during the onset of COVID-19), the PCU was effective in managing
        the process and delivering training and other support to enable the preparation of school
        development plans and use SDGs to finance improvements in teaching and learning quality.
       School management committees, including parents and community members, were created in all 240
        beneficiary schools, leading the preparation and implementation of school development plans and
        supporting SDG execution, an indication of citizens’ engagement.
       By the project’s end, all 240 schools had developed plans for quality investments supported by SDGs,
        exceeding the target of 150 schools.
       An endline survey revealed that 77 percent of school directors believed that SDGs effectively
        improved their planning capacity.
       A total of 6,896 basic education teachers received training/professional development financed by
        SDGs supporting school development plans.
       A total of 100,155 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning in beneficiary
        schools, of whom half (50,893) were female.

Outcomes on pre-university education accountability:

     Outcome #3 (information systems) was not achieved, given that most planned activities and
        indicators were dropped.
       Outcome #5 (information dissemination on student performance and sources of funds) was not
        achieved. By the project’s end, SRCs were piloted for one month in 160 primary schools, or 20
        percent of all primary schools in Kosovo. This fell short of the original target of 90 percent of all
        primary schools in Kosovo receiving and publicly displaying SRCs, produced by the updated EMIS, on
        a permanent basis.
       Outcome #6 (information dissemination on uses of funds for school-level interventions) was fully
        achieved, in terms of improved accountability, but SDG investments in teaching and learning quality
        were not assessed for their effects on quality and equity.
       Virtually all (99.6 percent) of beneficiary schools disseminated reports on grant budget allocation and
        utilization, exceeding the original target of 80 percent.
       An independent qualitative survey conducted in a sample of 140 beneficiary schools revealed
        respondents’ assessment of the project as highly effective in improving the functionality of school
        governance mechanisms. The share of respondents assessing the project as most effective in
        improving the performance of various governance mechanisms were: 85 percent for teacher councils;
        77 percent for school governing boards; 64 percent for student councils; and 38 percent for parent
        councils. The ICR did not discuss why the results were comparatively low for parent councils.
       The capacity of publicly financed schools was substantially strengthened to plan and manage
        resources, and to promote citizens’ engagement through the participation of teachers, parents, and
        communities in planning, implementing and monitoring of school activities.




                                                                                                Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



Outputs and intermediate results for Outcome #8: Improved accountability of higher education institutions
for learning outcomes:

      Because there was little progress under the project in the preparation of higher-education action plans
       or in stimulating policy discussions, subcomponent 2.3 was dropped at restructuring. Consequently,
       the project did not support activities to establish a mechanism for holding higher education institutions
       accountable for learning outcomes.

Outcomes on accountability of higher education institutions:

      The project did not achieve the outcome of improved accountability of higher education institutions
       for learning outcomes.



Overall, the project’s contribution to improvements in sector accountability and governance is rated modest.
For pre-university education: Outcome #3 (improved education data collection, management and utilization)
was negligibly achieved; Outcome #5 (school-based dissemination of information on student performance)
was negligibly achieved; and Outcome #6 (strengthened school-level accountability mechanisms through
information dissemination on the uses of funds for school-level intervention) was substantially
achieved. Among other contributing outcomes, Outcome #4 (improved quality monitoring through enhanced
student assessment) was substantially achieved and Outcome #1 (transparent budget allocation)
was negligibly achieved, as detailed, respectively, under Objectives 1 and 3. For higher education: Outcome
#8 (improved accountability of higher education institutions for learning outcomes) was negligibly achieved.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen select systems that contribute to accountability improvements in education in Kosovo

Revised Rationale
The restructured project's support to improved sector accountability:

      retained its focus on Outcomes #5 (school-based information dissemination on student performance
       and sources/uses of funds) and #6 (strengthened school-level accountability mechanisms through
       information dissemination on the uses of funds for school level intervention); and
      dropped its support to Outcomes #3 (improved information systems and their use) and #8 (improved
       accountability of higher education institutions for learning outcomes).

Outputs and intermediate results for Outcomes #5 and #6, along with the technical assistance on
information systems, are the same as those reported under the original Objective 2, and so are not
repeated here.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



Outcomes:

      Outcome #5 (information dissemination on student performance and sources of funds) was
       achieved. By the project’s end, SRCs were piloted for one month in 160 primary schools, or 20
       percent of all primary schools in Kosovo, fully achieving the revised target of 20 percent. (This is in
       contrast with the failure to achieve the much more ambitious, original target of 90 percent of all
       primary schools in Kosovo receiving and publicly displaying SRCs on a permanent basis.)
      Outcome #6 (information dissemination on uses of funds for school-level interventions) was fully
       achieved, as detailed under the original Objective 2.



Overall, the project’s contribution to improvements in sector accountability and governance is rated
substantial, with main contributing Outcomes #5 and 6 both substantially achieved. In addition, preliminary
steps to strengthen information systems were undertaken, even though Outcome #3 activities and measures
were dropped. Still another contributing outcome (Outcome #4: Improved quality monitoring through
enhanced student assessment), reported under Objective 1, was substantially achieved.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen select systems that contribute to efficiency improvements in education in Kosovo

Rationale
The project's contribution to improved sector efficiency was originally to be effected through the
achievement of two systems strengthening outcomes:

      Outcome #1: Transparent budget allocation, through which municipalities would allocate resources to
       schools using a revised per capita formula; and
      Outcome #2: Improved and rationalized allocation of resources.

In addition, Outcome #6 (strengthened school-level accountability mechanisms through information
dissemination on the uses of funds for school level intervention), while categorized as a primary contributor to
enhanced accountability, was also expected to contribute to improved sector efficiency.



Outcomes #1 (transparent budget allocation) and #2 (improved and rationalized allocation of resources) are
assessed together, since they were supported under the same subcomponent 1.1 and tightly linked.

Outputs and intermediate results:



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




      A project-supported consultancy produced an initial diagnosis of pre-university education financing in
       2018, but the dialogue on financing reform did not advance sufficiently to support improvements in
       budget monitoring and resource allocation based on per capita financing and spending efficiency.
      A consultancy to strengthen the financial autonomy and capacity of universities was procured, but not
       completed, due to lack of ownership. The intermediate results target, that rules for full financial
       autonomy in universities would be developed and approved, was not achieved.
      Although subcomponent 1.1 (strengthening strategic planning and financial management) was
       dropped during restructuring, technical assistance (TA) to support reforms of the per capita school
       financing formula remained an eligible activity. This TA ultimately supported: a review of the existing
       school financing formula; consultations at municipal and school levels; and policy options and
       recommendations for greater transparency and equity in resource allocation. Consultations on the
       findings, with the help of six simulations, built consensus and ownership around the proposed formula
       reforms. While the associated intermediate results target (revised formulas being in use by the
       project’s end) was not fully achieved, the TA did support movement toward this goal. In a follow-up
       discussion with IEG on June 1, 2022, the TTL noted that the various simulations, and the formula
       ultimately preferred by the government but not yet adopted or implemented, provides for extra funds
       for disabled students and rural schools.
      Another intermediate target (also dropped at restructuring), the approval and use of budgeting and
       financial management rules or bylaws for school autonomy, was not achieved.



Outcomes:

      Both Outcomes #1 and #2 were to be measured by the same indicator: share of municipalities
       allocating resources to schools according to a revised allocation formula. The end-of-project target of
       80 percent was not achieved.
      Outcome #1 (strengthened accountability through transparent budget allocation) was not
       achieved, since associated activities were dropped and budget allocation formulas are not yet
       adopted or in use.
      Outcome #2 (improved and rationalized allocation of resources) was partially achieved, given some
       progress made on revising the per capita financing formula and modest movement towards the
       improved and rationalized allocation of resources, considered a small contribution towards the
       ultimate result of improved efficiency.



The project’s contribution to improvements in sector efficiency against original targets and expected
outcomes is rated modest. Outcome #1 (transparent budget allocation) was negligibly achieved; and
Outcome #2 (improved, rationalized resource allocation) was modestly achieved.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 27
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Strengthen select systems that contribute to efficiency improvements in education in Kosovo

                            Revised Rationale
                            As redesigned, the project's support for improved sector efficiency was limited to some scaled-back
                            support under Outcome #2 (improved and rationalized allocation of resources), with Outcome #1 (transparent
                            budget allocation) dropped.



                            Outputs and intermediate results for Outcome #2 are the same as those reported under original
                            Objective 3, and so are presented in abridged form here:

                                  TA to support reforms of the per capita school financing formula supported: a review of the existing
                                    school financing formula; consultations at municipal and school levels; and policy options and
                                    recommendations for greater transparency and equity in resource allocation. Consultations on the
                                    findings built consensus and ownership around proposed formula reforms.



                            Outcomes:

                                  Outcome #2 (improved and rationalized allocation of resources) was partially achieved, given some
                                    progress made on revising the per capita financing formula and modest movement towards the
                                    improved and rationalized allocation of resources, considered a small contribution toward the higher-
                                    level objective of improved efficiency.



                            Outcome #2 was modestly achieved, culminating in a small contribution to the higher-order objective of
                            improvements in sector efficiency.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the original PDOs (and associated targets, indicators, and expected outcomes) was
                            modest, given that each of the three objectives (systems strengthening contributing, respectively, to improved
                            education quality, improved sector accountability, and improved sector efficiency) was modestly achieved.


                                                                                                                            Page 15 of 27
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



         Attribution. In a follow-up exchange with IEG on June 1, 2022, the TTL noted that outcomes were strongly
         attributed to the project. Donors in Kosovo support different elements of the education sector. The Bank is the
         major donor supporting basic education. The European Union and German Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
         focus their support on higher education, while UNICEF is largely focused on supporting early childhood
         education.

         Counterfactual. During this same exchange, the TTL provided a compelling analysis of the counterfactual,
         as follows. In the absence of the project, there would have been no SDGs, and over 100,000 students and
         6,800 teachers would not have benefited from investments in teaching and learning quality, in a fiscal
         environment where 90 percent of the budget is for the wage bill. The flexibility in the provision of goods
         provided a critical source of financing for distance learning needs during COVID and sanitary supplies for the
         return to the classroom, which may not have been provided in the absence of the project. Had there been no
         project, school-level management and implementation capacities would not have been strengthened, nor
         would MEST’s capacities for learning assessments and their use have been developed, and various
         assessments produced and disseminated. Moreover, without the project, the school financing formula would
         not have been assessed, nor would recommendations for improved implementation and options for enhanced
         efficiency and equity been explored.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy under the revised PDOs (and associated targets, indicators, and expected outcomes) was
         substantial, given that the first two objectives (systems strengthening contributing to improved education
         quality, and systems strengthening contributing to improved sector accountability) were substantially
         achieved, and the third objective (systems strengthening contributing to improved sector efficiency) was
         modestly achieved.

         The above assessment of the project’s attribution and counterfactual (presented under “Overall Efficacy”)
         applies here as well.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Because the original project targeted system reforms, the economic analysis undertaken at appraisal was a
qualitative assessment, grounded in international evidence, rather than a quantitative one. The end-of-project
analysis, on the other hand, was able to compute the project’s net present value (NPV) and internal rate of
return (IRR). That analysis concentrated on the restructured project’s enhanced focus on school-level quality
improvements financed by SDGs, and the scaled-up coverage to 240 schools (vs. the original plan of

                                                                                                          Page 16 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



160). SDG-financed school development plans focused on teacher training and learning materials, reflecting
international evidence about teaching effectiveness being a predictor of student learning. Of the 240 schools
ultimately supported, 100 were selected on a competitive basis, and 140 disadvantaged, rural schools were
selected with a view to improve equity. The ex-post economic analysis estimated the economic benefits
stemming from the school grants (wage increase due to better education quality resulting from teacher practice
improvement) to compute the NPV and IRR of the project. System-wide reforms were not explored, given
difficulties in quantifying direct beneficiaries. The estimated NPV ranges between $6 and $37 million, and the
IRR fluctuates between 9 and 20 percent, based on an estimated wage increase from 1 to 3 percent resulting
from school quality improvements achieved with SDG support. Given the exclusive focus of this analysis on
benefits of SDGs, the estimated NPV and IRR values represent the lower bound of benefits accruing from the
project.

Although the project’s original design was aligned with needs across various systems in education, it was too
ambitious given limited sector capacity. The April 2019 restructuring considerably reduced the scope,
strengthening its focus on a smaller number of critical systems and reforms, and enhancing quality through a
strengthened focus on school-based support.

Challenges to operational efficiency, concentrated mostly in the three-year period prior to restructuring, resulted
in low disbursements during the project’s initial years. These challenges included: high turnover of MEST and
PCU staff; political instability with high turnover in MEST leadership and upper management (four changes of
Ministers and three General Secretaries); delays in procurement; delays in SDG disbursements and payments;
and a one-time understated project budget for 2021, which limited project access to the full credit amount and
led to the cancellation of two supplemental activities (development of a student registry and update of the
EMIS, and procurement of tablets for disadvantaged students to facilitate distance learning during COVID-19).

A well-conceived restructuring, stronger MEST leadership, strengthened PCU capacity, the Bank team’s close
supervision, and two extensions adding 1.5 years to the project’s life all combined to accelerate implementation
and disbursements, culminating in achievement of the project’s modified (scaled-back) objectives. Eighty-six
percent of the project’s total financing was disbursed during the final two years of implementation, and all
planned activities under the restructured project were completed by the project’s end.

Overall, the project’s substantial efficiency rating is based on: its pro-equity approach, which is a cost-effective
way to reduce social inequality; the focus of grant resources on teacher effectiveness, which is a key predictor of
student learning; the economic analysis showing economic justification of benefits derived from the grants alone;
and success in overcoming initial operational inefficiencies, as evidenced by the sound redesign of the
project, and the completion of all activities and achievement of all objectives under the restructured design.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the project’s original outcome targets, the relevance of the PDO is rated substantial, efficacy in
achieving each of the three objectives (systems outcomes contributing, respectively, to improved education
quality, accountability, and efficiency) is rated modest, as measured against the original outcome targets, and
efficiency is rated substantial. These ratings culminate in an Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Under the project’s revised outcome targets, the relevance of the PDO is rated substantial; the
achievements against the first two objectives (systems outcomes contributing to improved education
quality, and systems outcomes contributing to improved accountability), as measured against revised targets,
are rated substantial, while the achievement of the third objective (systems outcomes contributing to improved
sector efficiency) is rated modest; and efficiency is rated substantial. These ratings culminate in an Outcome
rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

Overall Outcome, weighted by disbursements made before and after restructuring, is Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating                           Original outcome targets          Revised outcome targets
Relevance of PDO                 Substantial
Efficacy
  Achievement of Objective 1     Modest                            Substantial
  Achievement of Objective 2     Modest                            Substantial
  Achievement of Objective 3     Modest                            Modest
Efficiency                       Substantial
1. Outcome                       Moderately Unsatisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
2. Numerical value of outcome
                                 3                                 4
ratings
3. Disbursement                  $0.92 million                     $5.7 million
4. Share of disbursements        14 percent                        86 percent
5. Weighted value of the outcome
                                 3 x 14% = 0.42                    4 x 86% = 3.44
rating
                                 Moderately Satisfactory
6. Final Outcome Rating
                                 0.42 + 3.44 = 3.86, rounded up to 4




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s focus on systems strengthening contributed substantially to institutional capacity building. As
detailed in the ICR (p. 28), project support culminated in: (a) strengthened capacity at the school level
(focused on 240 beneficiary schools) in planning, management, implementation, procurement, monitoring,
and evaluation of SDGs and in strengthened governance structures at the school level (school management
committees and teachers' councils, among others); and (b) strengthened capacity of the DSME to design,
administer, and oversee national and international student assessments, analyze data and produce
performance reports, and monitor educational outcomes.

Still, given the continued fragile political context, weaknesses in institutional capacity, and challenges in
coordination among and within government institutions at central, municipal and school levels, there are
important risks to achieved outcomes. As of the ICR's publication, the new government was in the process of
drafting a new five-year education sector strategy, which has not yet been vetted with development partners
and whose reform priorities are not yet known. There is potential for a follow-up operation to build on this
project, but no formal request for such support has yet been issued.

Continued investments will be needed to sustain capacities built in student learning assessments. The
technical consulting positions for DSME financed by the project (statisticians, information
technology specialists, testing specialists) were neither regularized nor incorporated into the
MEST budget. This leaves the unit with fewer staff than needed and reliant on donor support to finance
positions, posing a significant risk to sustaining capacity built to monitor education outcomes.

The sustainability of the project’s achievements will depend on the new government’s ability to: (i) build
consensus around next steps for further capacity strengthening and formulation of a sound, evidence-based
sector strategy; (ii) mobilize partnerships and investments to support the implementation of sector policies
and strategy; (iii) ensure that MEST’s high-level managers take the lead in implementing sector reforms; and
(iv) continue capacity building of staff, including those implementing reforms, managing projects and
resources, and delivering services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant and responsive to the issues and challenges confronted by the
  education sector, both at design and at completion. It was appropriately focused on addressing the
  systems and capacity constraints that undermined, and continue to undermine, sector quality,
  accountability, and efficiency. However, these very issues of limited capacity were not properly factored
  into the project’s level of ambition, especially given the short implementation period, Kosovo’s fragile
  political context, and experience and lessons from the previous education operation. Indeed, much of this
  project's difficulty stemmed from issues that should have been foreseeable and reflected in its design,

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



  given that they already had been encountered -- and documented -- under the previous operation,
  including: high staff turnover within the PCU; political instability; frequent changes in MEST leadership;
  non-compliance with legal covenants; and low disbursements. Lessons were not taken fully into account,
  including the importance of: realistic assessments of institutional capacity and commitment and of country
  and sector readiness for reform (project preparation could have benefited from some high-quality political
  economy analysis, in this light); and simplicity of project design and institutional arrangements to match
  limited capacity. In short, even though the preparation properly diagnosed and analyzed sector issues
  and challenges and appropriately addressed systems and capacity issues, the scope and ambition of the
  project exceeded institutional capacity and constitutes a significant shortcoming to Quality at Entry. While
  poverty and inequities were addressed through SDG support, which provided for the selection of some
  beneficiary schools serving rural, disadvantaged populations, an opportunity was missed to include equity
  among the other higher-level objectives in the PDO, which could have infused equity concerns more
  systematically across all relevant areas of systems and capacity strengthening and all elements of the
  results framework.

  Environmental and fiduciary aspects were appropriately addressed during preparation. The Bank’s team
  undertook upstream assessments of systems and capacities for financial management and procurement,
  including associated risk assessments, and identified key training and other actions to mitigate most risks
  and to strengthen and supplement capacities for successful implementation. The overall (moderate) risk
  assessment was probably an underestimate. Identified risks that did materialize, particularly the need for
  political commitment in contentious areas (teacher career, higher education), had no mitigation measures
  specified in the PAD. As detailed in Section 9, M&E design was challenging in terms of defining indicators
  that would appropriately measure all of the eight expected systems strengthening outcomes in the initial
  design. M&E arrangements did clearly define indicators, roles and responsibilities for data collection,
  analysis, discussion, reporting, and use, and supported the decentralized school-based
  emphasis. Arrangements also included surveys and activities, which complemented project data.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s supervision support was close, proactive, and focused on development impact. An important
 outcome of this supervision was its success in carrying out an evidence-based mid-term review,
 culminating in a well-founded project restructuring, resulting in the considerable and needed scaling back
 of the project’s scope and ambition, simplified implementation arrangements, additional activities to
 strengthen and supplement implementation capacity, and an improved results framework. Fiduciary
 aspects were also closely supervised by financial management (FM) and procurement specialists,
 guiding adherence to guidelines and addressing capacity constraints and other issues undermining the
 pace of implementation.

 Supervision inputs and processes were intensive. The Bank's team included both headquarters- and
 country-based staff, plus a local technical consultant, who supported preparation and implementation and
 provided institutional memory. Even during a two-year period of no local human development (HD) staff in
 the country office, the local consultant together with the Bank’s Country Management Unit ensured
 close monitoring through bi-weekly virtual review meetings with the PCU and TTL. The recruitment of a

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



 local HD specialist in 2019 enabled intensified, continuous hands-on support and follow-ups to address and
 correct operational bottlenecks in a context of weak institutional capacity and a challenging political
 environment. In all, the Bank undertook 17 review and implementation support missions, including a mid-
 term review and two back-to-back restructuring support missions, or one every four months. Support was
 especially intensive and critical in 2018 (with five implementation support visits) and 2019 (with four visits),
 enabling an in-depth project restructuring with a more realistic focus on PDO achievement. Close
 communication and support to the PCU was ensured through monthly video conferences and meetings
 from 2019 onwards. ISRs and aides-memoire were candid, comprehensive, and realistic in their
 assessments and ratings and focused on actions and agreements to enable PDO achievement. These
 supervisions and technical supports were undertaken in a difficult context, characterized by frequent
 changes of MEST leadership (four Ministers of Education and multiple General Secretaries), high turnover
 of technical staff, and constant PCU staff rotations throughout the project life and, in later years, setbacks
 caused by COVID-19. Bank proactivity mitigated the effects of these factors on implementation by
 establishing a set of milestones with agreed targets to be achieved by July 2019. These milestones proved
 to be a significant turning point for the project. Although there were three TTLs from preparation to
 completion, joint implementation missions ensured proper handovers and maintained open and continuous
 dialogue.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's original design was broad in scope, ambitious, and complex, presenting formidable
 challenges for M&E design. ICR’s Annex 9 presents an accurate depiction of the original theory of change,
 as interpreted from the PAD’s Table 1. The PDO aimed to strengthen eight selected systems that would
 contribute to higher-level objectives. Although specific, measurable, relevant, and time-bound, the four
 original PDO indicators and accompanying intermediate results indicators did not fully capture all eight
 capacity/systems-strengthening outcomes. Moreover, many of the targets were unrealistic for a four-year
 operation, given the country’s context. An analysis of Table 1 of the ICR (p. 4) linking the four original PDO-
 level indicators to the eight systems outcomes reveals shortcomings in the measurement of certain
 systems outcomes, especially: improved data collection, management, and utilization; improved education
 quality monitoring through student assessments; and improved accountability of higher education
 institutions for learning outcomes. The addition of a new PDO indicator at restructuring provided better
 measurement of improved education quality monitoring (with an appropriately reduced target).

 Arrangements, roles, and responsibilities for carrying out M&E activities were clearly laid out and
 appropriately embedded in the right institutions, at the right levels. The arrangements involved regular data
 collection through implementation support visits, administrative data, and semi-annual monitoring reports
 prepared by the PCU, also responsible for bring together various departments and actors in MEST and

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



 municipal education directorates to monitor and evaluate the project’s achievements. Data sources and
 responsible entities for their collection and reporting were specified in the design, and these were to be
 supported by the project’s activities to strengthen systems and capacities for policy planning, monitoring,
 and evaluation at the central, municipal, and school levels. Project monitoring and evaluation reports were
 expected to inform annual reporting under the Joint Annual Review for Education Sector.

 Design included three qualitative surveys (baseline, midline, endline) in a subset of beneficiary schools to
 study the effect of the SDGs on school-level capacity and autonomy. Citizen engagement was to be
 monitored over the project implementation cycle by measuring the participation of community
 representatives in planning and decision-making and their compliance with applicable requirements for
 citizen engagement, detailed in the Project Operational Manual.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E activities were largely implemented as planned. Data was collected, compiled, discussed, and
  reported on a timely basis. An independent three-phase survey implemented in a sample of beneficiary
  schools provided a qualitative assessment of the effectiveness of SDGs in strengthening school-level
  capacities, including participatory governance and management of SDPs. The PCU produced quarterly
  and annual progress reports. Following the 2019 restructuring, the PCU produced bi-monthly reports
  focused on outcome reporting, as agreed with the Bank. When the number of expected systems
  outcomes was substantially reduced at restructuring, the PDO-level and intermediate targets and
  indicators were adjusted in line with the reduced scope of the project. These adjustments addressed
  some of the weaknesses in M&E design related to project ambition and complexity. The Implementation
  Support Firm monitored the SDGs and submitted regular monitoring reports to the PCU, complemented
  by site visits to beneficiary schools conducted by the Bank and the PCU. The involvement of parents and
  other community members in the monitoring of school-based data helped build transparency, awareness,
  and ownership of school-level performance. Overall, the collection of PDO-level and intermediate results
  indicators, combined with other studies and M&E activity, enabled an adequate assessment of the
  project’s PDO.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project data were regularly used to report on the status of implementation and results, reflected in
  internal Bank reporting and aides-memoire. Data were especially useful for inciting and informing the
  2019 restructuring, with appropriate adjustments of the results framework and targets. The development
  and pilot testing of school report cards provided a useful tool for school-level monitoring and self-
  evaluation, and constituted an important element for dialogue on school performance and decision-
  making for improvements. The three-phase qualitative survey carried out in a sample of 140 beneficiary
  schools explored the effect of SDGs on school-level capacity and autonomy and was used to make
  necessary adjustments during implementation. The implementation and use of project M&E contributed
  to improvements in DSME capacity to monitor sector outcomes and in sector reporting standards.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental. No construction or rehabilitation activities were envisaged under the proposed project. The
   Project Operational Manual and School Grants Manual included specific language about the ineligibility of
   civil works under the project. No environmental safeguards were thus triggered under the proposed project,
   which was classified as Category “C."

   Social. The project did not trigger the Bank’s social safeguards policies, as no form of involuntary
   resettlement was allowed under the project. The project did support citizens engagement and school-based
   governance structures facilitating the participation of teachers, parents, and communities in the preparation,
   implementation, and monitoring of school development plans financed by SDGs. Of the 240 schools
   selected to receive SDGs, 140 were chosen on the basis of their rural locations, poorer socio-economic
   background, and lower education outcomes, with a view to improving equity.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. As part of preparation, an FM assessment was carried out to determine risks
   and to help establish adequate arrangements. FM responsibilities were assigned to MEST’s Budget and
   Finance Department, given its satisfactory performance in implementing a previous IDA-financed project.
   To ensure a sound fiduciary environment and the satisfaction of minimum requirements under OP 10.00,
   the following actions were agreed with the government: (i) the recruitment of a qualified FM specialist to be
   placed in the PCU, in keeping with the arrangement under the previous project; (ii) periodic, on-the-job
   training of relevant FM staff in Bank procedures; (iii) documentation of FM procedures in the FM Manual;
   and (iv) revision of the existing SDG Manual. The overall FM risk at appraisal was assessed as moderate.

   The MEST budget was to pre-finance project expenditures and be reimbursed by the Credit, on the basis
   of quarterly financial reports documenting such expenditures. Other allowed disbursement methods
   included direct payment and special commitment. Annual project budget needs were to be submitted by
   MEST to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) as part of the budget preparation cycle, and included in the Budget
   Law. This pre-financing mechanism ran the risk of insufficient or untimely budgetary allocations, as
   acknowledged at appraisal. Indeed, this risk materialized during implementation, resulting in delays in SDG
   execution in the early stages of implementation and in the cancellation of planned activities in the last few
   months of implementation, impeding full disbursement of the credit prior to closing. Delays in the annual
   budget law, difficulty in accurately forecasting budgets for SDGs, and occasional weak coordination among
   MoF, MEST, and municipalities all played a part. Following the 2019 restructuring, SDG transfers were
   streamlined by MEST, municipalities, and MoF, and a Memorandum of Understanding documented an
   agreement between MEST and municipalities, making it clear that municipalities were to allocate those
   funds to schools, which in turn were to follow Bank procurement rules.

   In general, FM was found to have followed Bank procedures, and FM requirements were complied with
   throughout implementation. The FM rating was downgraded only once (ISR#6, September 2018) from
   Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory, given budget delays for SDGs. Internal financial reports were


                                                                                                   Page 23 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



   submitted on time and in accordance with Bank procedures. Annual audits, including SDG audits, were
   submitted on time, all with unqualified opinion, revealing no significant irregularities.



   Procurement. The overall procurement risk rating was substantial at appraisal due to capacity constraints
   under previous projects implemented by MEST. The lack of procurement knowledge and experience of the
   multiple beneficiary schools was also a high risk factor. While mitigation measures were adequate, they
   were not always complied with. It took more than two years to recruit a full-time procurement specialist,
   since the one initially recruited was available only on a part-time basis. The ICR noted that procurement
   practices were found to have followed Bank procedures, and no major issues were identified during
   procurement reviews and implementation support missions. Minor issues encountered, including the
   incomplete entry of contract information in STEP (an online system to support the planning and tracking of
   procurement activities), were resolved with the Bank’s help.

   Nevertheless, several procurement packages experienced significant delays due to weak capacity of
   MEST’s evaluation committees, insufficient understanding of Bank procurement rules, and poor
   communication and unclear responsibilities between the PCU and MEST. A number of actions improved
   procurement performance, including: face-to-face training and hands-on support provided by the in-country
   Bank specialist to the MEST procurement evaluation committee; allocation of additional time of the Bank’s
   in-country specialist to advise on procurement activities; the hiring of a new, full-time procurement
   specialist, who started in January 2019; project simplification at restructuring; and the addition of more
   procurement support with the hiring of a part-time, experienced procurement officer in July 2019.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from those presented in the ICR, reworded by IEG:

      A project supporting multiple, complex, system-wide reforms in a politically fragile,
       low-capacity environment is not likely to succeed without undertaking, and factoring
       into the design, rigorous assessments of: the political economy of those reforms
       among key stakeholders; the commitment and ownership of the highest levels of
       government to reforms; the technical, managerial, and institutional capacity to
       implement them; and the availability of resources to ensure their proper financing and
       sustainability. Because these assessments were not systematically undertaken during
       project preparation, the initial design, scope, and outcome targets of the project were far too
       complex and ambitious for the country context.
      Especially in the context of a constantly changing political environment with high
       turnover of sector leadership and key technical positions, a stable, adequately staffed
       PCU with low turnover is critical for ensuring smooth implementation, the
       achievement of results, and capacity building of ministry staff. Prior to restructuring,
       frequent rotation of PCU staff, including the Project Coordinator, undermined institutional
       capacity and memory and the pace of project implementation. Bank efforts to maintain
       implementation momentum during periods of government transition and to strengthen PCU
       staffing helped bring stability and enhance capacity, contributing to a positive turnaround in
       the project’s performance post-restructuring.

      A timely, rigorous, candid, and evidence-based mid-term evaluation can be an
       effective tool for major restructuring of a non-performing project and for enabling its
       ultimate success. In the case of this project, the restructuring resulted in a simpler, more
       focused design, with fewer critical activities, much better suited to the complex, fragile
       environment and limited institutional capacity in Kosovo.

IEG’s review offers an additional lesson:

      In a country where issues of strong inequities prevail, there are multiple opportunities
       to address these issues both directly and indirectly. Among the 240 schools selected to
       benefit from SDGs, 140 were selected for their rural locations and for their service to
       disadvantaged populations. During the June 1, 2022 meeting with IEG, the TTL provided
       additional information and insight on how the project also factored equity concerns into the
       capacity and systems strengthening activities. Disadvantaged schools benefited from school-
       level management capacity building and, disproportionately so, from the school report card
       pilot, which enabled comparison to other schools in the municipality and nationally. The in-
       depth report on PISA 2018 addressed the special theme of learning equity across the
       country. The technical assistance exploring school financing formulas factored in the need
       for increased financing for disabled students and disadvantaged schools. Had equity been
       included as a higher-order objective, and its tracking and measurement taken into account in
       the choice of intermediate results and/or outcome indicators (in other words, had equity been
       more systematically reflected in the various components of the project’s results chain), the
       project’s contribution to equity may have been more fully assessed and developed.



                                                                                                  Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Education System Improvement Project (P149005)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of evidence. The ICR’s presentation of the evidence was systematic and credible, supporting its
reporting of achievements. Annex 1 presented baselines, targets (original and revised), and actual
achievements, based on project data that was routinely collected and compiled, as noted in the M&E
section. These data were woven into the ICR’s efficacy section, along with results from qualitative surveys on
the project’s performance.

Quality of analysis. The ICR undertook a credible analysis of project performance, drawing on project data
and related surveys, and weaving in elements of its own direct observations and interviews of key informants
during the ICR preparation process. The analysis was particularly challenging for this ICR because: (a) the
project, especially in its initial stage, was extremely complex, largely focused on difficult-to-measure systems
and capacity reforms, and linked to higher-order objectives; and (b) restructuring represented a substantial
change in project scope and ambition. Indeed, the challenge of this ICR’s organization and analysis of efficacy
is raised among the ICR’s lessons (p. 40). The decision to organize the analysis around the eight expected
outcomes separately, while still assessing their links and contributions to higher-order objectives, was the right
one, and it was well executed through the text and a series of tables presenting tallies of activities, intermediate
results, and ratings for each outcome. Key factors affecting implementation, Bank performance, and M&E were
well assessed.

Quality of lessons was strong. Lessons were distilled from the evidence and analysis presented in the ICR;
relevant to specific experiences for the project while also relevant to other countries and projects embarking on
similar reforms; and consistent with ratings in the ICR.

Results orientation. Thanks to the ICR’s organization around the eight systems/capacity outcomes and their
links to higher-order objectives, its results orientation was strong and focused on what occurred as a
consequence of the project. A subsequent discussion with the TTL informed two paragraph under Section 4.of
this ICRR exploring attribution and the counterfactual.

Internal consistency/adherence to guidelines. The various parts of the ICR were logically linked and
coherent, and its reporting on safeguards and fiduciary compliance was in keeping with guidelines. The ICR
correctly opted for a split rating methodology and was systematic and clear in its implementation, albeit with a
small shortcoming, which did not impede IEG’s review: the ICR’s Table 12 (Summary of Overall Outcome
Rating/p. 21) and accompanying text presented ratings “at restructuring” and “at completion.” The guidelines
specify that a split rating should assess outcomes at the end of the project against, respectively, the original
PDO and outcome targets, and the revised PDO and outcome targets. Also, the presentation of disbursements
in SDRs would have provided for a more accurate calculation of disbursement rates.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                      Page 26 of 27
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Education System Improvement Project (P149005)



Substantial




                                                                              Page 27 of 27
