     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022986

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P131778                                    Obsolete Pesticides Management Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                              Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0742                                  30-Oct-2020                                            6,994,436.75

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Aug-2015                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             7,000,000.00                                    7,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              7,000,000.00                                    7,000,000.00

 Actual                                          6,994,436.75                                    6,994,436.75




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Chikako Miwa               Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to improve the management of obsolete pesticides and
   associated wastes in the Recipient's territory by the Recipient and other stakeholders” (Grant Agreement,
   Schedule 1, page 5). The PDO in the Grant Agreement was identical to that in the PAD (para 17), except for
   that the latter addressed the Recipient’s territory as “Côte d’Ivoire” and the Recipient as “the Government.”




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening the Regulatory and Institutional Framework (Estimate: US$1.90 million,
   Actual: US$2.17 million, 114 percent of the estimate) intended to strengthen the regulatory and institutional
   frameworks for pesticides management. The component had two subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1:
   Strengthening the Regulatory Framework Management of Obsolete Pesticides and Associated Wastes
   implemented activities to support the Government in developing new regulatory instruments and updating
   existing regulations and laws. Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening the Institutional Framework implemented
   activities to strengthen the capacity of the Government and the private entities to manage obsolete
   pesticides.

   Component 2: Management of Obsolete Pesticides and Associated Wastes (Estimate: US$6.50
   million, Actual: US$4.23 million, 65 precent of the estimate) intended to improve the efficiency in managing
   stocks of obsolete pesticides and their associated wastes. The component had three subcomponents.
   Subcomponent 2.1: Pesticides Inventory implemented activities to design a national inventory based on the
   preliminary survey conducted during project preparation and the existing international inventory system (i.e.,
   the Pesticides Stock Management System of the FAO). Subcomponent 2.2: Storage and Disposal of
   Obsolete Pesticides and Associated Wastes implemented activities to eliminate or safely store inventoried
   obsolete pesticides and their associated wastes in accordance with international standards and regulations.
   Subcomponent 2.3. Pesticides Management Information System (MIS) developed a pesticides MIS to
   provide information on: (i) the quantity and location of obsolete pesticides within the country; (ii) the
   progress made in safely storing and disposing pesticides; and (iii) the trading and importing of pesticides.

   Component 3: Promotion of Alternatives to Chemical Pesticides (Estimate: US$0.70 million, Actual:
   US$0.29 million, 41 percent of the estimate) supported the Government in designing and implementing
   Integrated Pest Management (IPM) alternatives in pilot areas where pesticide use was high due to the
   presence of cotton and cocoa farms. The component also supported the inclusion of IPM in educational
   curricula.

   Component 4: Project Management (Estimate: US$1.70 million, Actual: US$2.40 million, 141 percent of
   the estimate) supported the Integrated Projects Administration Unit (IPMU) in the Ministry of Environment
   and Sustainable Development (MINEDO: Ministère de l’Environnement et du Développement Durable) to
   conduct the overall daily administration of the project including Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Financial
   Management (FM), procurement, and audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$10.80 million (PAD, para 35). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$9.09 million (ICR, Annex 3, page 47).




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



   Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed by US$7.00 million grant from the Global
   Environment Facility (GEF) (PAD, para 35). At project closing, the actual disbursements were approximately
   US$6.99 million from the GEF (ICR, Table 3.1, page 41).

   Recipient Contribution: At appraisal, US$ 3.80 million was planned to be contributed by the Government
   (PAD, para 35). At project closing, the actual government contributions were US$2.28 million (ICR, Table
   4.2, page 52).

   Dates: The project was approved on August 25, 2015 and became effective on January 19, 2016. The Mid-
   Term Review was published on May 9, 2019. The project closed on June 30, 2021, after a closing date
   extension of eight months from the original closing date of October 30, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Agriculture is the primary income earner for more than half the population of
the country, though the agriculture sector’s contribution to GDP decreased from about 26.7 percent of GDP
in 2011 to about 20.6 percent in 2019 (ICR, para 3). The country has been the world’s largest producer of
cocoa (40 percent) (ICR, para 3). Intensive and widespread use of pesticides has been a significant driver
of the intensification of agriculture in Côte d’Ivoire. At appraisal, illegally imported pesticides were estimated
to be approximately 20,000 tons per year, which was larger than the estimate of legally commercialized
pesticides of 13,300 tons per year (PAD, para 5). The quantity of pesticides commercialized by the
members of CropLife, an international trade association of agrochemical companies was 9,983 tons in
2014, which accounted for only 75 percent of the total quantity of legally commercialized pesticides (PAD,
para 5). Inappropriately managed pesticides have the potential to result in serious adverse impacts,
including: (i) the accumulation of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes; (ii) high economic costs to
farmers; (iii) dispersal of pesticides into the natural environment (soil, water, and air) causing negative
impacts on fauna and flora; and (iv) negative impacts on human health due to residual pesticides in the
environment and food crops as well as from direct contact with pesticides during their use. About 44
percent of farmers around the world were poisoned by pesticides every year, according to a review of the
World Health Organization’s Mortality Database (ICR, para 5).

Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal, no national strategy for management of obsolete
pesticides and associated wastes was in place. The project envisaged to support the Government to
prepare the national strategy under Subcomponent 1.2 (ICR, para 15). The PDO was in line with the
Government’s commitment to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs),
Rotterdam Convention on International Trade of Hazardous Chemicals Based on Prior-Informed-
Consensus, and Basel Convention on Control of Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and their
Disposal, all of them were ratified by the country in 2003 (PAD, para 10). At project closing, the PDO was
in line with the national strategy for management of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes, which was
prepared under the project (ICR, para 44), and the international conventions listed above.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the last Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY10-13, in particular, its Outcome 2.3: “Strengthened Protection of the
Environment and Natural Resources” under Pillar 2: “Improving the Performance of the Agriculture Sector”

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



               (CPS, page 27). The PDO was also in line with the Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD) published in
               2015, which pointed out the excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides in the country in early
               2000s, that might contribute to soil and water pollution (SCD, para 6.38). At project closing, the PDO was
               weakly aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY16-19, which was extended through
               FY21. The project was expected to support CPF’s Objective 1: “Improve Productivity in
               Agriculture/Agribusiness Value Chains” under Focus Area One: “Accelerating Sustainable Private Sector-
               Led Growth” (CPF, Annex 1, page 38), by reducing adverse impacts from the obsolete pesticides to the
               environment and thus contributing to improving management of threats to agricultural production caused by
               climate change and natural disasters in the long term (CPF, para 44).

               Parallel Sector Experience: This project was designed to build upon the efforts and funding of the parallel
               projects supported by the World Bank to enhance sustainable and efficient use of pesticides, such as; (i)
               the Agricultural Sector Support Project (P119308, FY14-18), which aimed for enhancing productivity
               enhancement including through more environmentally sustainable use of pesticides; and (ii) the West Africa
               Agricultural Productivity Program APL for Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire (P117148, FY11-17), which aimed
               for a sustainable increase in productivity while supporting regional integration as means of achieving shared
               growth and poverty alleviation in West Africa (PAD, para 12).

               The PDO aligned with the Government’s commitments to the international conventions for protections of the
               environment and the national strategy for management of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes at
               project closing, as well as the World Bank’s CPS at appraisal. While the PDO’s alignment with the CPF at
               project closing was weak, there is an assumption that better management of pesticides will improve
               agriculture practices and thus have a long-term impact on greater opportunity in farmer value chains.
               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the management of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes in Côte d’Ivoire by the Government
                             and other stakeholders

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): The project envisioned that the activities including supporting the Government to
                             draft and approve laws, regulations, and a national strategy would result in outputs including the new and
                             updated decrees and regulations and the new national strategy on management of obsolete pesticides and
                             associated wastes, contributing to an outcome of strengthened regulatory and institutional framework for
                             the management of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes. The TOC also envisioned that
                             researching, providing training, piloting the use of biopesticides, and supporting education for integrated

                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



pest management would result in outputs including the pilots implemented to test the use of alternatives to
chemical pesticides and the management of farmer field schools and local field school established, also
contributing to an outcome of strengthened regulatory and institutional framework for the management of
obsolete pesticides and associated wastes. The project envisioned that the activities including inputting
information on obsolete pesticides to FAO’s Pesticides Stock Management System (PSMS) and developing a
pesticides management information system (MIS) would result in outputs including the development of a
national inventory and the MIS to monitor progress in storing, disposing, and trading pesticides, contributing
to an outcome of reduction of the stockpiles of the obsolete pesticides and associated wastes. Critical
assumptions here were that: (i) the Government was committed for sufficient budgetary and administrative
support for the long term; (ii) the Government strengthened partnerships with the private entities to share
storage and disposal costs; and (iii) the Government developed sufficient technical capacity for safe
collection, transport, and disposal of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes. In the long-term, those
outcomes listed above were envisioned to contribute to reducing use of synthetic and potentially dangerous
pesticides and adverse impacts from the obsolete pesticides to the environment and human health, as well as
to improving management of threats to agricultural production caused by climate change and natural
disasters.

Outputs (ICR, para 31-54 and Annex 1):

      The national strategy for management of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes was designed,
         not meeting the target of being budgeted and implemented at project closing. However, as of March
         2022, the strategy, on-going budget, action plan, and public and private partners for implementation
         have been validated by the technical and steering committee of the project (representing key private
         partners, agencies and ministries) (ICR team’s response to IEG’s questionnaire, hereafter, ICR team’s
         response).
        3 Pesticides Committees were functional, meeting the target of 3 committees.
        Legislative and regulatory measures for obsolete pesticides and associated wastes were drafted and
         enforced, partially meeting the target of being implemented with the corresponding budget. The
         project supported development of the law on reducing fraudulent pesticide trade and increasing
         enforcement measures, which entered into force in the country on January 18, 2022 (ICR team’s
         response).
        The inventory of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes was substantially completed and the
         inventory’s data was incorporated into a newly developed Management Information System (MIS) on
         obsolete pesticides, meeting the target.
        The MIS on obsolete pesticides was established and became functional, durable, was in use, and
         data was available to the public, meeting the target.
        Results of the pilot in the cocoa-growing area in the town of Azaguié to demonstrate the use of two
         biopesticides (i.e., Astoun and Neco in trade names) against brown rot of cocoa pods (i.e.,
         phytophthora palmivora) as alternatives to chemical pesticides were available and sufficiently
         disseminated, meeting the target (ICR, para 48).
        Direct project beneficiaries were 153,279 people, exceeding the target of 100,000 people. Female
         beneficiaries accounted for 51 percent of the total direct project beneficiaries, meeting the target of 50
         percent. The data used to inform this indicator were the number of attendants to meetings, workshops,
         and awareness raising sessions (ICR, page 35). Though this indicator was designed as a PDO
         indicator that was required at the corporate level, it measured output-level achievements given the
         engagement with activities.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



In addition to the outputs defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
output which did not have any formal targets.

      The National Guide on Biopesticides for the cocoa sector was developed and disseminated, with an
       aim to enhance environmental sustainability (ICR, para 49).

Outcomes (ICR, para 31-54 and Annex 1):

      329 metric tons of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) and POP wastes were destroyed, disposed or
       contained in an environmentally sound manner, exceeding the target of 250 metric tons (131 percent
       of the target). The total eliminated POPs and POP wastes consisted of 318.3 metric tons of obsolete
       pesticides and 10.7 metric tons of associated wastes. These were eliminated in incinerators at very
       high temperatures (850 to 1200 degrees Celsius) to comply with the international and national
       regulations.
            o 329 metric tons of OPs and associated wastes were safely contained at targeted sites, more
               than tripling the target of 100 metric tons.
            o 329 metric tons of OPs and associated wastes were safely disposed of, more than doubling of
               the target of 150 metric tons.
      81 percent of data in the national inventory on obsolete pesticides and associated wastes was publicly
       accessible, meeting the target of 80 percent. The remaining 19 percent of the data were not published
       due to its sensitivity and its link with the private sector.

In addition to the outcomes defined in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved
outcomes which did not have any formal targets.

      The yields of cocoa increased from 750 kg per ha to 2 tons per ha in cocoa farms with an average of
       50 trees per ha during the 2019 campaign, according to the farmers’ cooperative in the pilot area
       which applied one of the biopesticides introduced under the project (i.e., Astoun) (ICR, Annex 4, page
       48). The project selected a farm which had not used chemical pesticides for approximately 10 years
       as a pilot site to test biopesticides (ICR team’s response). The biopesticides’ effectiveness to kill the
       fungus that caused brown root rot in cocoa trees was demonstrated, resulting in a recommendation in
       the stakeholder meeting to test the biopesticides in all four areas of the Agneby Cacao program (ICR
       team’s response).
      108 Departmental Committees for the Fight against Illegal Pesticides (CDLPIs: Comités
       départementaux de lutte contre les pesticides illégaux) were set up in February 2017 by an inter-
       ministerial decree, contributing to the reduction of fraud in pesticide commerce at land borders (ICR,
       para 67). After awareness raising activities and other prevention activities were conducted, fewer
       markets in target areas had fraudulent pesticides for sale, according to anecdotal reports (ICR team’s
       response).

Referring to the TOC above, the two envisioned outcomes were achieved. Some evidence outside the
Results Framework implied a potential for the reduced use of hazardous chemical pesticides in the long-term,
though additional evidence was needed for further assessment. Overall, the efficacy is rated substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy is rated substantial because the two envisioned outcomes were achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, no Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was presented. The PAD (para 57) only
   qualitatively assessed the potential costs and benefits. At project closing, no IRR was presented. No reliable
   data was available, regarding the costs covering countrywide facilities and agricultural producers (ICR, Annex 4,
   page 50) and illegally imported pesticides (ICR, Annex 4, page 49).

   Cost-Effectiveness Analysis: At appraisal, the estimated cost per unit for disposing obsolete pesticides under
   the project was US$3,900 per metric ton (PAD, para 58). At project closing, the actual cost per unit of disposed
   obsolete pesticides was US$3,599 per metric ton (ICR, Table 4.1, page 49). The actual unit cost of disposal was
   also compared with that of the other Persistent Organic Pollutants management projects funded by the World
   Bank. The actual unit cost of disposal in the country was lower than US$4,183 per ton in Moldova and US$
   5,700 per ton in Mali, but slightly higher than US$3,400 per ton in Egypt and US$3,103 per ton in the regional
   program and more than doubled US$1,545 per ton in Belarus (ICR, Table 4.1, page 49).

   Aspects of Design and Implementation that Affected Efficiency: The actual costs for project management
   (i.e., for Component 4) increased to 140 percent of the estimate at appraisal, accounting for 26 percent of the
   total project costs at project closing (ICR, Annex 3, page 47). The ratio of the project management costs over
   the total project costs (i.e., 26 percent) was higher than those for similar obsolete pesticides projects such as 20
   percent in Mali (P146247), 7.2 percent in Philippines (P106885), 6.8 percent in Moldova (P090037), and 1.8
   percent in Belarus (P111110) (ICR team’s response). Even though the project expanded the scope of inventory
   to cover 4,072 sites, which was over 10 times the number of sites covered by typical inventory operations (ICR,
   Annex 4, page 51), the high ratio of the project management costs over the total project costs implied low
   implementation efficiency in terms of project management. The project closing date was extended for 9 months,
   mainly due to the external factors including: (i) the new national budget allocation system which delayed
   transferring budgets to the project’s 2020 annual work plan for 6 months; and (ii) the restrictions of physical
   movements due to the COVID-19 (ICR, Annex 4, page 50). The prolonged process to ensure MIS
   operationalization, however, resulted in the lack of data to calculate the ex-post IRR.




                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



The actual costs per unit for disposing obsolete pesticides under the project was lower than the estimate at
appraisal. The implementation delays were largely explained by factors external to the project. Overall,
efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated substantial because the objectives were in line with the strategies of the
government and the Bank’s assistance. The efficacy is rated substantial because the two envisioned outcomes
were achieved. The efficiency is rated substantial because the actual costs per unit for disposing obsolete
pesticides under the project was lower than the estimate at appraisal. The project’s outcome is thus rated
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The two risks to development outcome that were described in the ICR (para 99) are presented below.

Risks Related to Institutional Support: There was a risk that a further prolonged process of the
Government to adopt the regulations on pesticides management could result in increasing accumulation of
stocks of obsolete pesticides in the future (ICR, para 99). To mitigate the risk, the project supported
development of the law on reducing fraudulent pesticide trade and increasing enforcement measures, which
entered into force on January 18, 2022 (ICR team’s response). In addition, the project conducted a workshop
in December 2021 with CropLife’s support for strengthening the regulatory framework (ICR team’s
response).


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



Risks Related to Government Commitment: There was a risk that if the Government could not provide
budgetary support to the relevant department in the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
(MINADER) to manage the pesticide Management Information System (MIS), it might not be able to
contribute to sustain the project’s outcomes in the longer term. To mitigate the risk, MINADER pursued a
budget extension for continued financing to sustain operation of the MIS (ICR team’s response).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Technical, environmental, and social aspects were adequately addressed by ensuring the provision of the
  necessary technical assistance from the World Bank staff and the locally hired consultants. M&E
  arrangements and risk assessments were sufficient. In addition, the project coordinated with the other
  World Bank operations and the other development partners to ensure complementarity among the
  existing activities. As a result, parallel financing of US$2 million was provided from CropLife CI, US$6
  million from the German Agency for International Cooperation, US$6 million from the French government,
  and US$14 million from another World Bank project (ICR, para 93). The strategic relevance and
  approach were adequate in general, as described in Section 3. On the other hand, the fiduciary aspects
  were not adequately considered, as the institutional capacity of the Integrated Projects Administration
  Unit (IPMU) for financial reporting, disbursements, and procurement proved to be limited. Overall, the
  quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision inputs and processes through implementation support missions were adequate, as the project
 task team conducted a total of eight missions biannually to supervise and support implementation support
 missions (ICR, para 96). The focus on development impact was adequate in general. However, the project
 heavily focused on the reduction of the stockpiles of the obsolete pesticides and associated wastes, with
 lighter focus on promotion of alternatives to chemical pesticides, resulting in the actual expenditure for
 Component 3 to be 41 percent of the original estimate, as described in Section 2.d. Supervision of fiduciary
 aspects was not adequate; because, the IPMU’s insufficient fiducial management capacity that was
 identified at appraisal was not strengthened in early periods of project implementation (ICR, para 80),
 resulting in the delay in justification of the accounts-receivable balance that were pointed out in auditors’
 qualified opinions (ICR, para 91). The high ratio of the project management costs over the total project
 costs implied inefficiency in project management, as described in Section 5. Overall, the quality of
 supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



 Considering the satisfactory rating at entry and moderately satisfactory rating during supervision, the
 overall bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline by IEG and
 OPCS.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The indicators were specific, measurable, and time-bound in general. The baseline and targets were
 available for all indicators. The M&E manual was prepared to provide a detailed explanation of each
 indicator and verification methodology (ICR, para 82).The objective did not explicitly present outcomes that
 the project envisioned to achieve, as described in the TOC in Section 4. The PDO indicators were able to
 measure the outcomes on reduced stockpile of obsolete pesticides and on strengthened regulatory and
 institutional framework, but not the longer-term outcome on reduced use of chemical pesticides. The
 corporate-wide PDO indicator on the number of direct beneficiaries measured outputs, as described in
 Section 4. The M&E design and arrangements were not well-embedded institutionally, considering that an
 M&E specialist at the Integrated Project Administration Unit (IPMU) who was hired by the existing Forest
 Carbon Partnership Facility Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation+ (FCPF REDD+)
 project funded by the World Bank (PAD, Annex 3, page 38).



b. M&E Implementation
  All the indicators in the Results Framework were measured and reported. On the other hand, the agency
  responsible for M&E lacked a centralized system for archiving of key project documents, which might
  have posed a challenge for the IPMU’s in tracking budgets by components (ICR, para 83). The M&E
  functions and processes were unlikely to be sustained after project closing because no evidence was
  provided regarding to what extent technical transfer was made from the M&E specialist hired by the
  parallel project to the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development’s staff.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings informed the PIMU to identify the activities that were affected by the shortfall of the funding
  from the Government and modify the activities to reduce the costs while meeting the results (ICR, para
  85). In addition, the M&E process supported the contractor to ensure compliance with the Environmental
  and Management Plan (ICR, para 85).




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



  The M&E design, implementation, and utilization were adequate to provide evidence on achievements of
  outcomes, in spite of a few shortcomings in the M&E design. Overall, the M&E quality is rated
  substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as environmental category A (full assessment) and
   triggered two World Bank safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   Pest Management (OP 4.09). An overall Environmental and Social Impact Assessment was carried out,
   leading to the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMP outlined procedures and
   preventive/mitigation measures to manage environmental and social risks associated with: (i) registering
   obsolete pesticides and associated wastes in the original place to the inventory; (ii) transporting obsolete
   pesticides and associated wastes, and treating polluted sites; (iii) disposing obsolete pesticides and
   associated wastes; and (iv) responding to emergency situations on sites identified by the inventory (ICR,
   para 87). No additional ESMP for the contractor (i.e., Ruegg Matray Group Côte d’Ivoire) was deemed
   necessary, given that the contractor met all national and international standards for storage and disposal of
   obsolete pesticides (ICR, para 87). Collection, transport, and disposal of obsolete pesticides and associated
   waste were conducted without incident and in compliance with the World Bank’s policies and guidelines.
   The operations were reviewed and approved by the Ivorian Anti-pollution Center (CIAPOL: Centre Ivoirien
   Antipollution) and the project before implementation. No case of intoxication was detected during the post-
   inventory cholinesterase tests (ICR, para 88). At the time of the ICR, the remaining activities were the
   cleanup of the sites used for removal or collection of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes, as well as
   the verification of sites cleaning by an expert, based on the agreement with FAO and the support of
   CIAPOL. On the other hand, the grievance redress mechanism was not compliant with the World Bank’s
   standards due to missing records of oral complaints received (ICR, para 90). No social specialist was in the
   IPMU until May 2020, potentially reducing the project’s ability to monitor social safeguards instruments
   (ICR, para 90).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): At appraisal, the fiduciary aspects were arranged to be under the
   responsibility of the Integrated Project Administration Unit (IPMU) of this project and the existing Forest
   Carbon Partnership Facility Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation+ (FCPF REDD+)
   project, considering the project team of FCPF REDD+’s experience with the procedures of the World
   Bank’s projects and the potential for economies of scale (ICR, para 80). However, the IPMU’s inadequate
   capacity for financial reporting, disbursements, and procurement was revealed (ICR, para 80). The
   financial management slowly improved by the World Bank’s support including from an FM specialist based
   in the World Bank office in Abidjan who conducted regular implementation support missions (ICR, para

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



   91). The interim financial reports non-audits were prepared and submitted by the deadlines agreed in the
   financing agreements and were all deemed acceptable. The provisional audit reports and the FY20 audit
   report were submitted in a timely manner. However, the majority of the reports were issued with qualified
   opinion due to the delay in justification of the accounts-receivable balance (ICR, para 91). No explanation
   was provided in response to IEG’s inquiry regarding how the external auditors’ opinions mentioned in the
   ICR (para 91) had been addressed.

   Procurement: Procurement activities were conducted in line with the World Bank’s procurement
   guidelines and the project’s procurement plans. According to the last post review conducted in March
   2019, procurement arrangements aligned with the workload were still in place, while there were
   shortcomings in procurement process and contract administration: (i) inaccurate evaluation criteria; (ii)
   missing documents in the Call for Expressions of Interest; (iii) the evaluators systematically averaging their
   score instead of harmonizing it; (iv) long procedures; (v) errors in the appraisal report; (vi) cost overruns;
   and (vii) exceeding of execution deadlines (ICR, para 92). The Procurement Rating was downgraded from
   satisfactory to moderately satisfactory, based on the findings in the review in March 2019 (ISR Seq No: 8
   dated June 10, 2019). Though some training was provided to the procurement team based on
   recommendations to address the shortcomings identified in the review (ICR team’s response), the
   Procurement Rating remained moderately satisfactory until project closing (Operations Portal).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts to global health were observed through the disposal of obsolete pesticides and
   associated wastes, as the disposal was adequately handled to eliminate any threat of release of
   unintended persistent organic pollutants such as dioxins and furans (ICR, para 52).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                                                                  The quality at entry is rated
                                                                                  satisfactory. The quality of
                                                                                  supervision is rated moderately
                                                                                  satisfactory because the project
                                                                                  management cost ratio was
Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory   comparatively high among the
                                                                                  obsolete pesticides
                                                                                  management projects in other
                                                                                  countries. Overall, the bank
                                                                                  performance is rated moderately
                                                                                  satisfactory.

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (para 100-104) provided five lessons. Some of them are presented below with editing
because they may provide lessons of interests for other obsolete pesticides management projects.

Regional disposal of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes in Côte d’Ivoire can be an
option for future similar projects in other countries in the region, given it is pursuant to
international and regional agreements (i.e., the Basel, Rotterdam, and Bamako Conventions) and
environmental standards and safeguards. The disposal firm contracted under the project, Ruegg
Matray Group Côte d’Ivoire, disposed of the obsolete pesticides and associated wastes in line with
environmental standards and with reasonable costs of disposal (ICR, para 57). Considering that
FAO’s pricing models have not changed over the past decade, the cost of disposal has the potential
to drop further with economies of scale and additional experience (ICR, para 100).

Narrow focus on disposal of stockpiles of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes can
limit effectiveness of projects to incentivize stakeholders to shift from chemical pesticides to
biopesticides. The Results Framework lacked PDO indicators to measure an important
development result regarding the reduced use of obsolete pesticides, as described in Sections 4.
While the Integrated Pest Management approach was tested under the project by piloting the use of
biopesticides to manage brown pod rot and providing training to farmers to reduce reliance on toxic
pesticides (ICR, para 101), insufficient evidence was captured in the Results Framework regarding
what outcome was achieved by these activities.

If governments commit to co-financing of project components and not in-kind contributions,
it might pose a risk of delaying project implementation. The project activities to develop and
operationalize the pesticides inventory was delayed because the Government was not able to
provide its committed amount in full and in a timely manner (ICR, para 103). Constraints and
changes that may affect execution of governments’ budgets include fiduciary constraints within
budget years, changes in staffing, and other conflicting demands (ICR, para 103).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The report follows the majority of the guidelines. The
quality of analysis is aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR in general. The ICR provided clear lessons
and the supporting evidence. Some gaps in evidence were compensated by the ICR team’s response to IEG’s
questionnaire. On the other hand, the ICR’s descriptions on the design, implementation, and utilization of M&E

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)



were largely focused on project implementation process and less so on monitoring progress in achieving
development outcomes. No explanation was provided in response to IEG’s inquiry regarding how the external
auditors’ opinions mentioned in the ICR (para 91) had been addressed. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated
substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
