     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0022878

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P168587                                      MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP

 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Morocco                                      Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89250                                   31-Dec-2020                                         685,248,044.05

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Feb-2019                                  31-Dec-2020

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             700,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              700,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          685,248,044.05                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo           Christopher David             Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD
                              Nelson



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

As per the Program Document on page 3, "the Program Development Objective (PDO) is to foster financial
inclusion and contribute to digital transformation for individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs".




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The programmatic operation was underpinned by ten Prior Actions (PAs), which were structured around the
three pillars delineated below, and completed before disbursement.

Pillar 1: Enhancing financial inclusion for individuals and MSMEs:

The five PAs under the first pillar are presented below, and were completed ahead of the operation approval:

PA#1: To allow microfinance institutions to expand their portfolio and respond to credit demand of MSME, the
Council of Government has approved and submitted to Parliament on November 13, 2018, Draft Law No. 85-
18 amending Law No. 18-97 on Microcredit authorizing an increase in the maximum lending size from MAD
50,000 to MAD 150,000.

PA#2: To increase access to finance for small farmers, the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Credit
Agricole du Maroc have raised the ceiling of loans guaranteed to small farmers by the Fonds de Stabilisation
Prudentielle from MAD 100,000 to MAD 200,000, pursuant to an amendment to the Convention establishing
de Fonds de Stabilisation Prudentielle “FSP” dated November 2, 2018.

PA#3: To enhance oversight of gender gaps in financial inclusion of women and female-owned enterprises,
have gender data in the credit information system, and support modernization of Morocco’s credit information
system, BAM has issued Notice No. L/BKAM/2018/9632 dated December 20, 2018, making it mandatory for
payment companies to report gender-disaggregated data.

PA#4: To improve health insurance coverage, the Borrower has adopted on September 13, 2018 and
published in the Official Gazette dated January 21, 2019, Decrees No. 2.18.622, 2.18.623 and 2.18.624
implementing Law No. 98-15 to expand basic compulsory health insurance coverage to professionals, self-
employed individuals, and non-salary individuals.

PA#5: To develop Islamic Finance (Finance Participative): (a) the Borrower has enacted Law No. 69-17
amending and supplementing Law No. 33-06 related to the issuance of Sukuk certificates published in the
Official Gazette No. 6667 dated April 23, 2018; and (b) the Council of Government has approved and
submitted to Parliament on October 24, 2018, Draft Law No. 87-18 amending and supplementing Law No. 17-
99 on the Insurance Code relating to Takaful insurance.

Pillar 2: Supporting the development of digital platforms and digital infrastructure,

The three PAs under the first pillar are presented below, and were completed ahead of the operation
approval:

PA#6: To promote the development of mobile payments, the BAM has adopted Decision No. 392/W/2018 on
mobile payments, dated November 12, 2018 setting the conditions and modalities of mobile payments in
Morocco, including interoperability of mobile wallets (m-wallets).

PA#7: In order to create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications infrastructure
and strengthen competition in the fiber access market, the ANRT has adopted Decision No.
ANRT/DG/No.12/18 dated July 27, 2018 approving a wholesale offer to access passive infrastructure of
Maroc Telecom (Offre Génie Civil).


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



PA#8: To promote private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities (Collectivités Térritoriales)
including in remote areas, the Minister of Interior has adopted Circular No. F/2166 dated June 14, 2018
establishing a uniform ceiling for fees to be paid by investors to deploy their infrastructure in the municipal
public domain.

Pillar 3: Enhancing support to digital entrepreneurs

The two PAs under the first pillar are presented below, and were completed ahead of the operation approval:

PA#9: To streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means, the Borrower has enacted Law
No. 87-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 13-99 establishing the OMPIC, published in the Official
Gazette No. 6722 dated November 1, 2018; and the Council of Government has approved and submitted to
Parliament on March 19, 2018: (i) Draft Law No. 89-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 15-95 on the
Commercial Code for the establishment of a centralized electronic commerce register and decentralized
electronic commerce registries; and (ii) Draft Law No. 88-17 on the electronic creation and support to
enterprises.

PA#10: To promote the development of a new asset class to bridge the early stage finance gap of digital
entrepreneurs, the Fonds Innov Invest’s Technical Committee has adopted the technical specifications
(Cahier de Charge) dated December 26, 2018 outlining eligibility criteria for business angels to receive
financing from the Caisse Centrale de Garantie.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The Financial Inclusion and Digital Economy DPF was funded by a US$700 million loan from the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and disbursed in one tranche. The operation was approved on
February 19, 2019, became effective on April 10, 2019, and closed on schedule on December 31, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The PDO for this operation was consistent with Morocco’s five-year Government Program (2017–2021)
 and sector-level strategies supporting financial inclusion and digital transformation. In 2019, the
 Government, through the joint initiative of the Central Bank of Morocco (Bank Al Maghrib, BAM) and the
 Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), launched the National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS). This
 strategy was developed through a participatory approach and defined a common vision and national
 guidelines to reduce the disparities that persisted in terms of access and penetration of financial services. The
 Government developed an updated national strategy to drive digital transformation (Plan Maroc Numérique) in
 2020. The NFIS focused principally on rolling out mobile payments, microfinance, and inclusive insurance;
 facilitating the emergence of innovative financing tools for micro, small, and medium enterprise and start-ups
 and digitizing of government-to-person payments. The Plan Maroc Numérique aims to (a) digitalize
 government services; (b) promote the use of digital services to increase efficiency and the creation of new


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



business models in priority sectors; and (c) position Morocco as a digital hub for West Africa and outsourcing
market for Europe.

The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) both
emphasized the critical importance of greater socioeconomic inclusion. In the telecom sector, the SCD
called upon the authorities to update the legal and regulatory framework to attract new players. In the financial
sector, the SCD called for enhanced SMEs’ access to equity financing and better access to a range of
financial services (savings, remittances, credit, insurance, and digital payments). The CPF for FY19–FY24
set the overarching goal to “contribute to social cohesion by improving the conditions for growth and job
creation and reducing social and territorial disparities” and included two cross-cutting themes: gender and
digital technology. The design of this DPF thus had strong links to thGiven e SCD and the CPF.

The DPF built upon the World Bank Group’s active support of financial sector development for over a
decade. The World Bank Group delivered a strategic set of analytical and advisory services (ASAs) and
financing through both DPF and Investment Project Financing [IPF]) in the period leading up to this operation.
Therefore, each prior action and results area was informed by careful analytical work and a continuous reform
dialogue.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The assessment of the relevance of the Prior Actions (PAs) draws from the material presented in paragraphs
24-38 of the ICR.

PDO 1: To foster financial inclusion for individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.

Toward the above-mentioned PDO, five PAs were identified (PA#1 to PA#5) and their relevance and rating are
discussed below:

PA#1: To allow microfinance institutions to expand their portfolio and respond to credit demand of
MSME, the Council of Government has approved and submitted to Parliament on November 13, 2018,
Draft Law No. 85-18 amending Law No. 18-97 on Microcredit authorizing an increase in the maximum
lending size from MAD 50,000 to MAD 150,000.

Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

The PA#1 aimed to contribute to an improved legal framework, which would allow Microfinance Institutions
(MFIs) to acquire new clients through small enterprise lending. The reforms were intended to expand the
business line for MFIs and address gaps in small enterprise finance as there was a segment of the market that
was above the ceiling of MFIs, but below the amounts SME banks typically would lend. The increase in the
ceiling was viewed as a mechanism to boost financial inclusion. The two reforms had substantial potential to
positively affect financial inclusion and the stability of the microfinance sector.

The updated regulatory framework would allow MFIs to strengthen and diversify their funding source, and the
new law had the potential to promote continued financial stability in the sector, because corporate governance
standards were to be improved by the new legislation. The expected outcome was an increase the gross loan

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



portfolio in the sector. The PA#1 addressed a key business impediment and aimed to expand financial
inclusion by allowing MFIs to serve more affluent categories of customers. It was realistic, timely and aligned
with the PDO, and could generate results in the short term. The relevance of the PA#1 is rated Satisfactory.

PA#2: To increase access to finance for small farmers, the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the
Credit Agricole du Maroc (CAM) have raised the ceiling of loans guaranteed to small farmers by the
Fonds de Stabilisation Prudentielle from Moroccan Dinars (MAD) 100,000 to MAD 200,000, pursuant to
an amendment to the Convention establishing de Fonds de Stabilisation Prudentielle “FSP” dated
November 2, 2018.

Relevance Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The Moroccan Ministry of finance and the country's financial institution overseeing agriculture sector
credit signed a convention raising the ceiling of loans guaranteed by the Prudential Stabilization Fund (PSF)
from MAD 100,000 to MAD 200,000. Increasing the ceiling of the PSF guarantees would allow the Agricultural
Development Finance Corporation (TEF) to increase its credit portfolio and serve a larger number of
smallholder farmer enterprises that lacked adequate access to finance for business expansion and investment,
and to establish a more efficient program with improved outreach potential. The expected result was an
increase in volume of cumulative TEF loans disbursed, and an improved framework for TEF and CAM to fulfill
their mandate of promoting employment and growth in the agricultural sector in Morocco.

The PA#2 addressed a key business impediment and aimed to serve a larger number of smallholder farmer
enterprises that lacked adequate access to finance for business expansion and investment, and to establish a
more efficient program with improved outreach potential. The PA#2 was timely and aligned with the PDO-1,
and could generate results in the medium to long-term, because of difficulties inherent to the change in the
financial and agriculture sector and the large number of intervening institutions. The relevance of the PA#2 is
rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA#3: To enhance oversight of gender gaps in financial inclusion of women and female-owned
enterprises, have gender data in the credit information system, and support modernization of
Morocco’s credit information system, BAM has issued Notice No. L/BKAM/2018/9632 dated December
20, 2018, making it mandatory for payment companies to report gender-disaggregated data.

Relevance Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

The Moroccan Central Bank (BAM) adopted a Technical Notice, making it mandatory for payment companies to
report gender-disaggregated data. The policy aimed to develop and implement a data collection center on the
financing of women and women-owned enterprises, to better monitor gender gaps in access and use of the
formal financial system, and enhance their capacity to make credit and product allocation decisions to female
individuals and small businesses. The PA#3 aimed to better monitor gender gaps and inform financial sector
policy makers to address those gaps, and improve women and women-led companies access to finance in
particular through Government programs supported under PA#1 and PA#2.

The NFIS had a target of reducing the gender gap in the number of adults with access to financial accounts.
The PA was a logical evolution and a major building block for ensuring good quality data on the gender gap and
for achieving the PDO through financial inclusion. The PA#3 addressed a key business impediment to financial
inclusion. While it was timely and aligned with the PDO-1, in hindsight, it could not generate results in the short
term, because of social and institutional inertia. In addition, the presumption the data would be default influence


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



a shift in women's participation was a stretch given the layers working against women's access to
finance. Thus, the relevance of the PA#3 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA#4: To improve health insurance coverage, the Borrower has adopted on September 13, 2018 and
published in the Official Gazette dated January 21, 2019, Decrees No. 2.18.622, 2.18.623 and 2.18.624
implementing Law No. 98-15 to expand basic compulsory health insurance coverage to professionals,
self-employed individuals, and non-salary individuals.

Relevance Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The Moroccan Government adopted three Decrees aimed at expanding basic health insurance coverage to
formal self-entrepreneurs, thus providing self-entrepreneurs with a critical social safety net and incentives for
them to formalize, and promoting transparency in the business environment and links with formal sector
business opportunities, and improving the business enabling environment. The PA#4 intended to improve the
overall health insurance coverage of underbanked Moroccans and in doing so promote financial resiliency of
low-income Moroccans. This reform could contribute to the financial resilience of a large segment of the
population and was fully aligned with the PDO.

The PA#4 addressed a key business impediment and aimed to expand financial inclusion by ensuring basic
health insurance coverage to formal self-entrepreneurs. The PA#4 was timely and aligned with PDO-1, and
could generate results in the medium and long-term term. The relevance of the PA#1 is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.

PA#5: To develop Islamic Finance (Finance Participative): (a) the Borrower has enacted Law No. 69-17
amending and supplementing Law No. 33-06 related to the issuance of Sukuk certificates published in
the Official Gazette No. 6667 dated April 23, 2018; and (b) the Council of Government has approved and
submitted to Parliament on October 24, 2018, Draft Law No. 87-18 amending and supplementing Law
No. 17-99 on the Insurance Code relating to Takaful insurance.

Relevance Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The development of Islamic finance can be an important accelerator of financial inclusion, as it allows
participative banks, insurance and finance companies to offer new instruments to develop Morocco’s Islamic
financial sector, and allows institutional investors to have additional instruments contributing to deepening and
diversifying Morocco’s capital markets. The PA was supported by complementary market development
mechanisms, including the establishment of an entity which validates and approves this regulatory activity and
the adoption of a circular detailing capital requirements and prudential ratios for Islamic banks. The
complementary action supports strengthened oversight of participative financial institutions and
ensured continued financial stability of these new entities. The expected result was an increase in volume of
Sukuk certificate issuances which would contribute to increased diversification of the financial sector with
regards to investment and insurance product options.

The PA#5 addressed a key business impediment and aimed to expand financial inclusion by developing
Morocco’s Islamic financial sector, and by allowing institutional investors to have additional instruments
contributing to deepening and diversifying Morocco’s capital markets. The PA#5 was timely and aligned with
PDO-1, and could generate results in the medium to long-term period. in order to achieve results,
the Parliament needed to approve the draft law, and second, and the Government needed to issue the
executive regulations. The relevance of the PA#5 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



PDO 2: To contribute to digital transformation for individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.

Toward the above-mentioned PDO-2, five PAs were identified (PA#6 to PA#10) and their relevance and
rating are discussed below:

PA#6: To promote the development of mobile payments, the BAM has adopted the Decision No.
392/W/2018 on mobile payments, dated November 12, 2018 setting the conditions and modalities of
mobile payments in Morocco, including interoperability of mobile wallets (m-wallets).

Relevance Rating: Highly Satisfactory

The PA#6 supported measures setting the conditions and modalities of mobile payments in Morocco, and in
particular, it established a level playing field among three types of operators: (a) banks that leverage existing
payment networks to offer mobile payment services; (b) telecommunications operators that leverage the
existing mobile customer base to enable mobile payments between mobile customers and to Points of Sale
(POS); and (c) ‘over-the-top’ operators, leveraging the mobile broadband infrastructure to offer mobile payment
services.

Digital financial services are considered an important element of financial inclusion as they connect ‘unbanked’
populations and microenterprise segments to the formal financial services market and can help increase the
reach and transparency of social cash transfer programs. A comprehensive technical interoperability test
was carried out, successfully linking two entities (Wafa Cash and Barid Bank) and testing all the functionalities
and integrity of the system. The operationalization of the mobile switch and the strengthening of the mobile
payment market in Morocco resulted in an increased number of mobile wallets issued in Morocco.

The PA#6 addressed a key business impediment and aimed to expand financial inclusion by facilitating access
to mobile e-wallets in the country. The PA#6 was timely and aligned with the PDO-2, and could generate
substantial results in the short term. The relevance of the PA#6 is rated Highly Satisfactory.

PA#7: In order to create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications
infrastructure and strengthen competition in the fiber access market, the ANRT has adopted Decision
No. ANRT/DG/No.12/18 dated July 27, 2018 approving a wholesale offer to access passive infrastructure
of Maroc Telecom (Offre Génie Civil).

Relevance Rating: Highly Satisfactory

The ability of a competitor to effectively deploy a fiber plan depends on the regulatory framework, including the
ability of telecom regulators and competition authorities to enforce fair competition rules. The creation of Fiber
Regulatory Package (FRP), an appropriate regulatory package to facilitate the deployment of fiber. The first
measure of this FRP was the approval by the National Telecommunications Authority (ANRT) of a
comprehensive offer of incumbent operator Maroc Telecom to allow access to its conduits and passive
infrastructure elements to new competitors. In this way, new competitors will not need to deploy new civil works
to reach the final customer (household or business). Enabling greater access to passive infrastructure, thus
decreasing the cost of expansion of broadband and potentially enabling increased competition, could logically
lead to expansion of broadband infrastructure and thus increased potential for digital transformation.

The PA#7 minimized the amount of civil works by allowing access to existing passive infrastructure and
positively impacted the business plan of operators. The introduction of a regulatory environment around the
Civil Engineering Offer of Maroc Telecom improved access to telecommunication infrastructure and lowered the

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



cost of broadband infrastructure, thus the fixed broadband penetration. The PA#7 addressed a key business
regulatory impediment and fostered digital transformation. The PA#7 was timely and aligned with the PDO-2,
and could generate substantial results in the short term. The relevance of the PA#1 is rated Highly
Satisfactory.

PA#8: To promote private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities (Collectivités
Térritoriales) including in remote areas, the Minister of Interior has adopted Circular No. F/2166 dated
June 14, 2018 establishing a uniform ceiling for fees to be paid by investors to deploy their
infrastructure in the municipal public domain.

Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

The Circular adopted by the Ministry of Interior set uniform prices, reducing the regulatory uncertainty and
facilitating investment and access to broadband services to the citizens and the firms in Morocco. This
measure was part of a ‘fiber regulatory package’ aimed at stimulating investment. In addition, operators were
called to abide by the Circular of the Ministry of Health regulating the distance of building from radio
equipment. The prior action was expected to facilitate the deployment of fiber to second tier cities, remote
areas, and local communities; and to promote a more balanced deployment of high-speed Internet
infrastructure. As a result, percentage of rural households with Internet access is expected to
increase. Reforms were thus needed to encourage investment in lower-income, lower-density areas,
complementing the role of the Universal Service Telecommunications Fund

The PA#8 addressed a key business regulatory impediment and fostered digital transformation. It was timely
and aligned with the PDO-2, and could generate results in the short term. The relevance of the PA#8 is
rated Satisfactory.

PA#9: To streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means, the Borrower has enacted
Law No. 87-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 13-99 establishing the Moroccan Office for
Industrial and Commercial Property (OMPIC) published in the Official Gazette No. 6722 dated November
1, 2018; and the Council of Government has approved and submitted to Parliament on March 19, 2018:
(i) Draft Law No. 89-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 15-95 on the Commercial Code for the
establishment of a centralized electronic commerce register and decentralized electronic commerce
registries; and (ii) Draft Law No. 88-17 on the electronic creation and support to enterprises.

Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

The PA#9 aimed to improve overall competitiveness for new businesses related to starting a business in
Morocco, in addition to promoting greater efficiency and transparency in the economy and firm-level
productivity. The policy innovations were expected to stimulate digital entrepreneurship by: (i) making it easier
for digital entrepreneurs to create a business; (ii) stimulating the growth of a category of self-
entrepreneurs whose services digital entrepreneurs increasingly depend on to build lean businesses to create
digital marketplaces; and (iii) improving the experience of foreign investors, who represent a major source of
diffusion of digital technology from abroad. The expected result was that the electronic system would be
operational and used by businesses and public authorities. The Moroccan Office for Industrial and Commercial
Property (OMPIC) would be in a better position to track data and support business creation through electronic
filing of key documents, and develop value-added services on the portal and at a later stage.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



The PA#9 addressed a key business regulatory impediment and fostered digital transformation. It was timely
and aligned with the PDO-2, and could generate results in the short term. The relevance of the PA#9 is
rated Satisfactory.

PA#10: To promote the development of a new asset class to bridge the early stage finance gap of digital
entrepreneurs, the Fonds Innov Invest’s Technical Committee has adopted the technical specifications
(Cahier de Charges) dated December 26, 2018 outlining eligibility criteria for business angels to receive
financing from the Central Guarantee Agency (CGA)

Relevance Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The proposed introduction by the Central Guarantee Agency (CGA) of official recognition requirements for
business angels established the required policies for business angels to organize themselves in networks.
Once published, the technical specifications would include terms and conditions for business angel groups to
apply for official recognition by the state and to qualify for public funding managed by Central Guarantee
Agency. Angel groups would be critical to the emergence of early stage angel investments in Morocco because
they create strong economies of scale, network economies and economies of learning, and diffuse the culture
of angel investing. CCG’s incentives for angel groups can therefore trigger a chain of systemic changes
that will unlock a new investment class and conducive policies for early stage investment in
Morocco. The PA could thus be viewed as a building block toward availing greater public support for
business angel financing, a valuable tool to support technology start-ups, and thus achievement of the
digital transformation objective of the PDO.

The prior action supports not only the introduction of business angels in Morocco but the definition of eligibility
criteria for CCG financing to expand operations. The expected key results were: (a) an increase in the number
of business angel networks that have been certified by the CCG; and (b) an increase in the number of start-up
projects submitted to business angels for funding. The PA#10 addressed a key business regulatory impediment
and fostered digital transformation. It was timely and aligned with the PDO-2, and could generate results in the
short term. The relevance of the PA#10 is rated Satisfactory.

Table 1. Rating of Relevance of Prior Actions
                                                                                                                      R
PDO                      PAs
                                                                                                                      o
                       (i) To allow microfinance institutions to expand their portfolio and respond to credit
                                                                                                                      S
                       demand of MSME;
PDO 1: To foster
financial inclusion of (ii) To increase access to finance for small farmers;                                          M
individuals,           (iii) To enhance oversight of gender gaps in financial inclusion of women and female-
enterprises, and       owned enterprises, have gender data in the credit information system, and support              M
entrepreneurs.         modernization of Morocco’s credit information system;
                       (iv) To improve health insurance coverage;                                                     M
                       (v) To develop Islamic Finance (Finance Participative);                                        M
PDO 2: To contribute (vi)To promote the development of mobile payments;                                               H
to digital             (vii) To create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications
                                                                                                                      H
transformation for     infrastructure and strengthen competition in the fiber access market;
individuals,           (viii) To promote private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities
enterprises, and                                                                                                      S
                       (Collectivités Térritoriales) including in remote areas;

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



 entrepreneurs.           (ix) To streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means;                S
                          (x) To promote the development of a new asset class to bridge the early stage finance
                                                                                                                    M
                          gap of digital entrepreneurs.
 Overall Rating of the
                                                                                                                    S
 Relevance of PAs




Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

To measure the performance of the this operation, seven Results Indicators (RIs) were identified at
appraisal. Three PAs having two RIs, PA#1, PA#2 and PA#5, which had two indicators each, and the
remaining PA# had one RI each. Below is the discussion and rating of each result indicator identified to
assess the outcome arising from the PAs.

PDO 1: To foster financial inclusion of individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.

PA#1: To allow microfinance institutions to expand their portfolio and respond to credit demand of
MSME, the Council of Government has approved and submitted to Parliament on November 13,
2018, Draft Law No. 85-18 amending Law No. 18-97 on Microcredit authorizing an increase in the
maximum lending size from MAD 50,000 to MAD 150,000.

       RI#1: Gross loan portfolio for the microfinance sector (MAD billion; percentage of women
         borrowers).
       Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The Results Indicator #1 was to measure the change in the gross loan portfolio for the microfinance
sector. The 2017 baseline was MAD 6.7 billion, and the target was MAD 7.5 billion, with 50 percent of
women borrowers. This was an outcome indicator to assess progress toward the change in the gross loan
portfolio for microfinance. The expected result was an increase in the gross loan portfolio in the sector,
and female beneficiaries would be tracked through the results indicator for this prior action. The policy
reform aimed to improve the institutional capacity of MFIs for longer-term transformation and their
ability to provide finance for households and micro firms.



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



While the indicator was specific and measurable, an increase of 12 percent of the gross loan portfolio for
the microfinance sector over 3 years was not an ambitious target. Moreover, why the indicator was to be
assessed after 3 years for an annual stand-alone DPF is difficult to understand. There was room to
identify a better indicator recording short term changes resulting from the new policy initiative by the
Government. Overall, the relevance of the Result Indicator #1 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA#2: To increase access to finance for small farmers, the Ministry of Economy and Finance and
the Credit Agricole du Maroc have raised the ceiling of loans guaranteed to small farmers by the
Fonds de Stabilisation Prudentielle from MAD 100,000 to MAD 200,000, pursuant to an amendment
to the Convention establishing de Fonds de Stabilisation Prudentielle “FSP” dated November 2,
2018.

      RI#2: (i) Volume of cumulative Tamwil El Fellah (TEF) loans disbursed (MAD billion),
       (ii) Number of female beneficiaries of TEF
      Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The two indicators identified to assess performance of the PA#2 were as follows: (i) the volume of
cumulative Tamwil El Fellah (TEF) loans disbursed would reach MAD 2.3 billion at end-2020, against a
2017 baseline of MAD 1.7 billion, and (ii) the number of female beneficiaries of TEF would reach the
number of 2,000 at end-2020, from a baseline of 927 at end-2017. As was the case for the RIs under the
PA#1, these indicators were specific, measurable and achievable, but there was room for improvement.
Again, it is difficult to understand why the assessment period is three years for a one-year stand-alone
operation. Overall, the relevance of the RIs for the PA#2 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA#3: To enhance oversight of gender gaps in financial inclusion of women and female-owned
enterprises, have gender data in the credit information system, and support modernization of
Morocco’s credit information system, BAM has issued Notice No. L/BKAM/2018/9632 dated
December 20, 2018, making it mandatory for payment companies to report gender-disaggregated
data.

      RI#3: Percentage of payment companies reporting gender-disaggregated performance data
      Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

One indicator was identified to measure the performance of the PA#3. The indicator aimed to ensure that
financial inclusion is taking place by monitoring the share of women accessing to credit and using the new
modern payments system. The indicator was specific and measurable, as the percentage of payment
companies reporting gender-disaggregated performance data would increase from 0 percent at end-2017
to 75 percent at end-2020. In the banking and the financial sector, when the Central Bank issues a policy
or an instruction, a higher compliance is expected, and the target should have been at a higher end. The
relevance of the indicator is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

PA#4: To improve health insurance coverage, the Borrower has adopted on September 13, 2018
and published in the Official Gazette dated January 21, 2019, Decrees No. 2.18.622, 2.18.623 and
2.18.624 implementing Law No. 98-15 to expand basic compulsory health insurance coverage to
professionals, self-employed individuals, and non-salary individuals.

      RI#4: Number of independent professionals, self-employed individuals, and non-salary
       individuals with health insurance coverage

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



      Rating: Satisfactory

The only indicator to assess performance of the PA#4 identified in the context of this operation was the
number of independent professionals, self-employed individuals, and non-salary individuals with health
insurance coverage, which would reach a target of 50,000 at end-2020, from an end-2017 baseline of
0. This was a specific and measurable indicator, and the target reflected the importance of the policy
reform. The expected results reflected the importance of the new legislation, although a one-off change
would have been more appropriate in the context of a stand-alone DPF. The relevance of the RI for the
PA#4 is rated Satisfactory

PA#5: To develop Islamic Finance (Finance Participative): (a) the Borrower has enacted Law No.
69-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 33-06 related to the issuance of Sukuk certificates
published in the Official Gazette No. 6667 dated April 23, 2018; and (b) the Council of Government
has approved and submitted to Parliament on October 24, 2018, Draft Law No. 87-18 amending and
supplementing Law No. 17-99 on the Insurance Code relating to Takaful insurance.

      RI#5: (i) Volume of Sukuk certificate issuances (MAD billion), (ii) Number of insurance
       companies issuing Takaful products
      Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

Two indicators were identified to assess the performance of the PA#5 as follows: (i) the target for the
volume of Sukuk certificate issuances (MAD billion) was expected to increase from a nil 2017 baseline to
a target of MAD 2 billion at end-2020, and (ii) the target for the number of insurance companies issuing
Takaful products would increase from a 2017 baseline of zero to a target of 3. The two indicators were
specific, achievable, and aligned with the PDO-1, and had to the potential to measure the
performance resulting from the policy measures initiated in the area of Islamic finance development to
tackle financial inclusion. The relevance of the results indicators is rated as Satisfactory.

PDO 2: To contribute to digital transformation for individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.

PA#6: To promote the development of mobile payments, the BAM has adopted Decision No.
392/W/2018 on mobile payments, dated November 12, 2018 setting the conditions and modalities
of mobile payments in Morocco, including interoperability of mobile wallets (m-wallets).

      RI#6: Number of m-wallets issued
      Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

The unique performance indicator identified to measure the progress toward the PA#6 was the number of
m-wallets issued. The target for this the number of m-wallet by end-2020 was 20,000, against a nil
baseline at end-2017. The result indicator was simple, measurable and aligned with the PDO-2, geared
to contributing to digital transformation in Morocco. While the target level was not justified, the indicator
was adequate and its relevance is rated Satisfactory.

PA#7: In order to create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications
infrastructure and strengthen competition in the fiber access market, the ANRT has adopted
Decision No. ANRT/DG/No.12/18 dated July 27, 2018 approving a wholesale offer to access
passive infrastructure of Maroc Telecom (Offre Génie Civil).


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



      RI#7: Fixed broadband penetration as a percentage of households
      Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

The results indicator selected to measure the performance achieved after implementing the PA#7 was an
increase in the fixed broadband penetration as a percentage of households from a 2017 baseline of 19.4
percent to a 2020 target of 22 percent. The result indicator was specific, measurable and aligned with the
PDO-2, geared to contributing to digital transformation in Morocco. While the target level was not justified,
the indicator was adequate and its relevance is rated Satisfactory.

PA#8: To promote private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities (Collectivités
Térritoriales) including in remote areas, the Minister of Interior has adopted Circular No. F/2166
dated June 14, 2018 establishing a uniform ceiling for fees to be paid by investors to deploy their
infrastructure in the municipal public domain.

      RI#8: Percentage of rural households with Internet access
      Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

The results indicator selected to measure the performance achieved after implementing the PA#8 was an
increase in the percentage of rural households with internet access from an end-2017 baseline of 53.1
percent to a 2020 target of 56 percent. The result indicator was specific, measurable and aligned with the
PDO-2, geared to contributing to digital transformation in Morocco. While the target level was not justified,
the indicator was adequate and its relevance is rated Satisfactory.

PA#9: To streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means, the Borrower has
enacted Law No. 87-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 13-99 establishing the Moroccan
Office for Industrial and Commercial Property (OMPIC) published in the Official Gazette No. 6722
dated November 1, 2018; and the Council of Government has approved and submitted to
Parliament on March 19, 2018: (i) Draft Law No. 89-17 amending and supplementing Law No. 15-95
on the Commercial Code for the establishment of a centralized electronic commerce register and
decentralized electronic commerce registries; and (ii) Draft Law No. 88-17 on the electronic
creation and support to enterprises.

      RI#9: The new electronic portal is operational
      Relevance Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The results indicator selected to measure the performance achieved after implementing the PA#7 was an
output indicator consisting in having in place a new electronic portal which is operational. The result
indicator was an output indicator, was specific and was aligned with the PDO-2, geared to contributing to
digital transformation in Morocco. While an outcome indicator would have captured better the impact of
the operation, the indicator was adequate and its relevance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA#10: To promote the development of a new asset class to bridge the early stage finance gap of
digital entrepreneurs, the Fonds Innov Invest’s Technical Committee has adopted the technical
specifications (Cahier de Charges) dated December 26, 2018 outlining eligibility criteria for
business angels to receive financing from the Caisse Centrale de Garantie.

      RI#10: (i) Number of business angel networks that have been certified by the CCG,
       and (ii) Number of start-up projects submitted to business angels for financing

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



        Relevance Rating: Satisfactory

 Two indicators were identified to assess the performance achieved after implementing the PA#10 as
 follows: (i) the number of business angel networks that have been certified by the CCG would increase
 from an end-2017 baseline of zero to an end-2020 target of 2, and (ii) the number of start-up projects
 submitted to business angels for financing would increase from an end-2017 baseline of zero to and-2020
 target of 30. The result indicators were specific, measurable and aligned with the PDO-2, and geared to
 contributing to digital transformation in Morocco. While the target levels were not justified, the indicators
 were adequate and their relevance is rated Satisfactory.



 Table 2: Rating of Relevance of Results Indicators
                                                                                                                      Rat
 PDO                         Prior Actions
                                                                                                                      Res
                           PA#1: To allow microfinance institutions to expand their portfolio and respond to
                                                                                                             Mo
                           credit demand of MSME
 PDO 1: To foster          PA#2: To increase access to finance for small farmers                             Mo
 financial inclusion of    PA#3: To enhance oversight of gender gaps in financial inclusion of women and
 individuals, enterprises, female-owned enterprises, have gender data in the credit information system, and  Mo
 and entrepreneurs.        support modernization of Morocco’s credit information system
                           PA#4: To improve health insurance coverage                                        Sat
                           PA#5: To develop Islamic Finance (Finance Participative)                          Mo
                           PA#6: To promote the development of mobile payments                               Sat
                           PA#7: To create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications
 PDO 2: To contribute to infrastructure and strengthen competition in the fiber access market                Sat
 digital transformation
                           PA#8 To promote private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities
 for individuals,                                                                                            Sat
                           (Collectivités Térritoriales) including in remote areas
 enterprises, and
 entrepreneurs.            PA#9 To streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means         Mo
                           PA#10 To promote the development of a new asset class to bridge the early stage
                                                                                                             Sat
                           finance gap of digital entrepreneurs
 Overall rating of the
 Relevance of Results                                                                                        Sa
 Indicators




Rating

Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 27
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1: To foster financial inclusion of individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.


               Rationale
               The assessment of achieved results toward the PDO-1 draws from the material presented in paragraphs 44-
               53 of the ICR. The five PAs under the PDO-1 aimed to increase financial inclusion of individuals, smallholder
               farmers, and microenterprises.

                     PA#1: To allow microfinance institutions to expand their portfolio and respond to credit
                      demand of MSME.
                     Rating: Modest

               The goal was to boost access to finance for an underserved segment of microenterprises by authorizing
               microcredit institutions to increase the maximum lending size from MAD 50,000 to MAD 150,000. The RI#1
               aimed to increase the gross loan portfolio for the microfinance sector of by MAD 0.8 billion. As of end-June,
               2021, this target had reached 0.9 MAD billion. However, the upward trend is skewed by the significant
               restructuring of the loan portfolio that occurred because of the COVID-19 crisis. The loan amounts that were
               restructured due to COVID-19 measures appear as new loans in the gross loan portfolio. While the statistic
               indicates growth, there was an actual decrease in the microfinance beneficiaries and lending volume. Few
               MFIs have started introducing the higher loan amounts, but they consider that the loans above the new ceiling
               currently was a ‘negligible proportion’ of the total portfolio. Overall, it is too early to assess the full effect of this
               PA, and the observed impact should be measured again when the financial situation of the MFI stabilizes.

               The target related to the percentage of women borrowers maintained to 50 percent was fully achieved in June
               2021. While there was a slight drop in the percentage of women borrowers to 48 percent in 2020, a recovery
               up to 53.4 percent was recorded in the first half of 2021. Interviews with the MFI association indicate that the
               temporary drop was driven by women trying to recover from the COVID-19 impact. However, the
               implementation of the PA did not necessarily contribute to this trend as few MFIs had introduced lending
               above the new ceiling.

               Overall, the performance of the PA#1 toward the PDO is rated as Modest.

                     PA#2: To increase access to finance for small farmers.
                     High

               The PA #2 aimed to boost access to finance for underserved smallholders by raising the ceiling of loans that
               could be guaranteed to smallholders through the Agricultural Development Finance Corporation (Tamwil El
               Fellah, TEF). The measure was introduced in response to the financial needs of small and medium farmers,
               traders, and agro-processors with turnover of US$10,000–500,000 a year, which were considered too small
               to be considered by traditional banks or investments funds, given that they had no collateral and were too
               large to be considered by MFIs.



                                                                                                                         Page 15 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



The RI#2a targeted a 35 percent increase in the volume of cumulative TEF loans disbursed from MAD 1.7
billion in 2017 to MAD 2.3 billion in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the volume of cumulative TEF loans
disbursed was MAD 3.1 billion, representing 58.9 percent increase, significantly above the target. According
to the latest figures provided by Crédit Agricole du Maroc, the lending above the new ceiling represented 20
percent of the lending committed as of June 30, 2021. However, the full effect of this loan category on the
results metric had not materialized yet, given that most of the loans were committed, but have yet to be fully
disbursed. Overall, the RI#2a was fully achieved.

Regarding the R#2b, the growth in female beneficiaries between 2018 and 2019 reached 93.15 percent, but
the pace was likely disrupted by the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, which was reflected in a timid 3 percent
growth in 2020. By June 30, 2021, the number of female beneficiaries had reached more than 4,000, thus
quadrupling the number of female beneficiaries compared to the 2017 figures. According to the MEF, the
significant increase in the number of women TEF beneficiaries can be explained by the in-depth work carried
out by the TEF sales and marketing team to effectively target women's cooperatives that are very active in the
sectors dedicated to local products. But there no data on the proportion of women beneficiaries of the loans
above the old lending ceiling.

Based on the above discussion on achievements by the RI#2a and RI#2b, he efficacy of the PA#2 is
assessed as High

      PA#3 To enhance gender gaps in oversight of financial inclusion of women and female-owned
       enterprises, have gender data in the credit information system, and support modernization of
       Morocco’s credit information system.
      Rating: Negligible

The goal of the PA#3 was to enhance financial inclusion of women and female-owned enterprise by
monitoring gender gaps in access to finance. The RI#3 aimed to strengthen data availability on women’s
access to finance by making it mandatory for payment companies to report gender-disaggregated data. The
PA was a logical evolution and indeed a fundamental building block for ensuring good quality data on the
gender gap and for achieving the PDO.

According to BAM, there are currently 20 payment companies licensed with the central bank. It has been
mandatory for payment companies to provide gender-disaggregated data since the end of 2018, but such
data are not yet published as part of the BAM annual reports on banking supervision or on payment
systems. While gender-disaggregated data for Level 2 and 3 customers can be generated without any
adaptations to existing regulatory frameworks, BAM and the Professional Association of Payment
Establishments are in dialogue to find a solution to the challenges associated with tracking gender-
disaggregated data for Level 1 customers.

Based on the achieved results described above, the PA#3 is assessed as Negligible

PA#4: To improve health insurance coverage.

      Rating: Modest

The PA#4 aimed at expanding compulsory basic health insurance coverage to formal self-entrepreneurs, thus
providing them with a critical social safety net and incentives for them to formalize and become financially
included. The PA#4 intended to improve the overall health insurance coverage of underbanked Moroccans

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



and in doing so promote financial resiliency of low-income Moroccans. The RI#4 aimed to have 50,000
independent professionals, self-employed individuals, and non-salary individuals enrolled in compulsory
health insurance, against a baseline of 0. The number of beneficiaries by end-June 30 stood at 17,103.

The intent was for the compulsory health insurance law to go into effect in March 2020. However, given the
time needed to determine the basis for the health insurance premiums, and the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic in the same month, the implementation deadline was pushed to August 2020. The 2021 Finance
Law approved in December 2020 introduced a single professional contribution to allow certain groups of
independent professionals and workers previously subject to the flat rate profit regime to pay a single tax
replacing three taxes. Negotiations to settle the flat income amount upon which the contribution rate would
be applied has now been completed with additional categories of workers, including traders, medical
professionals, pharmacists and auto-entrepreneurs to be subscribed by the first quarter of calendar year
2022. Due to accelerated progress, more than 600,000 individuals were likely to be covered by the
compulsory health insurance within the first quarter of 2022.

Based on the above account of achievements in relation to the PA#4, the efficacy rating is assessed as
Modest

      PA#5: To develop Islamic Finance (Finance Participative).
      Rating: Negligible

The PA#5 goal was to expand financial inclusion by developing the Morocco’s Islamic financial sector, and by
allowing institutional investors to have additional instruments contributing to deepening and diversifying
Morocco’s capital markets. The RI#5a had an end-2020 target of Sukuk certificate issuances of MAD 2 billion,
from a 2017 baseline of zero. By end- June 2020, no Sukuk certificate had been issued. Neither the
Government nor the private sector have made use of this instrument, because the regulations were not yet in
place. However, the Government completed the first billion Moroccan dirham sovereign issuance aimed to be
a base index and a catalyst for use of Sukuk as a mechanism for financing state expenditures and private
institutions. The RI#5b had a 2020 target of 3 insurance companies issuing Takaful products Baseline from a
baseline of zero. By end-June 2020, three insurance companies had issued Takaful products, but the decrees
setting the standard general conditions of the three Takaful products were not adopted yet.

Based on the limited results described above, the PA#5 is assessed as Negligible



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To contribute to digital transformation for individuals, enterprises, and entrepreneurs.


Rationale



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



The assessment of achieved results toward the PDO-2 draws from the material presented in paragraphs 54-
68 of the ICR. The five PAs under the PDO-2 aimed to contribute to digital transformation for individuals,
enterprises, and entrepreneurs.

      PA#6: To promote the development of mobile payments
      Rating: High

The goal of the PA#6 was to establish a level playing field among the banks, the telecommunications
operators, and the ‘over-the-top’ operators, in order to leverage the mobile broadband infrastructure and offer
mobile payment services. The RI#6 had a 2020 target of 20,000 beneficiaries from a 2017 baseline of
zero. By end-June 2021, the target was largely exceeded, and achieved result amounted to 3.9 million of
beneficiaries of mobile payment facilities. In total, 20 payment companies were licensed including 16 that are
full service and 4 that specialize exclusively in cash-to-cash transfers. By December 2020, almost 1.4 million
mobile wallets had been issued, and by mid-2021 that number reached 3.9 million. The onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic accelerated reforms related to digital payments in Morocco as elsewhere in the world. In line
with the increase in issuance of mobile wallets, mobile transactions increased. According to BAM, in 2020,
the total volume of transactions reached MAD 443 million.

Based on the level of achievements described above in relation to the PA#6, the efficacy rating is rated as
High.

PA#7: To create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications infrastructure
and strengthen competition in the fiber access market.

      Rating: High

The goal of the PA#7 was to create an environment conducive to the deployment of telecommunications
infrastructure and strengthen competition in the fiber access market. The key expected outcome was
the creation of an appropriate regulatory package to facilitate the deployment of fiber. The RI #7 had an end-
2020 target of achieving a fixed broadband penetration as a percentage of households of 22 percent, from a
2017 baseline of 19.4 percent. The fixed broadband penetration reached 23 percent of households by end-
2020, which was above the target of 22 percent.

With the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, virtual work and online school activities became prevalent, and in
parallel, mobile broadband prices were dropping, thus increasing the affordability of internet access. Morocco
also became a new candidate among the 2020 among economies meeting the ‘2 percent of GDP per capita’
affordability target of the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development. However, the regulations
related to shared infrastructure from planning the digital development of the territory to the supervision of
infrastructure deployment by operators were not yet fully implemented.

 Based on the level of achievements described above in relation to the PA#7, the efficacy rating is assessed
as High.

      PA#8 To promote private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities (Collectivités
       Térritoriales) including in remote areas
      Rating: Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



Policy measures promoted by the PA#8 were expected to facilitate the deployment of fiber to second tier-
cities, remote areas, and local communities and led to a more balanced deployment of high-speed Internet
infrastructure. The RI#8 aimed to increase the percentage of rural households with internet access to an end-
2020 of 56 percent from an end-2017 baseline of 53.1 percent. The penetration rate for rural households
with internet access reached 71.9 percent in 2020, which was significantly above the target of 56
percent. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the rapid shift to conduct work and attend school remotely
likely also boosted the subscription rates.

While the upward trend in mobile broadband subscriptions has accelerated, the main driver for this result
seems to be the success of the National Plan for Broadband and UltraBroadband rather than the
implementation of the PA. There were no data indicating the extent to which implementation of the reform
supported by the PA contributed to this development.

Based on the level of achievements described above in relation to the PA#8, the efficacy rating is assessed
as Substantial.

      PA#9 To streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means
      Rating: Modest

The intent of the PA#9 was to improve overall competitiveness for new businesses starting a business in
Morocco. The target for the RI#9 was to have in place an operational electronic portal. Several regulatory
steps were needed in order to implement the electronic portal for business registration. The final step before
the electronic portal can go live was the approval by the Secretary General of the Government of the
operational and technical procedures. The planned portal is ambitious in scope and aims to integrate
registration, tax, and social security in one application. All in all, while the results target was not achieved,
significant progress has been made.

Based on the level of achievements described above in relation to the PA#9, the efficacy rating is assessed
as Modest.

      PA#10 To promote the development of a new asset class to bridge the early stage finance gap
       of digital entrepreneurs
      Rating: Modest

Expected outcome from the PA#10 was the introduction by the Central Guarantee Agency (CGA) of official
recognition requirements for business angels to organize themselves in networks. The RI#10a was to
increase the number of business angel networks that have been certified by the CCG to a 2020 target of 2
from an end-2017 baseline of zero. While the CCG has taken the preparatory steps to introduce the CCG
certification, the advent of COVID-19 in March 2020 disrupted progress. The target was not achieved; but the
certification process is in progress. The RI#10b aimed to increase the number of start-up projects submitted
to business angels for financing to an end-2020 target of 30, from an end-2017 baseline of zero. The target
was not achieved either; as the result is pending the completion of the certification process.

Toward the PA#10 goal, discussions are under way between the CCG and the angel networks concerning the
requirements for the certification to benefit from the CCG’s co-investment facility, a draft certification manual
has been completed, and preparations of due diligence requirements and risk management strategies are
ongoing.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 27
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



                      Based on the level of achievements described above in relation to the PA#10, the efficacy rating is assessed
                      as Modest.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall, the operation efficacy is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

On progress towards DPO-1, efficacy was Moderately Unsatisfactory, based on strong performance with regards
to the increase in access to finance for small farmers, and weaker progress in the response to credit demand
by MSMEs, in the oversight of gender gaps of financial inclusion of women and female-owned enterprises, in
the improvement in health insurance coverage, and in the development of Islamic Finance.

In terms of progress on the DPO-2, efficacy was Satisfactory, based on strong results as regards the
development of mobile payments, and the creation of an environment conducive to the deployment of
telecommunications infrastructure and the competition in the fiber access market. Moderate results were achieved
in the areas of (i) expanding private investment in digital infrastructure in local communities and in remote areas,
(ii) streamline and facilitate enterprise creation by electronic means, (iii) development of a new asset class to
bridge the early stage finance gap of digital entrepreneurs.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

       Both the rating of the relevance of design of PAs and that of the results indicators was Satisfactory (see tables
      1& 2). The overall rating of the efficacy of the PAs was Moderately Satisfactory, resulting in an overall outcome
      rating of Moderately Satisfactory, as summarized in the table 3 below.

        Table 3. Overall Outcome
                                                                        Rating of Relevance
        PDO                                PAs                                                Efficacy                     Outcome
                                                                        of Prior Actions



                                                                                                                     Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



                       (i) To allow microfinance
                       institutions to expand
                       their portfolio and          Satisfactory                Modest
                       respond to credit demand
                       of MSME;
                       (ii) To increase access to
                                                    Moderately Satisfactory High
                       finance for small farmers;
                       (iii) To enhance oversight
PDO 1: To foster       of gender gaps in
financial inclusion    financial inclusion of
of individuals,        women and female-
enterprises, and       owned enterprises, have      Moderately
                                                                               Negligible
entrepreneurs.         gender data in the credit    Unsatisfactory
                       information system, and
                       support modernization of
                       Morocco’s credit
                       information system;
                       (iv) To improve health
                                                    Moderately Satisfactory Modest
                       insurance coverage;
                       (v) To develop Islamic
                       Finance (Finance             Moderately Satisfactory Negligible
                       Participative);
                                                    Moderately                                               Moderately
Rating of PDO-1                                                                Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                    Satisfactory                                             Unsatisfactor
                      (vi)To promote the
                      development of mobile         Highly Satisfactory         High
                      payments;
                      (vii) To create an
                      environment conducive to
                      the deployment of
                      telecommunications            Highly Satisfactory        High
                      infrastructure and
PDO 2: To             strengthen competition in
contribute to digital the fiber access market;
transformation for
individuals,          (viii) To promote private
enterprises, and      investment in digital
entrepreneurs.        infrastructure in local
                      communities                   Satisfactory               Substantial
                      (Collectivités
                      Térritoriales) including in
                      remote areas;
                      (ix) To streamline and
                      facilitate enterprise
                                                    Satisfactory               Modest
                      creation by electronic
                      means;


                                                                                                       Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



                       (x) To promote the
                       development of a new
                       asset class to bridge the Moderately Satisfactory Modest
                       early stage finance gap of
                       digital entrepreneurs.
Rating of PDO-2                                   Satisfactory            Satisfactory                   Satisfactory
Overall PDO
                                                    Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory       Moderately Sa
Rating




a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Our assessment of the risk to development outcome draws from the information provided in paragraphs 84-
85 of the ICR.

Overall, the risk to development outcome is assessed to be low. There is a high probability that the
achieved results will be sustained, and that those not achieved yet will be completed in the near future. The
GOM has demonstrated clear commitment to the DPF goal with the adoption of a National Pact for Economic
Recovery and Employment adopted in July 2020, which outlined measures to boost access to finance for
firms, expand insurance access, accelerate financial inclusion and improve business digitization.
Furthermore, the 2020 and 2021 budget had clear targets and specific fiscal policies to accelerate the
access of 22 million additional people to compulsory basic health care by 2022, and finally, the May 2021
New Development Model report outlined a vision for development and inclusion that is driven by
entrepreneurship and leverages digitization.

Most importantly, the new DPF series (Financial and Digital Inclusion DPF P171587, P174004) was
approved in 2020 with an overarching development objective of improving financial inclusion, digital
entrepreneurship, accessing to digital infrastructure and services for individuals and businesses and
strengthening resilience of households and firms.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



Our assessment of the Bank performance in designing this operation draws from the material presented in
paragraphs 75-79 of the ICR.

The operation was closely aligned with Morocco’s priorities, was underpinned by strong analytical
and advisory work, and was supported by other external donors. This DPF was strategically
positioned as a key element of the authorities’ implementation of the 2019 National Financial Inclusion
Strategy which defined a common vision and national guidelines to reduce the disparities that persist in
terms of access and penetration of financial services. It was also aligned with the 2020 Morocco Digital
Plan (Plan Maroc Numérique) , which aimed to digitalize government services, promote the use of digital
services to increase efficiency and the creation of new business models in priority sectors; and position
Morocco as a digital hub for West Africa and outsourcing market for Europe. The reform agenda was
supported by extensive analytical and advisory work, and was underpinned by a solid understanding of
the real constraints of the financial and telecommunications sectors. Finally, key external partners (The
French Development Agency the African Development Bank, and the German development cooperation
were all in support of one or more measures promoted by the DPF. For instance, the French Development
Agency indicated that the PA 2 built upon its work with Groupe Crédit du Maroc on the agricultural
development, agricultural digital technologies’ deployment, and financial inclusion among women ( ICR,
para 76)

Potential risks to the DPF performance were well identified and mitigated. While the overall risk of
the operation was rated Moderate, both (i) stakeholders and (i) institutional capacity for implementation
and sustainability, were rated Substantial. The reforms supported by this operation involved various public
stakeholders as well as institutional and political support, and interagency coordination. Many of the
reforms also required legislative approvals and subsequent regulatory developments for the law to take
effect, some of which were in new legislative areas. The completion of program reforms generally would
imply that the implementing organizations adapt to new ways of doing things. One key mitigation factor
was that the World Bank continuously provided advisory and technical assistance supporting the DPF
measures.

While performance indicators were overall relevant, measurable and appropriate, their definition
and targets could have been more refined. The DPF result framework was generally well designed, but
there was room to improve outcome definition and attribution. For instance, under Pillar 1, an increase in
the gross loan portfolio could also be achieved by lending more below the new ceiling. A better approach
to measuring the effect of the introduction of the higher ceiling may have been to measure the volume of
loans extended between the old and the new ceiling and the number of new borrowers borrowing between
the old and the new ceiling. Moreover, a number of PDO targets were pitched at the output-level.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 23 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



Our assessment of the Bank performance in implementing this operation draws from the material presented in
paragraphs 80-82 of the ICR.

The supervision and M&E remained a challenge throughout the period of implementation because of
the short-term nature of the operation. The ICR did not provide any documentation related to the
supervision and the M&E of the operation. As the DPF was a one-year operation, the Bank did not conduct any
supervision mission, and no Aide-Memoires or ISRs were prepared.

The World Bank appropriately supported the Government’s commitment to the reform agenda through
sustained lending and ASA instruments. The World Bank prepared (i) a direct follow-on Financial and Digital
Inclusion DPF series which covered most of the reform areas in the stand-alone DPF, (ii) a social protection
loan (P172809), and (iii) an IPF (P150928) initiated the early-stage finance agenda. Moreover, the World Bank
continued to support the Government with technical assistance, including (i) a review of the microfinance law
and the deign of a new microfinance guarantee fund to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis, (ii) a review
of key reforms needed to accelerate the expansion of high-speed internet infrastructure and a digital economy
assessment (P165244), and (iii) a digital entrepreneurship policy note and open date readiness assessment
report (P169007).



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.

Bank performance in designing the operation was Satisfactory, because the operation was closely aligned
with Morocco’s priorities, was underpinned by strong analytical and advisory work, and was supported by
other external donors. Potential risks to the program performance were well identified and mitigated. However,
the definition of PDO targets could have been refined.

Bank performance in implementing the operation is rated Satisfactory. The World Bank appropriately
supported the Government’s commitment to the reform agenda through lending and ASA instruments,
although supervision and M&E remained a challenge because of the short-term nature of the operation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

                                                                                                 Page 24 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)




The ICR did not present any other impacts in the social and poverty areas, beyond what was developed under
the Section 5 discussing the operation efficacy. It is actually too early to capture specific impacts in the social
and poverty areas.




b. Environmental

This operation was a DPL, and no environmental policies were triggered, because no significant negative
environmental impacts were expected as an outcome of the PAs, and there are no indications that such negative
effects have occurred. The country already had environmental systems that could mitigate any potential negative
effects resulting from the supported policy reforms.



c. Gender

The ICR indicates that gender inequality may have worsened both in rural and urban areas during the pandemic,
but this trend can hardly be associated to the reforms supported by the DPL. In 2020, this rate increased in both
rural and urban areas, respectively, from 2.7 percent to 3.9 percent and from 21.8 percent to 24.7 percent, HCP
estimated. Moreover, the target for the RI#3 related to the percentage of payment service providers that report
gender-disaggregated data was not achieved, reflecting the challenges to be overcome when designing the results
framework for a one-year standalone DPL.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is overall well-written, evidence-based and internally consistent. It provides a detailed storyline of the
operation context, implementation and the achieved results. In particular, the macroeconomic context of the
operation was well analyzed, including a detailed discussion of the financing instrument and the COVID-19
impact on some of the policy measures supported by the operation. The results orientation and the quality of
analysis were superior, as illustrated by detailed figures and annotated tables and graphs, and annexes. Thus,
the quality of the ICR is rated High.




                                                                                                      Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
                                   Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
Bank Performance                   Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                   ---                    Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                     ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR identified lessons presented in the paragraphs 86-92, and this review is in agreement with the three
lessons summarized below:

(i) Strong analytical work, borrower commitment and follow-on implementation support are factors that
can help mitigate the risk of non-sustainability that could otherwise occur with a stand-alone DPF. This
operation arose from the World Bank Group’s cumulative support of the country's financial sector development
for over a decade. Each PA and results area were informed by careful analytical work and a continuous reform
dialogue and support. If this DPL had occurred without the wealth of both lending, continuous dialogue and
advisory work in the financial sector, there would likely have been significant risk to adopt such a complex
stand-alone DPL. The World Bank understood and valued well the level of commitment of the client and all
preparatory work completed ahead of approval, and moved ahead with the standalone DPL.

(ii) The World Bank teams should be cautious to expect results at the outcome level when adopting
output-level structural reform as PAs in stand-alone DPFs. There might be a long lead time between the law
submission to Parliament and its eventual approval. Moreover, the implementation of the law requires several
regulatory steps before institutions can translate the new law in practice, making results at the outcome level
unachievable within the implementation duration of a stand-alone DPL. Results at the outcome level are only
likely to be achieved after the end of a stand-alone DPF. While submission of draft laws might be included as a
PA; the Bank team should ensure that the laws have been drafted based on best practices and are in a domain
with significant development impact, and are supported by a strong policy dialogue with the Borrower, and there
is either strong commitment from the Borrower, and the possibility of follow-on programmatic DPLs.

(iii) The theory of change and the M&E system for a stand-alone DPL instrument remain a
challenge. The short term nature of a stand-alone DPL operation makes difficult to identify policy measures
which can generate outcome-level impact. In the case of this operation, there were some shortcomings in
having a more precise measurement of the effect of some PA on the final outcomes. The result targets for some
of the PAs were mostly outputs, while others were more ambitious, and all of them had to be achieved during



                                                                                                      Page 26 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MA: Finan'l Inclus'n & Digital Eco. DP (P168587)



the same timeline. The idea that the reforms supported by the operation would have a causal impact becomes
elusive, as it is difficult to ensure that all PAs will generate outcomes.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
Because follow-on programmatic DPLs have already been approved and implemented, and their design was
underpinned by the results achieved under this DPL, it makes sense that IEG would gain in preparing a PPAR
covering both this stand-alone DPO and the programmatic DPLs.




                                                                                              Page 27 of 27
