     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022959

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P101209                                   HN Rural Competitiveness Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Honduras                                  Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-44650,IDA-60460                       30-Nov-2015                                          40,159,718.42

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jun-2008                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              30,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                               42,206,986.96                                            0.00

 Actual                                           40,159,718.42                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson              Christopher David             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective of COMRURAL, as stated in the Project Agreement (PA, 2008) and
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2008), was: “To contribute to increased productivity and competitiveness
   among organized rural small-scale producers through their participation in productive alliances”.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



   The revised PDO, as stated in the amended PA (2017) was: to contribute to increased productivity and
   competitiveness among organized rural small-scale producers through their participation in productive
   alliances; and (b) to enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the PDO (revised version) was achieved (Section 4), this
   review parses the PDO into three objectives (and their corresponding outcomes and indicators):

   Objective 1: to contribute to increased productivity among organized rural small-scale producers through their
   participation in productive alliances;

   Objective 2: to contribute to increased competitiveness among organized rural small-scale producers through
   their participation in productive alliances; and

   Objective 3: to enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Sep-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   A) Support for Productive Alliances: (Original allocation: US$ 9.0 million; Actual Cost: US$ 8.6 million).
   This component supported subcomponents/activities to: (i) provide outreach to the Rural Producer
   Organizations (RPOs), Commercial Partners (CPs) and Private Financial Agencies (PFAs); (ii) create and
   consolidate Productive Alliances (PAs); (iii) identify potential business opportunities; (iv) prepare Business
   Plans (BPs); and (v) build the capacity of Technical Service Providers (TSPs) to increase the quality of
   services provided to the Pas, including facilitating the preparation and implementation of viable BPs;

   B) Productive Investments: (Original allocation: US$ 39.6 million; Actual Cost: US$ 62 million). The core
   activity was to co-finance the implementation, via grants, of BPs formulated under Component A. Eligibility
   for funding under the project depended on a BP being financially viable, linked to one or more concrete
   PAs, and having secured up-front resources from PFIs (a minimum of 30 percent) to support the BP;

   C) Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation: (Original allocation: US$ 2.6 million; Actual Cost:
   US$7.0 million. The main activities were: project administration, and M&E, including: the setting up and
   implementation of a participatory M&E system, baseline information collection, mid-term evaluation and final
   evaluation.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



  With the AF in 2017, two components were added:

  D) IRM Contingency: (Original allocation: zero; Actual Cost: 2.2 million). No funding was allocated to
  Component D at the time it was introduced, but if an eligible emergency were to occur, this component was
  intended to provide a conduit for the use of up to US$5 million in uncommitted project funds to support
  activities by the appropriate agencies to respond to the emergency.

  E) Cross-Cutting Institutional Strengthening: (Original allocation, via AF: US$1.9 million; Actual Cost:
  US$ 0.57 million). This component aimed to support strategic activities to strengthen the agricultural sector,
  including: (i) consulting services to conduct studies to identify issues affecting the main value chains and
  proposals for increasing competitiveness, and (ii) studies to promote productive alliances;



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (i) Project Cost: The total project cost at approval was US$ 76.2 million. The revised costs (following eight
  restructurings) was US$72.0 million. The actual project cost/disbursements at closing was US$78.9 (or
  103.5% of the total original cost and 109.6% of revised cost). The difference in the original and revised
  costs with the final costs/disbursements was due to an increase the counterpart contribution from the
  Government and private capital sources (see ICR, Data Sheet and Annex 3).

  (ii) Financing: At approval and final actual/disbursed amounts, the sources/amounts of original financing
  and disbursement were as follows, respectively: 2 IDA Credits: ($55 million vs. $40.2 million); Other
  ($29.75 vs. $38.7 million). The actual other source of financing (ref. $38.7 million) was as follows: private
  capital sources of US$33.5 ($20.25 million from private financial institutions/PFIs; and $13.25 million from
  rural producer organizations/RPOs); COSUDE Trust Fund (US$3.8 million); and Government: US$1.4
  million.

  (iii) Borrower/Other Contribution: Original amount: US$ 21.2 million; Actual/Disbursed amount: US$38.7
  million (which included funding from PFIs and RPOs, as shown above).

  (iv) Dates: The project was approved on June 17, 2008, and became effective on May 28, 2010. A mid-
  term review was carried out in February, 2013. The original closing date was November 30, 2015, with the
  actual closing date on June 30, 2021 (i.e., an extension of 67 months). This extension was due to various
  delays in Credit effectiveness and implementation, reflecting various capacity weaknesses and project
  restructurings.

  (v) Restructurings and Significant Changes During Implementation: The project had eight
  restructurings, including revision of the PDO and a restructuring which was approved by the Bank’s Board
  of Directors (in September, 2017), and Additional Financing/AF which added two components (i.e., cross-
  cutting institutional strengthening and immediate response mechanism/IRM) and adjustments to the PDO
  outcome targets during various restructurings, and was generally based on a sound rationale (for further
  details/rationale, see ICR, paras. 9 – 24, and Annex 6, especially summary Table A.6.1). In summary:

  (a) July 2011: The PDO indicators and implementation arrangements were modified in this restructuring;

  (b) September 2011: SDR4.4 million (US$7.05 million equivalent) was cancelled;



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



                       (c) February 2012: Two indicators adjusted to reflect the cancellation following the September 2011
                       restructuring;

                       (d) November 2015: The Project's closing date was extended by 13 months, and some of the Credit funds
                       were reallocated among categories;

                       (e) November 2016: The Project's closing date was extended by nine months;

                       (f) September 2017: Board-approved Restructuring and AF: (a) an AF of US$25 million was approved; (b)
                       the project area was expanded to include six new departments; (c) the AF would benefit 5,500 new direct
                       beneficiaries; and (d) technical implementation of the parent Project was transferred to the Honduran
                       Strategic Investment Office (INVEST-H);

                       (g) November 2020: The Project's closing date was extended by seven months;

                       (h) March 2021: This restructuring reallocated credit proceeds and revised component costs.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project’s objectives were Highly relevant, at appraisal and throughout implementation, to addressing
the country’s key developmental challenges and to contributing to the implementation and achievement of:
(a) the country’s development plans, including its Plan for the Agricultural Sector for 2006 – 2010, launching
of the DR-CAFTA Free Trade Agreement in 2008, GoH’s long-term agenda to develop and modernize the
rural and agri-food economy; (b) the Bank country strategy developmental strategies (e.g., CAS: FY2006-
2010, CPS: CPS: FY2012-2015; CPF FY16-20, Honduras Private Sector Diagnostic of 2021, Honduras
Country Diagnostic, 2022, thematic priorities of the World Bank, and framework for Green, Resilient,
Inclusive Development/GRID). Accordingly, the Project addressed 2 core developmental challenges at the
design and implementation stages, involving low productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural sector,
especially with respect to targeting low-income smallholders, including disadvantaged subgroups involving
indigenous and women farmers (ICR, paras. 1-4). As a reference, at project design, in rural areas about
82% and 62% of the rural households were poor and extremely poor, respectively. The Project design
targeted the lower income districts and smallholder groups who had been excluded from productivity
initiatives (ICR, para. 8). In addition, the Project’s follow-up phases through the Bank-funded Phases II
(under implementation) and III (expected to be effective later in 2022) are providing relevant support to the
continued support of strategic productive alliances among beneficiary farmers and low income target
groups, in continuing to address the core developmental challenges of low productivity and value chain
competitiveness among smallholder farmers, and building on the positive experiences and lessons from
COMRURAL I.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Objective: to contribute to increased productivity among organized rural small-scale producers through their
               participation in productive alliances;

               Rationale
               The project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), but did
               not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR
               reconstructed a ToC for the project, based on the implicit results chain outlined in the PAD, and which is
               consistent with the overall PDO, core outcomes and supporting components/outputs/activities (ICR, Figure 1,
               paras. 10 – 17). The ToC figure clearly illustrates the rationale for and operational logic and linkages of this
               objective, to help achieve/contribute to the overall PDO.

               Theory of Change:

               The core expected outcome of increased productivity is generated by targeted beneficiaries adopting
               innovative, climate-resilient, nutrition-smart technologies and practices, which is enabled by the project:
               providing expanded access to improved technologies and inputs; providing productive investments through
               matching grants which leverage private financial and technical resources; organizing beneficiaries to gain
               access to established productive alliances, including expanded access to improved technologies, finance and
               competitive markets.

               Outcome indicators: (ICR, Annex 1) (original and revised targets are shown below)

               i) Percentage increase in land productivity by rural producers participating in the project: Original target: 20;
               Actual: 23.5 (as % of original target: 118%);

               (ii) No. of technical service providers approved to provide support to rural producer organizations: Original
               target: 15; Revised target: 55; Actual: 65 (as % of revised target: 118%);

               (iii) No. of productive alliances under implementation: Original target: 150; Revised target: 190; Actual: 163
               (as % of revised target: 86%);

               (iv) No. of direct project beneficiaries: Original target: 6,700; Revised target: 10,780; Actual: 12,878 (as % of
               revised target: 119%);

               In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated Substantial, because 3 of the 4
               outcome and intermediate outcome targets were achieved. At the same time, the ICR provided limited
               information to assess with greater reliability two aspects: the source of the reported productivity increases and
               attribution to project activities; and the nature and extent of climate-resilient and nutrition-smart technologies
               provided by the project. This shortfall was due to the absence of evaluation studies carried out for the project,
               and which are now being included under the follow-up phases. In addition, the ICR stated that “producers

                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



also made productivity gains in processing” (ICR, para. 32). The efficiency analysis showed that
coffee producers were able to reduce processing costs by 40%, grain producers reduced processing costs by
13%, and dairy producers were able to improve overall productivity by 23% (ICR, para. 32).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to increased competitiveness among organized rural small-scale producers through their
participation in productive alliances.

Rationale
Similar to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is reflected in the project’s original design and in the ToC
reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1), with respect to the various types of project-funded activities, which
contributed to generating sustainable IRIs/outputs, which in turn, contributed to the sustainable outcome of
increased competitiveness among rural small-scale producers.

Theory of Change: The prioritized interventions with respect to achieving Objective 2 include 3 types:

     i. providing technical support to formulating and financing business plans;
    ii. organizing farmers into productive alliances;
   iii. mobilizing private capital, and expanded and inclusive access to it.

Outcome indicators: (ICR, Annex 1) (original and revised targets are shown below)

     i. Percentage increase in value of gross sales of rural producer organizations, based on implementation
          of business plan: Original target: 10; Actual: 25.5 (as % of original target: 255%);
    ii. No. of technical service providers approved to provide support to rural producer organizations:
          Original target: 15; Revised target: 55; Actual: 65 (as % of revised target: 118%);
   iii.   No. of rural producer organizations produced a profile that is approved to become business plan:
          Original target: 215; Revised target: 235; Actual: 236 (as % of revised target: 100.4%);
    iv.   No. of productive alliances under implementation: Original target: 150; Revised target: 190; Actual:
          163 (as % of revised target: 86%);
    v.    No. of direct project beneficiaries: Original target: 6,700; Revised target: 10,780; Actual: 12,878 (as %
          of revised target: 119%);
    vi.   Percentage of investments identified in the business plans completed on schedule: Original target
          (2011): 80; Actual: 97 (as % of original target: 121%);
   vii.   Percentage of business plans financed by project implemented using good environmental practices:
          Original target (2011): 70; Actual: 89.7 (as % of original target: 128%);
  viii.   Percentage of business plans in project successfully implement measures targeting youth and
          indigenous communities: Original target (2011): 70; Actual: 97 (as % of original target: 139%)
    ix.   Amount of private capital mobilized (US$ millions): Original target: 12.5; Revised target: 24.3; Actual:
          24.3 (as % of revised target: 100%);

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)




    x. Percentage of rural producer organizations working under alliance approach 24 months after
       disbursement: New/Revised target: 80; Actual: 91 (as % of new/revised target: 114%).

In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated High, because 9 of the 10 outcome
and intermediate outcome targets were achieved, with some by significant margins, and most targets were
increased during the restructurings. While the indicators were generally sound, some of the indicators
provide limited perspective on the progress toward the competitiveness objective (e.g., modest increase in
sales, number of business plans prepared).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. Added as part of the
restructuring in 2017.

Rationale
Honduras has experienced frequent natural disasters, resulting in significant loss of life and economic and
social damages. On the request from Government, and recognizing limited availability of resources I the
event of a natural crisis, the Bank approved the addition of this objective and component, and use of
unallocated project funds, while recognizing the need for flexibility, subject to the occurrence of some natural
disaster.

Theory of Change: Given the nature of the need to use public funds for an emergency situation, the main
rationale underpinning the addition of this component is the vital role of Government to provide “public goods
and services”, in the event of an occurrence of the crisis event.

This objective involved two targets involving the establishment and operation of an Internal Response
Mechanism/IRM: (1) the contingent emergency response was triggered by COVID conditions, and guided by
the IRM manual which was developed in time to guide the response process; and (2) the disbursement
window was an actual 27 weeks, well above the targeted 4 weeks.

In summary, while the IRM system was established, there was a significant delay in the Bank’s disbursement
of funds, due to the delays in the international procurement of the sanitary goods/inputs, which were used to
combat COVID effects in Honduras). This delay was due to acute global supply constraints. Also, the ICR
reports that the distribution of the supplies once procured/delivered were managed effectively (ICR, para. 40).




Rating
Modest


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the extent to which the original and revised PDO and supporting 3 objectives, and their
                            original and revised targets arising from the restructurings (especially in September, 2017) were achieved is
                            rated Substantial. The ICR reached a sound conclusion in recognizing that the “project piloted an innovative
                            and agile approach in a complex environment and fragile governance framework to substantially achieve the
                            PDO outcomes of increased productivity and competitiveness” (ICR, para. 41). Supporting evidence included:

                                  Four of the five PDO indicator targets were exceeded;
                                  Out of the 14 intermediate result indicators, 12 out of 14 targets met or exceeded their original or
                                   revised targets; and
                                  There is promising scaling-up and sustainability of project benefits, as evidenced by: RPOs’ continued
                                   contracts with commercial partners (CPs), ongoing relationship with PFIs, and the ongoing
                                   implementation of COMRURAL Phases II and III, which are further reinforcing this scaling-up and
                                   sustainability of COMRURAL Phase 1.

                            At the same time, there were shortcomings. The project experienced significant delays, at start-up, and at
                            closing, with an extension of 67 months of Credit closing. Overall, the efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Overall, the project’s performance and results demonstrated Substantial efficiency, based on various
   evidenced-based tools, and analyses applied and presented in the ICR (ICR, paras. 42-49, with further details in
   Annex 4). The methodology and results used to assess efficiency involved applying ex-post financial and
   economic analyses, with respect to the project’s components, as follows:

   (a) Financial Analyses (paras. 42- 44). The ex-post financial analysis took into account the financial analyses
   conducted at appraisal, which used 10 prototype farm/enterprise models, each focused on a specific activity
   (e.g., potato seed production, tilapia production, coffee production, tourism, and strawberry production), and
   extrapolated to a total of 125-150 subprojects that the project planned to finance/implement. By project closing,
   the project had financed about 120 subprojects, based on formulated business plans (BPs). While the coffee
   value chain represented about 75 % of the investments and 70 % of the beneficiaries, several other value
   chains were included to assess the financial benefits. A random sample of 12 case studies/financial models
   were analyzed to assess/extrapolate the project’s financial cash-flows/benefits, covering the main value chains
   supported by the project, based on various sources of information. The cash flows of the analyzed case
   studies were used to extrapolate cash flows for the total investment of the Project in each value chain. Financial
   rates of return (FRR) were found to be "robust" at the time of project closing (para. 45, and Annex 4), in


                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



comparison with the FRR estimated at appraisal (of 16%). The financial and economic returns were affected
adversely due to the delay in project start-up, which resulted in losses in financial and economic efficiency.

(b) Economic Analyses (paras. 43-48). The ex-post economic analyses was based on a similar methodology
used for the financial analyses, with some adjustments, including: application of estimated economic prices for
the relevant commodities; and inclusion of all project costs. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was
estimated to be 20 percent, which is consistent with the appraisal value (also, 20%), and lower than the EIRR
estimated at the time of the interim ICR (in 2017, of 25%). This final estimated EIRR, although generally
satisfactory and consistent with the appraisal value estimated in 2008, was due to the types of businesses which
the project supported and to decreases in the international coffee prices, for the project’s critical coffee value
chain. The ICR conducted a sensitivity analyses of the EIRR to show that the ex-post EIRR is robust and
remains positive up to a combined impacts of 20 percent decline in benefits and a 10 percent increase in costs.

(c) Other Efficiency Effects (ICR, para. 48). The ICR was not able to quantify the environmental benefits
achieved through adopting improved production and manufacturing practices (e.g., adoption of drought and
disease resistant seed varieties, drip irrigation techniques and micro greenhouses). Moreover, the project’s
contribution to an overall increase in environmentally sustainable economic activity also led to increased
employment opportunities in the targeted rural areas, with the creation of an estimated 24,673 permanent and
temporary jobs.

In summary, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial, based on overall financial and economic results, and
also considering the following factors:

(i) the difficult national context, including the institutional capacity challenges, which were improved following
project restructuring in 2017, which assigned a key implementation/coordination role to INVEST-H;

(ii) the evolving economic context following the approval of DR-CAFTA;

(iii) repeated weather-related shocks, the severe political crisis around a change in administration in 2009;

(iv) the pilot nature of the operation, which introduced an innovative productive alliances approach to around 3
percent of Honduran small-scale rural producers;

(v) notwithstanding the initial delays in implementation, the Project yielded robust economic returns (not
including the environmental benefits mentioned above), with an EIRR of 20 percent, in line with the EIRR
projected at Appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 20.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              20.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating is based on the assessment of the 3 dimensions as summarized above. While the
project had eight restructurings, this evaluation focuses on considering more substantive restructuring (in 2017),
involving a change in the PDO, additional financing and adjustments to various indicator targets (see details in
Section 4). Accordingly, the assessment of the entire project is based on the original and revised outcome and
output targets and achievements. Accordingly, and based on IEG guidelines for deriving the overall outcome
rating for projects (ref. to IEG Guidelines, Tables 9.1 and 9.2), this review concludes that the project’s overall
outcome is rated Satisfactory. The following points provide a summary of the outcome assessment.

(a) High rating for Relevance of Objectives: This rating is based on the project’s initial and continued
(throughout implementation) strong alignment of objectives and priority activities with: Government’s national
and agricultural sector policies, strategies, national investment program, and contribution to their strategic
targets; and the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy/Framework (covering three periods: 2006-2010, 2012-
2015, and 2016-2020), and various analytical reports. Also, the country’s fragile, conflict and violence (FCV)
challenges involving the project area reinforced the relevance of the project in addressing key agricultural
growth and rural poverty challenges.

(b) Substantial rating for Efficacy: The project piloted an innovative and agile approach in a complex
environment and fragile governance framework to substantially achieve the PDO outcomes of increased
productivity and competitiveness. Supporting evidence included: four of the five PDO indicator targets were
exceeded; out of the 14 intermediate result indicators, 12 met or exceeded their original and revised (upwards)
targets; and there is strong evidence to support promising scaling-up and sustainability of project benefits (as
reflected in the follow-on projects, COMRURAL I and II). Also, the addition of the IRM proved to be useful in
helping the country address the adverse effects of COVID.

(c) Substantial rating for Efficiency: The ex-post analyses demonstrated positive overall financial and
economic results, consistent with appraisal estimates, and also demonstrated positive efficiencies in the context
of a challenging political and economic environment. At the same time, the project experienced various
implementation delays, resulting in a project extension period of almost 6 years.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



Overall, there is Modest risk to sustaining the project’s development outcomes and overall PDO, especially
with regards to the sustainability of the productive alliances/PAs supported by the Project. The main
associated risks involve the following main aspects and evidence (ICR, para. 77):

(a) COMRURAL worked with relatively well-established Rural Producer Organizations/RPOs. This is
evidenced in the organizational capacity index score that the Project collected for 100 RPOs.

(b) Specific design aspects of the PA model appear to have been successful in reducing risk and
improving the sustainability of the PAs, including: (i) close technical project support provided to the
RPOs; and (ii) the model’s intrinsically high level of sustainability once the economic advantages have
become apparent to producers and buyers, and once a successful business relationship with CPs and PFIs
has been established. The ICR provided positive evidence of the sustainability of formal financing to the
RPOs.

(c) Market risk associated with commodity prices, production quality, and timing of delivery for
honoring contracts could potentially hamper the profitability of various productive investments. The
ICR provided evidence (via closing survey and sensitivity analysis) that the Project contributed to equipping
the RPOs with a deeper awareness of market demands and more integrated production systems.

(d) The Project has contributed to a better understanding of and improved approaches to the risks
associated with external weather events and climate variability, by encouraging the adoption of
appropriate and sustainable agricultural practices promoted/supported by the project. The inclusion of the
IRM also enabled the GoH to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, although with a disbursement delay; and

(e) The Project has been followed by two other phases of COMRURAL (Phase II and Phase III), which
are continuing with the now-tested model of PAs, while reported to be incorporating lessons learned from this
Project (e.g., greater focus on institutional strengthening of critical sector institutions, adoption of climate
smart productive technologies and practices, and targeting of vulnerable groups).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Overall, quality at entry of this project is positive and moderately satisfactory, notwithstanding the
  challenging operating environment and institutional weaknesses to design, implement and sustain the
  project. The ICR highlights 7 features, and their supporting evidence of what was done well and of the
  challenges (ICR, see para. 74 for further details). First, Project design was based on sound background
  analysis and implementation experiences in Honduras, which considered national and international
  lessons learned, as well as sectoral strategies. Second, Project design was simplified to the extent
  possible, after having been reviewed and analyzed extensively during project preparation. Third, Project
  design was ambitious relative to the capacity of key implementing partners, and the project’s
  implementation risk was still underestimated. Fourth, the geographical scope of the Project was selected
  based on explicit criteria, including existing social capital. Fifth, the fiduciary (financial management and
  procurement) and safeguards aspects were adequately assessed, although changes in fiduciary
  implementation arrangements during the project life suggest that a more careful assessment may have
  been needed. Sixth, M&E arrangements were formulated in detail, but their rollout was held up by

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



  changing implementation arrangements and capacity constraints. The RF was well-designed to track
  Project indicators, but could have been improved by formulating more sharply likely project outcomes for
  the productivity and competitiveness objectives. Seventh, likely risks were correctly identified, although in
  retrospect underestimated, and mitigation measures proved insufficient in some cases (e.g., the initial
  challenges associated with coordination between SAG and UAP/SEFIN).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank played an active and constructive role in monitoring and supporting the implementation of
 the Project, including the following six aspects/evidence (for further details, see ICR, para. 75).

 First, Bank supervision missions were carried out on a regular basis, proactive, mobilizing appropriate and
 competent technical support from the World Bank Headquarters/field office, the Country Management Unit,
 and other technical agencies (e.g., FAO). Some examples of the Bank’s proactive role include: World
 Bank teams carried out 22 bi-annual implementation support missions between project effectiveness (May
 2010) and closing (June 2021); the missions comprised teams with relevant expertise; the Mid-term
 Review (MTR) was conducted in a timely manner (February 2013), and provided useful recommendations,
 which appear to have been utilized; the Project was restructured eight times, suggesting strong proactivity
 in the Bank’s approach to addressing project implementation challenges for this innovative project in a
 difficult institutional context.

 Second, the Bank’s supervision of fiduciary compliance was intensive and timely, involving financial
 management, procurement, and safeguards.

 Third, Project Performance Ratings for IP and DO realistically reflected project progress (see Data Sheet
 performance ratings).

 Fourth, the Bank project team sought diligently improvements in the implementation arrangements, which
 underwent significant changes during the project’s life.

 Fifth, while the Project made substantial improvements in monitoring during its life after a slow start, the
 evaluation aspect fell short, which is expected to be addressed through a more rigorous evaluation of the
 forthcoming COMRURAL III.

 Sixth, the Bank worked with the COMRURAL project team and other executing agencies to ensure an
 orderly project closing and sound transition arrangements for the regular operation of supported activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the design of the project’s M&E system was comprehensive and sound, providing detailed
 guidance on its functions, evaluation methodology and frequency, based on the following evidence (for
 details, see ICR, para. 61 and 62):

 (i) The M&E system was designed to track and measure implementation of the day-to-day activities of the
 Project and to evaluate project outcomes;

 (ii) The monitoring of implementation progress included: developing baseline data on RPOs, and
 monitoring progress towards project objectives; providing information and receiving feedback from key
 stakeholders; determining updates and recommending adjustments to project processes as needed;
 and generating methodologically sound inputs for the measurement, analysis, and dissemination of project
 results and lessons learned;

 iii) The project evaluation framework specified semi-annual, annual, mid-term and final evaluations, starting
 with a baseline survey of rural producers to be repeated for every cycle of the competitive grants;

 (iv) Results Framework (RF) indicators were relevant, generally specific and aligned to operational
 objectives, although some gaps were identified.



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall implementation performance of the M&E system was Substantial, based on the following
  evidence (for details, see ICR, paras. 63 – 66):

  (i) The Results Framework was modified four times during the Project’s life. However, most of these
  changes only involved clarifications in wording or changes in indicator values (mostly
  increases);

  (ii) The M&E system designed for COMRURAL has enabled the PIU to track the Project's progress with
  regard to the PDO and intermediate outcome indicators;

  (iii) M&E implementation was delayed due to the Project’s slow/delayed launching;

  (iv) The Project’s established MIS system collected key information on RPOs;

  (v) The Project’s MIS was redesigned in 2017 to make data entry more efficient and improve the quality
  of the reports generated;



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



  (vi) Although the MIS system was strengthened, the implementation of a rigorous evaluation methodology
  involving control groups was only prioritized for implementation in the successor operations;

  (vii) Various studies were conducted at project closing to inform the Borrower's Completion Report and
  the Bank’s ICR.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, there was good utilization of the Project’s M&E system/reports, as follows (ICR, paras. 67-68):

  (i) The Project’s M&E data collected was used to prepare the Project’s progress reports submitted twice
  yearly to the line ministries and World Bank, for their coordinated use;

  (ii) Project management and Bank’s Project team actively used the M&E information data for monitoring
  implementation progress, tracking results indicators, updating the economic and financial analysis
  (EFA), for guiding the focus of the AF and the various project restructurings, justifying project closing
  date, and using as key inputs for the Completion Report and the Bank’s ICR; and

  (iii) the various project reports, including lessons learned, were used as key inputs for Government
  requesting and designing, and the Bank supporting the follow-up COMRURAL II and III projects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as environmental category “B” (partial assessment),
   and triggered four environmental safeguard policies, during the preparation and implementation:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Pest Management (OP 4.09);
   and Forests (OP/BP 4.36). All 120 BPs underwent a preliminary environmental and social assessment by
   the Project's safeguards staff, based on which the RPOs implemented an Environmental Management Plan
   (EMP), which laid out environmental mitigation measures for each of the potential impacts identified.
   Safeguard performance was mixed, as follows (ICR, para. 69):

   (i) The Project did not finance activities in BPs that could result in transformation or degradation of critical
   natural habitats;

   (ii) Integrated pest management techniques were used, focused on biological controls, and types of
   parasites and tools for behavioral control of pests and insects; and

   (iii) Safeguards performance and compliance were affected by extended periods, notably in the early stages
   of project implementation, when the client lacked either one or both required environmental specialists,
   which resulted in a lack of monitoring and reporting on compliance with environmental safeguards.


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



  Social Safeguards: The ICR rated the Social Safeguard Performance and compliance as Moderately
  Satisfactory or Satisfactory throughout the Project’s life. The Project was classified as Category “B”, and
  triggered three social safeguards: OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) and OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural
  Resources); and OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, was activated as a precautionary measure.
  Performance was generally good, based on the following performance:

  (i) An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was developed following consultations, included for key actions (ICR,
  para. 70), and was publicly disclosed at the Bank’s country office in Honduras and Infoshop (2007);

  (ii) Any proposal submitted involving impacts on any cultural site would not be eligible for funding unless
  supported by the Honduran Institute of Anthropology and History (IHAH);

  (iii) The Project did not approve BPs that required land purchases. This was not found to be a limitation for
  participation of Indigenous Peoples, since existing land tenure schemes have resulted in issuance of
  collective, community or individual land titles, as applicable.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management (FM): Based on the various assessment reports, the ICR rated financial
  management performance as Moderately Satisfactory (from April 2008 to Nov 2012), and Satisfactory, with
  some gaps, thereafter and throughout project Implementation. The GoH’s Integrated Financial
  Administration System (SIAFI) was used by the Project and operated in a satisfactory manner, allowing
  adequate financial monitoring and compliance with the terms of the legal agreements and applicable laws
  and regulations. The Project's bi-annual interim unaudited financial reports (IFRs) were submitted to
  the Bank and were acceptable to the Bank. Audit reports were submitted on time to the Bank and included
  unqualified (clean) opinions which were accepted by the Bank.

  At the time of preparing the Interim ICR, there were various shortcomings in financial management,
  including delays in providing information needed to manage and monitor Project implementation, resulting
  from the separation of functions between technical (SAG) and administrative/financial (SEFIN)
  management of the Project. technical and administrative/ financial management aspects were later
  consolidated under one body (INVEST-H) at the time of the AF (2017), and subsequently, financial
  management performance improved.

  (ii) Procurement: Procurement compliance was rated as Satisfactory throughout project
  implementation. Procurement processes for productive alliances, implemented by RPOs, followed the
  principles of the Procurement Regulations embedded in the guides prepared for the RPOs, which were
  updated as needed, based on “good practices”. These guides were reviewed and approved by the Bank.
  The TA for the PAs included training support for the RPOs on commercial procurement practices and
  enabled them to follow the procedures and reporting requirements outlined in the guides.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



  Not Applicable



d. Other
  The ICR highlights 4 other positive aspects contributed by the project: women/youth/indigenous
  communities; institutional strengthening; mobilizing private sector financing; and poverty reduction and
  shared prosperity. While recognizing some attribution challenges with respect to the precise role and
  contributions of this project to these other strategic benefits, the ICR provides relevant evidence (paras. 52
  – 60) on the nature/scope of these “other” benefits. Below are some of the key aspects.

  (i) Women/youth/indigenous communities: The project provided direct support to enhance the role of and
  direct benefits to women, youth and indigenous population, including (see paras. 52 – 54): proactive
  targeting by the Project ensured that 27 percent of total direct beneficiaries were women and three of the
  BPs consisted of RPOs with only women; extensive technical support to women through the BP/proposal
  preparation process; developing, approving and implementing gender strategy plans, including active
  decision-making roles in their RPOs; increasing the number of women in management bodies/roles, thereby
  closing gender gaps in terms of access to finance, information and technology through the productive
  alliances; ensuring about 13 percent of beneficiaries were youth and 97 percent of RPOs developed and
  implemented measures targeting youth in the RPOs, including specific training and strategies to prepare
  youth to assume managerial roles in RPOs; ensuring about 38 percent of direct beneficiaries were from
  several indigenous communities; ensuring about 35 of the BPs (out of 120 BPs) consisted of RPOs which
  consisted only of Indigenous People; carrying out consultations with key representatives of indigenous
  communities before and during project implementation to ensure their interests were incorporated in project
  activities; although membership by women, youth and indigenous persons in RPOs grew by 14 percent, 27
  percent and 16.1 percent, respectively, the overall rate of increase of cooperative membership was even
  higher -- 46 percent.

  (ii) Institutional Strengthening: (ICR, paras. 55-56): Although institutional strengthening was added as an
  additional component in the latter half of the project’s implementation, and following initial
  implementation challenges in terms of institutional capacity of previous implementing partners and overall
  country capacity constraints, the project’s support to institutional strengthening and involvement of and
  reliance on INVEST-H entity has shown good progress. These implementation arrangements have been
  adopted and further strengthened by the follow-on projects of COMRURAL II and II.

  (iii) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The project made important strategic contributions to expanding the
  role of the private sector, based on the following evidence (ICR, paras. 57 – 58): (a) Every dollar of Project
  financing leveraged another US$1.35 of private financing, US$24.73 million in IDA financing under the
  Project leveraged US$33.5 million in private capital, of which US$20.25 million were raised through PFIs
  and US$13.25 million RPOs’ own financing; (b) The brief survey conducted at project closing suggests that
  85 percent of RPOs continued to have access to finance from the same or an alternative PFI after project
  closing; this reflects positively on the PA model's sustainability in mobilizing private capital; (c) the project
  model included several mechanisms, including technical assistance, to incentivize credit by substantially
  reducing the risk faced by financial institutions when dealing with small rural producers; (d) The project
  established a credit guarantee fund to protect the investment of the PFIs. The Complementary Guarantee
  Fund (FONGAC-COMRURAL) was established by the GoH and committed to insure 50 percent of the
  financing provided by the PFIs to the RPOs.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



   (iv) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (ICR, paras. 59 – 60). The project provided evidence of
   promoting poverty reduction and making some tangible contributions in a challenging context,
   including: (a) The project targeted small-scale rural producers, including women producers and
   indigenous producers who faced gaps in access to finance, technology and information, and contributed to
   their increased productivity and competitiveness; (b) The farmers constituting the project-supported RPOs
   were comparable to other small-scale farmers in Honduras in terms of cultivated farm size and
   productivity;    (c) The Project intervention resulted in a 46 percent increase in the number of co-operative
   members and these additional farmers had smaller cultivated areas; (d) The overall increase in
   environmentally sustainable economic activity also led to increased employment opportunities in the
   targeted rural areas; (e) A significant contribution of the Project has been to validate and refine the
   productive alliance model in Honduras and in the region more broadly, and to enhance the institutional
   capacity of the Implementing Agency (INVEST-H) to such an extent that the follow-on operations,
   COMRURAL II and COMRURAL III, have been able to extend coverage to subsistence farmers and less
   developed value chains.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents six main lessons from this project (ICR, para. 78). The four most relevant lessons
have been consolidated and further sharpened below. These lessons are based on project-specific
implementation experience and conclusions, and which can be applicable and contextualized to
other projects in Honduras (as being done for COMRURAL I and II) and other countries which are
considering a similar strategy.

Lesson 1: Promotion of appropriate, profitable, sustainable and productive technologies, and
associated prioritized and transparent public investments, combined with improved access
to markets, provided farmers with improved incentives for adoption and participation, and
proved to be an effective strategy. The Project promoted adoption of profitable, sustainable
production and processing practices (integrated pest management, drip irrigation, solar drying for
coffee, etc.) and helped many beneficiaries acquire certifications that allowed them to access
markets that provided price premiums for quality and reliability of their increased production and
marketable surpluses. The project also strengthened farmer-based organizational capacity and
scale, which contributed to enhanced farmer bargaining power, all of which contributed to higher
productivity and production sales.


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



Lesson 2: Given the inherent risks in lending to the agricultural sector, an integrated package
of prioritized public investments and supporting measures can increase confidence of PFIs
and private capital mobilization, and lead to sustainable financing relationships with rural
producers. The integrated approach reduced risks, increased bankability of business plans
implemented by the beneficiaries, and contributed to sustainable increased value of production and
marketed surpluses, which can be scaled-up in Honduras and customized in other countries.

Lesson 3: A strong monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is an essential tool to track,
enhance and sustain project performance and sustainable results, especially involving a
project that is serving as a model for both within and beyond Honduras. Moreover, gathering timely
baseline data and more disaggregated data on relevant key indicators can generate further insights
into the precise nature and scope of project benefits, including the effective inclusion of vulnerable
target groups.

Lesson 4: Identifying, tracking and implementing relevant factors which foster the active
inclusion of vulnerable groups should be incorporated into project design and objectives.
Project design should explicitly address factors that prevent vulnerable communities from
engagement in project activities. While COMRURAL successfully reached large numbers of women
and Indigenous Peoples with support that closed gaps in access for them, their overall participation
in rural organizations grew at a below-average pace. A specific design feature that has been
included in the new, ongoing COMRURAL projects, in addition to a dedicated window for
subsistence farmers, is that additional points and priority are assigned during in the evaluation
process for the approval of BPs to RPOs with a higher proportion of members from vulnerable
groups. Revitalizing the rural economy while modernizing the agri-food sector requires both
improved technologies to boost productivity and a range of specific measures to ensure greater
inclusion and generation of direct and sustainable benefits for traditionally marginalized groups.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well written, analytical, evidence-based and results-focused, especially with respect to:

(a) most sections being supported by generally adequate evidence (including the farm models used to assess
the ex-post EFA), albeit some limitations on the rigor of the project's attribution issues;

(b) providing a comprehensive results framework (ref. Annex 1), with quantifiable performance indicators at the
outcome and intermediate outcome levels, and supported by a sound and clear reconstructed theory of change
(ICR, Figure 1);




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HN Rural Competitiveness Project (P101209)



(c) inclusion of sound strategic lessons which have application for similar projects in Honduras (especially
COMRURAL Phases II and III) and other developing countries, although the number of lessons were
consolidated in the ICRR --- from 7 to 4 lessons;

(d) candid in recognizing explicitly: (i) the most important shortfalls of the project, especially regarding the
significant delays in the project’s launch and subsequent implementation delays; (ii) absence of a more rigorous
impact evaluation methodology and study (which has been deferred to the subsequent Project Phases
(COMRURAL II and III); and (iii) the sustainability challenges, although the available evidence presented in the
ICR on the continuation/sustainability of the Productive Alliances (PAs) seems promising.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
