     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022876

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P120843                                   BD: Private Sector Development Support

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48660,IDA-57690,TF-99730              30-Jun-2016                                        183,442,957.21

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Mar-2011                               28-Feb-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          120,000,000.00                                   17,409,930.00

 Revised Commitment                           185,850,477.01                                   17,098,611.55

 Actual                                       183,442,957.21                                   17,098,611.55




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo         Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the May 2011 Financial Agreement (FA) on page 5, the original Project Development Objective (PDO)
   was " to facilitate investment in growth centers in the emerging manufacturing and services sectors of the
   economy with the aim of generating employment". The project was expanded through an additional financing
   using the June 22, 2016 restructuring, and the PDO was revised to read as follows: "to facilitate private
   investment and job creation and promote compliance with international quality standards, building codes, and



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



   good social and environmental practices in economic zones supported by the Private Sector Development
   Support Project (PSDSP)".

   The June 22, 2016 revised PDO was essentially an improved and comprehensive formulation of the original
   PDO, and as such there will be no split assessment of the PDO. In line with the ICR methodology, this review
   will assess this project against the parsed revised PDO as follows:

           Objective 1:To facilitate private investment
           Objective 2:To facilitate job creation
           Objective 3: To promote compliance with international quality standards in economic zones
           Objective 4: To promote compliance with international building codes in economic zones
           Objective 5: To promote compliance with international good social and environmental practices in
            economic zones




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening the Enabling Environment for EZ Development (Amount at appraisal of
   US$13.2 million, Actual amount of US$30.87 million). The activities in this component were structured to
   build capacity in the BEZA and the BHTPA and support the operationalization of the two authorities. The
   component supported i) development of procedures for EZ licensing, concessional agreements, and project
   management, ii) creation of the online one-stop-shop portal design, iii) establishment of procedures for site
   assessments and pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, iv) hiring of transaction advisors, and v) off-site
   infrastructure design.

   Revised component: This component was revised three times as follows: (i) contrary to the overall
   reduction of the project envelope during the 2013 restructuring, IDA allocation for this
   component increased from US$3.1 million to US$6.3 million, due to an increase of the number of zones to
   be supported under the investment project from three to at least five, and the cost of associated
   consulting services; (ii) with the Additional Financing in February 2016, IDA/DFID resources for this
   component increased from US$12.7 million to US$31.20 million




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



Component 2: Public Investment Facility for EZ Development (Amount at appraisal of US$116.9
million, Actual amount of US$145.37 million). This component focused on building off-site last-mile
infrastructure and shared on-site facilities of a public-good nature for targeted EZs. The infrastructure
investments included land preparation and development, access roads, sewerage systems, power
distribution, and rail connections and landings.

Revised component: This component was revised twice as follows: (i) in July 2013 the IDA allocation of
this component was significantly reduced from an amount of US$111.9 million down to US$24.6 million, due
to the cancelation of the costs for the rail connections, carriages and landings, and most importantly, and
the compensation for Eligible Resettlement Costs as well; (ii) with the Additional Financing in February
2016, IDA/DFID resources for this component increased significantly from US$29.5million to
US$135.50 million, following the scaling up of last-mile infrastructure and EZ-specific equipment and works.

Component 3: Strengthening Skills Formation, Building Safety, and Sustainable Social and
Environmental Standards.(Amount at appraisal of US$7.3 million, Actual amount of
US$9.04 million). This component focused on i) training the workforce and local firms, ii) hiring
environmental and social counselors, and iii) enforcing building safety code compliance. It aimed to
enhance the quality of the skilled workforce in the zones and promote the adoption of good social and
environmental practices.

Revised component: This component was revised twice as follows: (i) the cost under this component was
unchanged during the July 2013 restructuring and stood at US$5,0 million, but a new item was created to
fund training and operating costs in the amount of US$4.1 million; (ii) with the February 2016
Additional Financing, IDA/DFID resources for this component increased from US$10.00 million to
US$22.49 million, with the need to scale up (a) training and placement, and complying with quality
standards and obtaining certification, building safety and codes compliance, and promoting environmental
and social standards.

                                                                                                   Level-1
                                                                                                  Restructuring Ac
Components                          Approval March 2011 Level-2 Restructuring July 2013
                                                                                                  February      clo
                                                                                                  2016
                                    IDA           DFID      IDA                    DFID           IDA/DFID      IDA
Component 1: Strengthening
the Enabling Environment for        3.1           10.1      6.3                    6.4            31.20            30.
EZ Development
Component 2: Public
Investment Facility for EZ          111.9         5.0       24.5                   5.0            135.50           145
Development.
Component 3: Strengthening
Skills Formation, Building
                                    5.0           1.3       5.0                    5.0            22.49            9.0
Safety, and Sustainable Social
and Environmental Standards
Training and Operating Costs        0             1.0       4.2                    1.0            -
Total                               120.0         17.4      40.0                   17.4           189.19           185



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project cost totaled US$200.5 million, comprising disbursements from an IDA credit in
  the amount of US$183.4 million, and a British Department for International Development (DFID) grant in the
  amount of US$17.1 million. Original appraisal estimates were US$120.0 million to fund activities aimed at
  generating jobs in the emerging manufacturing and services sectors of the Bangladesh economy.

  Financing. The original IDA credit was in the amount of US$120 million, but was downsized to US$40.0
  million following the cancellation of US$80.0 million on July 14, 2013. The project resources
  were supplemented by an Additional Financing (AF) on July 2016 in the amount of US$130 million, totaling
  US$170 million. Th project was also funded by a DFID grant in the amount of US$17.1 million.

  Borrower Contribution: The Bangladesh Government planned to contribute to this project in an amount of
  US7.0 million, but there were no disbursement during project implementation.

  Dates: The project was approved on March 1, 2011, and became effective on July 1, 2011. The project
  went through five restructurings and closed on February 28, 2021, 56 months after the original closing date.

  Restructurings: The project was restructured five times as follows:

        On July 20, 2013, the level-2 restructuring aimed to: (a) revise the project scope to align it with
           implementation realities and the reduced financing envelope from US$120 million down to US$40
           million; (b) rationalize the results indicators; (c) reallocate the credit and grant funds among the
           disbursement categories in line with the downsizing; (d) add a Governance and Accountability Action
           Plan (GAAP) to address governance issues, and (e) simplify the provisions on institutional
           arrangements;
          On April 05, 2016, the level-1 restructuring proposed changes including an Additional Financing (AF)
           in the amount of US$130.0 million, and a revision of the PDO and associated results framework, the
           introduction of activities that promote good social and environmental practices, and the merger of
           two components. The AF also triggered the safeguard policy 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples and
           extended the local closing date for the original project;
          On June 22, 2016, the level-2 restructuring brought in changes in loan closing date and reallocation
           between disbursement categories; and aimed to extend the closing date from June 30, 2016 to
           March 31, 2017, and to synchronize the Department for International Development (DFID) grant
           closing date with that of the PSDSP IDA credit and to reallocate funds between disbursement
           categories.
          On August 28, 2019, the level-2 restructuring revised the results framework and reallocated funds
           between disbursement categories; and
          On March 02, 2020, the level-2 restructuring brought in changes in the results Framework, in
           components and cost reallocation between disbursement categories.

  Assessment methodology



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



         The project went through four level-2 restructurings and one level-1 restructuring as indicated in the
          paragraph above. The level-1 restructuring on June 22, 2016 was essentially an improved and
          comprehensive formulation of the original PDO, followed by an additional financing. As such, the
          project scope was expanded, and a new result framework was adopted. While there were other
          level-2 restructurings to adjust the M&E system, the scope of the revised project did not change.
          Applying the OPCS guidelines in the case of an expansion of the project scope, the efficacy of the
          project will be assessed against the revised ambitious results framework, and there will be no be
          no split assessment of the PDO.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: There was in the country an urgent need to create productive jobs and attract Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI) and spur sustained economic growth. FDI had remained persistently stagnant at
approximately 1 percent of GDP per year, and was largely concentrated in services, particularly in
telecommunications and banking. Bringing more FDI in other sectors would boost technology innovation,
diversify exports, improve export-market linkages, and create good jobs. The Government of Bangladesh
(GoB) opted to expand its Special Economic Zones by passing (i) the Bangladesh Hi-Tech Park Authority
Act, and (ii) the Bangladesh Economic Zones Act. The above laws provided the legal coverage for
attracting and leveraging private investment, and set out a framework for the provision of infrastructure
services on a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) basis. It also enabled the establishment of a one-stop shop
(OSS) system to facilitate public services required by investors including a system for commercial and labor
dispute resolution.

The PDO was consistent with the Borrower's priorities. The original and revised PDO remained highly
relevant to the GoB’s developmental objectives at project appraisal and remained consistent with the GoB's
most recent five-year plan. The project supported the country's National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty
Reduction II, FY2009-2011, focusing on promoting EZs and enhancing productivity and efficiency through
science and technology. The GoB’s recently approved a new five-year development plan covering 2021-25
entitled "Promoting Prosperity and Fostering Inclusiveness", which identified labor-intensive, export-oriented
manufacturing-led growth and ICT-based entrepreneurship as three of its six major pillars of development.

The PDO was consistent with the World Bank's country strategies. At appraisal, the project was
aligned with the Country Assistance Strategy FY11-14, (Report 54615-BD), which aimed at supporting
Bangladesh's inclusive and sustainable growth agenda by promoting increased transformative investments
and improvement of the business environment. It was also consistent with the most recent CPF FY16–20
(Report No. 103723-BD), which had the overarching goal of supporting Bangladesh in accelerating job
creation as a driver for poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The project also has sought to address
some of the main obstacles to private investment and job creation identified in the recent Country Private
Sector Diagnostics (CPSD) from 2020, including trade logistics and customs administration.

Overall, the PDO relevance was high, with clear alignment with both the Bank and the GoB's strategies and
a clear strategic articulation of the challenge to be addressed.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To facilitate private investment.


                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             The first sub-objective was "to facilitate private investment". Project activities (see Section 2-d) sought to
                             enhance potential indirect benefits of economic zones from spillover effects on local firms through FDI. As
                             such, identified interventions aimed to address many of the binding constraints to attracting investment.
                             Expected outputs included (i) the number of licenses to develop an EZ issued, (ii) the number of sites with
                             completed assessments, (iii) the number of feasibility studies or master plans completed, and (iv) the number
                             of tenant firms registered in the economic zones. Expected outcomes included (i) the amount of public
                             investment used to step up the EZs infrastructure, and (ii) the amount of direct total private investment in EZs.
                             Overall, there was a logical link between the identified activities, the expected outputs, outcomes and the
                             PDO. However, the reconstructed theory of change did not spell out the key assumptions of the results chain.

                             Outputs

                             Key outputs generated under this sub-objective are delineated below:

                                        The target for the number of developers receiving a license to develop an EZ was exceeded, reaching
                                           the number of 36 against a revised target of 35, and a baseline of 0;
                                        The target for the number of sites with completed assessments, feasibility studies or master plans for
                                           new EZs was exceeded, reaching the number of 60 against a revised target of 59, and a baseline of 0;
                                           The target for the number of tenant firms was exceeded, reaching 358 against an original target of
                                           300, and a baseline of 4;
                                          9 operational zones under Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority (BEZA) and 6 under the
                                           Bangladesh High-Tech Park Authority (BHTPA) were launched;
                                          The project supported the establishment of private and Public-Private Partnerships High-Tech Parks
                                           (PPP HTPs), and issued 14 final licenses to park developers;
                                          A functional One Stop Shop (OSS) has enhanced service-delivery to developers and investors
                                           with superior services relative to the rest of the country;
                                          The project supported the BEZA’s and the BHTPA’s capacity for investment promotion, and officials
                                           from the BEPZA, the BEZA, and the BHPTA attended investment promotion events and participated in
                                           industrial management workshops;

                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)




        A total of 26 investment promotion programs, international seminars, and study tours were organized
         in countries across around the world to attract developers and investors.
        The BEZA and the BHTPA Investment Facilitation and Promotion Strategy was developed and
         adopted, and the BEZA has established a Customer Relations Management (CRM) system;

Outcome

Achieved results toward the first sub-objective are summarized below:

        The target for the public investment in last mile off-site infrastructure and on-site facilities was
           exceeded, reaching US$407.00 million, against an original target of US$360 million, and a baseline of
           US$33 million;
          The cumulative direct total private investment in Economic Zones (EZs) reached an amount of
           US$3,941.00 million, largely exceeding the revised target of US$3,600.00 million, and a baseline
           of US$15.00 million;
          Under the BEZA, the project has mobilized US$3.9 billion in investments in new industries beyond
           Ready-Made Garments (RMG), including food and beverage, edible oils, packaging, agro-based
           activities, leather, toys, cement, shipbuilding, automobiles, and electronics.
          The time to process a business registration has been cut from 44 to 8 days. Stakeholders consulted
           during implementation identified the OSS as one of the best services that BEZA provides.
           Respondents in the Bangladesh Economic Zone Enterprise Survey ranked the ‘ease of administrative
           procedures’ as their third most important reason for moving into an economic zone;
          The ICT sector has proven to be vibrant with the share of ICT service exports to total service exports
           increasing from about 3 percent in 2000 to 13.6 percent in 2017. The sector is expected to continue its
           growth momentum with the increased role of HTPs/STPs creating a conducive entrepreneurship
           environment for growth and linkages to other sectors; and
          The project’s ecosystem development approach has drawn investments to firms across the ICT sector
           supporting cross-sectoral linkages. Many firms have developed linkages with other sectors like
           transport, healthcare, media, and other businesses, among others.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To facilitate job creation.

Rationale
Theory of change

The second sub-objective was "to facilitate job creation". Project activities sought to enhance potential indirect
benefits of economic zones from spillover effects on local firms and jobs creation. As such, identified
interventions aimed to address many of the binding constraints to jobs creation from local and foreign firms
operating in the EZs. The results chain presented under the first sub-objective applies in the context of the

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



second sub-objective, and all achieved outputs and outcomes were to contribute in the performance toward
the second sub-objective. However, the reconstructed theory of change did not spell out the key assumptions
of the results chain.

Outputs

The outputs generated under this sub-objective are presented below:

        All outputs identified and presented under the first sub-objective apply here and count for the second
         sub-objective.
        Moreover, the project supported the BHTPA’s skills enhancement program that has provided training
         for over 21,000 individuals since 2011, which will have positive employment effects, raise workers'
         productivity and ability to absorb knowledge and technology spillovers, thus impacting
         positively competitiveness.

Outcome

Key outcomes achieved toward the second sub-objective are summarized below:

        All outcomes achieved under the first sub-objective contributed directly or indirectly to the creation of
         jobs, thus supporting the performance achieved toward the second sub-objective;
        The cumulative number of jobs facilitated by the PSDSP was 41,225, exceeding the revised target of
         30,000; under BEZA, it created 29,241 permanent jobs and under the BHTPA it created another
         11,759; and
        The cumulative number of jobs for females facilitated by PSDSP was almost met, as it reached 24.00
         percent against a revised target of 25 percent.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To promote compliance with international quality standards in economic zones.

Rationale
Theory of change

The third sub-objective was "to promote compliance with international quality standards in economic zones".
Project activities (see Section 2-d) under this sub-objective aimed to make sure that firms operating in the
economic zones comply with the best quality standards. Expected outputs included (i) the number of quality
certificates issued, and (ii) the number of certification firms established. Expected outcomes comprised (i) the
level of compliance to international quality standards by local firms, and (ii) the stock of qualified




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



staff providing demand-driven training, certification or benefitting from it. However, the reconstructed theory of
change did not spell out the key assumptions of the results chain to achieve the third PDO.

Outputs

The outputs generated under this sub-objective are presented below:

      138 firms acquired quality certification on CMMI Level 3, CMMI Level 5, ISO 9001, and ISO 27001;
      Certification infrastructure and accreditation processes were improved significantly in Bangladesh over
       the project cycle; and
      Local ISO-certified audit firms have established offices in Bangladesh, making such services more
       readily available to the broader private sector.

Outcome

Achieved outcomes in support of the third sub-objective are delineated below:

      The compliance with quality standards (ISO 9000 or equivalent) was fully achieved, reaching 97.47
       percent, against a target of 70.69 percent from a baseline of 0;
      The number of persons benefitting from demand-driven training or certification was exceeded,
       reaching 21,056 against a target of 18,000 and a baseline of 0;
      The share of persons benefitting from demand-driven training or certification who are female was
       exceeded, amounting to 31 percent, against a target of 30 percent, and a baseline of 26; and
      The certification has helped firms improve the quality of outputs, processes, access to markets,
       accelerate growth and enhance managerial practices. Though the evidence outlining progress against
       these intended benefits is limited and the direct link between progress and certification remains
       somewhat tenuous.

Thus, the rating is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To promote compliance with international building codes in economic zones

Rationale
Theory of change

Key interventions toward the fourth PDO included the following: (i) Toward improving building safety and
codes compliance within zones, all buildings being constructed had to comply with all relevant local building
codes, (ii) the goal was to have semi-annual audits of all facilities by a third party who will report on
compliance to relevant international and/or local standards and codes of practice on construction, fire safety,

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



storage, and disposal of hazardous waste material. Expected outputs included: (i) the issuance of building
code, and (ii) the reduction of accidents on construction sites. Expected outcomes were: (i) the reduction of
code violation, and (ii) improved compliance with the building codes during project implementation. However,
the reconstructed theory of change did not spell out the key assumptions of the results chain required to
achieve the fourth PDO.

Outputs

Key outputs generated by this project to support the fourth sub-objective are summarized below:

      The project supported the development and enforcement of the BEZA Building Code to enhance the
       quality and safety of infrastructure;
      Large-scale building collapses and fires were reduced, increasing the safety in densely populated
       areas with both commercial and residential buildings;
      Violations of the Bangladesh National Building Code and accidents were reduced, following
       the elimination of unplanned construction; and
      The project supported the development of the BEZA’s and the BHTPA’s buildings and instituted an
       enforcement and compliance mechanism such that there was 100 percent compliance during project
       implementation.

Outcome

      The unique outcome achieved was the compliance with building codes standards, reaching the
       established target of 100 percent from a baseline of 0. However, the presumption that these standards
       will flow through to broader practice remains unclear and there is limited evidence of the link between
       the practices and actual examples of improved safety.

Given these minor shortcomings, the rating is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
To promote compliance with international good social and environmental practices in economic zones.

Rationale
Theory of change

Project activities (see Section 2-d) sought to ensure that firms operating in economic zones comply with best
international environmental and social practices. Expected outputs included (i) effective mechanisms for
processing grievances and reducing violence at the workplace, (ii) issuance of environmental clearance
certificates, and (iii) adoption of childcare operations guidelines. Expected outcomes included (i) a better
management of social grievances, and (ii) improved social and environmental practices. However, the


                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



                            reconstructed theory of change did not spell out the key assumptions of the results chain required to achieve
                            the fifth PDO.

                            Outputs

                                   Effective mechanisms for processing grievances and reducing violence at the workplace were
                                      introduced;
                                   An increased number of environmental legal permits and licenses were issued;
                                   21 factories in EPZs obtained ISO 14000 certification, which provides a framework for effective
                                    environmental impact management;
                                   The number of industries with emergency response plans has increased by about 315 percent over
                                    the same period (91 plans in 2013 to 288 plans in 2017);
                                   30 environment counselors were deployed to monitor and guide environmental compliance by
                                    industries in the eight operational BEPZA zones; and
                                   Analytical laboratories to regularly assess the quality of environmental parameters and outcomes were
                                    established.

                            Outcome

                                   The social and environmental counselors’ program improved working conditions and raised
                                      environmental compliance in EPZs;
                                     Environmental clearance certificates (ECC) issued quadrupled between 2013 and 2017, from 93 to
                                      298 licenses; and
                                     A decrease in license-processing time was noted, particularly for ECCs from the Department of
                                      Environment.
                                     Legal compliance related to obtaining ECCs has increased by about 320 percent in four years (from
                                      93 certificates in 2013 to 298 certificated in 2017).
                                     Significant improvements in the quality of wastewater discharge, air emissions, the handling, storage,
                                      and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes, and the use of chemicals/harmful materials was also
                                      reported; and
                                     A total of 451,520 workers received regular counseling to improve social and environmental practices,
                                      against a target of US450,000



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Performance toward facilitating private investment was highly satisfactory as illustrated by the following
                            achievements: (i) public investment in last mile off-site infrastructure and on-site facilities was exceeded, (ii)
                            the cumulative direct total private investment in Economic Zones (EZs) was exceeded, (iii) investment into

                                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



  new industries beyond RMG, and private investment in public and private parks exploded; (iii) the time to
  process a business registration has been significantly reduced, and (iv) the ICT sector has proven to be
  vibrant and created a conducive entrepreneurship environment for growth and linkages to other sectors.
  Similarly, project support toward facilitating job creation led to a cumulative number of jobs exceeding the
  revised target, of which 24.00 percent were female.

  Achievements toward promoting compliance with international standards in economic zones were
  also satisfactory as follows: (i) toward international quality standards, there was an increase in the compliance
  with quality standards (ISO 9000 or equivalent) and in the number of persons benefitting from demand-driven
  training or certification, including a satisfactory number of female workers, (ii) toward compliance with
  international building codes, the established target of 100 percent was fully achieved, and
  (iii) toward compliance with international good social and environmental practices, results included: (i)
  improved working conditions and environmental compliance in EPZs as well; (ii) a four-time increase in the
  issuance of environmental clearance certificates (ECC), and (iii) a decrease in license-processing time was
  noted.

  Given some tof the minor shortcomings on a number of the objectives, the overall rating for Efficacy is
  Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and financial efficiency: This review concurs with substantial rating presented in the ICR. An
economic and financial analysis was conducted at appraisal and during the additional financing restructuring.
The update of the economic and financial analysis in the ICR applied the methodology and basic
parameters used during the 2016 AF, including actual data collected and updated as part of the M&E exercise.
The analysis indicates that the project has an ERR of 32.7 percent with an NPV of US$ 570.6 million, slightly
above the estimates calculated at the additional financing phase. Improved results were driven by higher ERRs
for zones under both the BEZA and the BHTPA and in both cases by a higher impact of employment than
initially projected.

Administrative and operational efficiency:

The project experienced initial delays and slow disbursement due to Government inefficiencies. The
Government approved the BHTPA component 26 months after Bank's project approval, only US$1.86m had
been disbursed against a target of US$80m. Moreover, there was a 14.5-month difference between the project’s
approval by the World Bank’s Executive Board and the first disbursement. Similarly, the approval of the EZ rules
remained pending for over a year. Much of these delays were caused by ineffective management at the BEZA,
and implementation progress gained only traction in 2014 following the appointment of a new managerial team
at the coordinating authority. These delays led to five restructurings and to the project closure 56 months after




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



the original closing date. However, given the significant contributions and moderate shortcomings the rating for
efficiency is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 31.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              32.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall, the relevance of PDOs was high, because there was a country's need to create productive jobs and
attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), and the PDOs were aligned with the country's priorities and the thrust of
the Bank's agenda in Bangladesh. Efficacy was overall Substantial, reflecting the satisfactory results achieved
under each of the sub-objectives. Efficiency was Substantial reflecting satisfactory economic outcomes, despite
moderate weaknesses in the operational and administrative performance of the project when the project was
initiated. Thus, the overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Based on the ICR discussion on page 21, the key risks to development outcome might arise from (i) the
COVID-19 pandemic, and (ii) the increasing cost of maintenance of the newly built infrastructure.

At project closure, the COVID-19 pandemic continued to disrupt local and global value chains, and the
reorganization of local and global value chains may have either positive or negative outcomes on
Bangladesh’s zone programs, and the zones success will depend on the authorities’ ability in evaluating their
competitive edge to seize emerging opportunities.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



The largest proportion of project funds supported infrastructure development, and adequate maintenance is
critical to ensuring a return on investment and avoiding ghost zones. The establishment of a well-resourced
unit within the zone authorities focused on maintenance would mitigate this risk.

Finally, continued support and collaboration from the WBG and other donors would help solidify the project’s
gains and contribute to investment mobilization, job creation, poverty reduction, and economic growth. The
support includes the WB follow-on project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The assessment of the quality at entry in the ICR on pages 20 was short and needed to be
  expanded. The project design was informed by a comprehensive economic and sector analysis and
  lessons learned from other projects in Bangladesh and the region. A demand survey to gauge investor
  interest in the Bangladesh’s export profile, and a random sample of international companies was selected
  in five regions and across five sectors. The results corroborated strong interest in Bangladesh beyond the
  RMG sector from regional investors if business and investment constraints were eased.

  The shift from Bangladesh’s former EPZ model to a broader EZ approach warranted an extensive sector-
  and firm-level technical analysis focused on demand- and supply-side constraints and opportunities. The
  design of the zones program aimed to establish the necessary conditions to attract private sector
  participation and diversify the base of tenant firms away from the concentration in the RMG sector.

  Implementation and M&E arrangements and risk assessments and mitigations were not assessed in the
  ICR, but as per the PAD, they were well thought through and were satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 While the ICR assessment of the quality of supervision was limited and needed to be expanded, aspects of
 project supervision were extensively presented in the paragraphs 53-56 of the ICR. Moreover, the project
 team provided additional material upon request.

 The project experienced initial delays and slow disbursement due to protracted challenges in
 government approvals and the Padma Bridge legacy issues. A major component (the BHTPA
 component) did not receive government approval until 26 months after project approval, and only
 US$1.86m had been disbursed against a target of US$80m. In addition, there was a 14.5-month difference
 between the project’s approval by the World Bank’s Executive Board and the first disbursement. Similarly,
 the drafting of EZ rules were reviewed by the BEZA Board of Governors, but their approval was pending for
 over a year. Much of these delays were caused by ineffective management at the BEZA, and

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



 implementation progress gained only traction in 2014 following the appointment of a new managerial team
 at the authority. The Padma bridge issue also affected the implementation progress of most project
 activities for about two years. These delays led to the project’s restructuring and partial cancellation of the
 initial credit.

 Project implementation benefitted extensively from multiple trust funds and grants from the UK
 Department for International Development (DFID) and IFC. A proactive close engagement between the
 IFC and DFID enabled building capacity in the newly established institutions. The above funding enabled
 the project to embed several local and international consultants for procurement, project management,
 legal issues, zone planning, and marketing to support implementing agencies and overall project
 implementation throughout the project. The TA allowed the World Bank Task Team to recruit and embed
 senior advisors in the GoB and support the implementing agencies on a number of critical tasks, namely
 formulating EZ rules and regulations, mapping and site identification, public- private- partnership framework
 design, long term strategy development, investment promotion and institutional capacity building. The
 intensive support provided by the DFID child trust fund was key to moving ahead with the project objectives
 after the approval of the AF. Overall, the TF significantly increased the resources that the World Bank
 Task Team had for implementation support in a standard IDA operation.

 The high quality of leadership in implementing agencies and relative stability of Bank's TTLs
 contributed to project performance after the delays experienced during the early years.
 The reshuffle of the BEZA leadership in 2014 was critical in steering the agency’s engagement in project
 activities despite high turnover at lower levels of the agency. The Project Director of the IDA financed
 activities in the BHTPA remained the same from project design to completion easing implementation. On
 the side of the World Bank, the project had only 4 Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the project’s almost 10-
 year life. Each TTL who took over was a prior member of the task team for one to two years, thus helping
 smooth transitions, and following AF, the project had a co-TTL based in Dhaka.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The description of the M&E design presented in the ICR in paragraph 58 was insufficient. The Economic
 Relations Division (ERD) was responsible for the implementation of the M&E plan with support from M&E
 specialists in the implementing agencies. Initially, the project faced limited-capacity issues including on the
 M&E front. While the project’s theory of change was designed in a clear way, the results indicators were
 more loosely defined at appraisal, but the restructuring operations corrected that situation.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



b. M&E Implementation
  The description of the M&E design presented in the ICR in paragraph 59 was incomplete. The
  first revision of the project results indicators was completed in 2013 when the project scope was scaled
  down. An MTR review was completed on July 1, 2014 and concluded by the option of expanding the
  project scope through an Additional financing. The project’s results indicators underwent additional
  revisions in the 2016, and 2019 restructuring to enhance their precision and link to the project
  development objectives. In the end, the results framework adopted during the 2016 restructuring
  determined the goal in terms of project outcomes, because it reflected the expansion of the project
  scope. M&E implementation significantly improved under the AF where a more effective M&E plan was
  established and adequate data collection procedures were put in place. The highly qualified and
  proactive M&E specialist at the ERD ensured adequate data collection and verification. They also
  maintained close collaboration with M&E specialists in the BEZA, the BHTPA, and the BEPZA and
  managed to visit or connect with project beneficiaries.



c. M&E Utilization
  The description of the M&E design presented in the ICR in paragraph 60 was insufficient. The project
  task team and the implementing agencies proactively monitored the progress of the PDO and
  intermediate indicators and revised the project to reflect lessons learned. The M&E framework was used
  to adjust and refine project activities after the changes in the project scope that occurred during the 2013
  and 2016 restructurings. Several indicator targets were scaled-up to reflect better than expected
  progress in project activities under the AF credit. The project’s task team was conservative in their
  targets given the slow progress under the original credit. However, the project gained momentum under
  the AF with most targets being surpassed, leading to a restructuring of the results framework to raise
  targets accordingly.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The ICR provided substantive material related to social and environment safeguards in paragraphs 62-63,
   but there was no overall rating of the achieved compliance with established standards, and there was no
   reporting on the compliance for each triggered safeguards policy . However, the last ISR rated the overall
   Safeguards compliance as Moderately satisfactory.

   At approval, the project was classified as a category ‘A’ operation, and the following three
   safeguard policies were triggered: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), (ii) Indigenous Peoples
   (OP/BP 4.10), and (iii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Key safeguards documents were prepared
   and approved by the Bank, and included the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and
   Resettlement and Social Management Framework (RSMF). Moreover, site-specific screenings and relevant



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), Small Ethnic Communities Plans (SECPs) and Gender Action Plans
  were prepared and adhered to during implementation.

  The SEZ authorities ensured that there be limited or no adverse environmental and social impacts on the
  project area/communities from the development of SEZs. They submitted regular progress reports on the
  implementation of safeguard management aspects in the project. They hired an environmental counselor to
  ensure effective integration of environment management and safeguard aspects during planning, design,
  development, and operation of economic zones. The results related to the observation of social and
  environmental safeguards are reviewed in detail under the efficacy of the fifth PDO related to compliance
  with international good social and environmental practices in economic zones.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR coverage of the fiduciary compliance was appropriate and is summarized below.

  Financial management: The FM performance rating varied between Satisfactory and Moderately
  Satisfactory, with one instance of a downgrade to Moderately Unsatisfactory. At the project launch,
  the PIU had difficulties to prepare (i) the timely submission of acceptable and accurate quarterly Interim
  Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs), (ii) hiring FM staff, and and (iii) timely submission of annual audit
  reports. After the AF, the FM improved following the establishment of a web-based integrated financial
  management information system with an adequate e-audit trail to facilitate timely access to financial
  information and its consolidation for all accounting centers on a real-time basis.

  Procurement: Overall, the ICR rated the procurement performance under the project as moderately
  satisfactory. The project complied with procurement requirements, as procurement plans were updated
  promptly by the PIUs, with adequate support and guidance provided by the Bank’s procurement
  specialists. The implementing agencies hired procurement consultants throughout project implementation,
  but their high turnover resulted in some delays. The Bank team remained proactive to ensure compliance
  as the WB procurement procedures and documentation requirements were updated. In 2016, the IA’s staff
  (i) were trained on the new online integrated procurement planning and tracking system called the
  “Systemic Tracking and exchange in Procurement” (STEP) process, and (ii) worked on the Project
  Procurement Development Strategy (PPSD) as required by the New Bank Procurement Framework
  (NPF).




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR singled out few unintended impacts summarized below, although they are somehow associated
   with the results presented under the Efficacy section.

   (i) Project implementation created a context of sustained dialogue between the public and private
   sectors which strengthened the PPP framework approach. The sustained interaction between the
   public and private sector paved the way for greater dialogue between industry associations and
   policymakers to discuss other sector constraints and solutions. This collaboration enhanced their capacity
   to manage the transaction process for PPPs. Moreover, the project facilitated legal drafting and reviews of
   PPP guidelines, and financed the initial PPP transaction advisory services to develop information
   guidelines for potential PPP investors. There are now two PPP EZs under the BEZA, and one under the
   BHTPA.

   (ii) Success stories from this project were replicated in other spheres of the country's life. Some of
   the project's successful interventions have been replicated by other government agencies as follows: (i) the
   federal government has established a national OSS system based on the one adopted by the BEZA and
   the BHTPA, (ii) the National Cabinet has already approved the Daycare Act of 2020, based on the BEZA’s
   and the BHTPA’s childcare guidelines developed under the project, and (iii) the project enabled the
   integration of effective systems and good practices across multiple aspects of zone policy, including the EZ
   Construction of Building Rules and the EZ Workers Welfare Policy.

   (iii) Institutional strengthening was paramount within both the implementing agencies (BEZA and
   BHTPA). The project financed the BEZA to lease its own office space, systems and structures, and to
   hire 250 employees and consultants with several departments. The BHTPA has also grown by leaps and
   bounds and now employs about 87 staff and is implementing 8 government and donor-funded projects that
   employ over 100 staff.



d. Other




11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)




12. Lessons

A number of lessons and recommendations were discussed in the paragraphs 74-81 of the ICR,
which are rather generic for this kind of special economic zones projects. This review concurs with
five lessons which are summarized and rephrased below:

 (i) Building institutional capacity to oversee complex special economic zones (SEZ) projects
takes time. The key lesson from this project is that it takes time to establish well-functioning
institutions and entities that can oversee the management and implementation of a project
supporting an EPZ. These projects may take time to mature and evolve toward realistic targets.
During project implementation, the rate of disbursements is generally non-linear, because oversight
agencies and managers are first involved in institution building, with disbursement achievements
that are low in early years and accelerating as institutional capacity firms up. Institutional
arrangements should strive to strike a balance between ensuring sufficient the local requirements
and international standards, while avoiding overly burdening the process with bureaucratic
procedures.

(ii) Agencies overseeing the SEZ projects need to rely on a diversified and competent
expertise. Entities and agencies managing EPZ need to have the diversified expertise required to
handle all stages of the SEZ project transaction cycle, including preparation, procurement, and
implementation. Particularly, investments in hard infrastructure and skills-upgrading in SEZ projects
have to mitigate social and environmental risks, make work environments more inclusive,
and adhere to social regulations and environmental standards. To avoid adverse outcomes, the
agencies need to acquire the specific expertise tailored to local contexts and be aware of good
international practices through hiring and sustained training.

(iii) Government commitment and coordination are central in the oversight of multiple entities
involved in implementing SEZ projects. SEZ programs and projects entail a multitude of activities
across public and private sectors, including regulatory authorities, line ministries, and private actors
and investors. This interaction of these different actors can be a source of bottlenecks from limited
capacity of certain agencies, and can undermine clarity for potential investors, and create unneeded
competition between stakeholders. This project mitigated many of these risks by capitalizing on the
comparative advantage of respective zone authorities by reducing their overlap. In the context of this
project, one entity (BEZA) had a strong capacity for investment promotion and facilitation,
including land and infrastructure development, and it took the lead in supporting industrial
development and manufacturing. On the other side, the BHTPA supported SMEs with skills
programs, coaching and training, and supporting quality accreditation. All this arose from the
Government presence, commitment and coordination throughout the period of project
implementation.

(iv) Flexibility, and proactiveness are principles that can help in addressing
the implementation challenges in SEZ projects. The project underwent multiple restructurings
both to scale down its scope to factor in implementation challenges, and to raise targets when they
proved too modest. These changes may not have been possible without a committed project team
and country management, and the dedication from the leadership of implementing agencies. Where
a project’s success is contingent on key individuals in implementing agencies to act as champions,
proactive Bank teams should look for or create such champions. The need for this change was

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



viewed as critical by the Bank’s team and arose from a productive dialogue between the WB and
Government teams, including the embedded experts that provided the required technical capacity.

(v) The success of zone programs in Bangladesh has brought lessons on policy
interventions that have resulted in significant investment, employment-generation, and social
and environmental practices. A last lesson from this project is that SEZs can be a lab for
experimenting with regulatory innovations and soft policies that can enable governments to find out
what works best in a relatively low-cost way that can then be generalized for the entire country. For
example, (i) the Child Care Guidelines adopted in the EZs are already being expanded outside of
zones, and (ii) the Economic Zone Enterprise Survey from 2021 in Bangladesh found that tenant
firms were motivated to move into zones by the quality of infrastructure and services, proximity to
transport infrastructure, ease of administrative procedures, and access to land.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This is an innovative and successful project that can inspire the design and implementation of a similar
  projects in countries looking for FDI and jobs creation. A sector PPAR assessing the impact of this project and
  follow-on operations would provide lessons to Bank teams looking for ideas to design projects aimed
  at generating similar outcomes in similar contexts of the WBG members.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive, evidence-based and internally consistent. It provides a clear storyline of the
operation context and the achieved results. In particular, the efficacy part of the operation was well-
analyzed, because of its results focus and narrative as illustrated by detailed figures, annotated tables and
graphs, and annexes. However, there were weaknesses in the reporting of the performance of the Bank and
the M&E system. While some elements could be found throughout the ICR text regarding the above two
themes, the sections describing the Bank and the M&E performance lacked substance. However, some of the
missing information was provided by the project team upon request. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated
Substantial.




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Private Sector Development Support (P120843)



(i) RDO is not rated

(ii) M&E and bank performance not well covered



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
