     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022946

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P130014                                     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53520                                   31-Dec-2020                                       158,850,163.13

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jan-2014                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               180,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Revised Commitment                                174,768,825.20                                          0.00

 Actual                                            158,850,163.13                                          0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Hassan Wally                J. W. van Holst                Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (IAIP) as
   articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 13) was identical to the one mentioned in the
   Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) and aimed to:

   "improve the sustainability of irrigated agricultural production systems in selected Central coastal
   and Northern mountains provinces in Vietnam."


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



   Parsing the PDO. According to the ICR (paragraph 24) "Irrigated agriculture refers to the improvement of
   both hard irrigation and drainage infrastructure and the soft systems (for example: institutional setup, O&M
   resources, and responsibilities) and implementing practices. The PDO aimed to "emphasize the sustainability
   of irrigation as a production method while improving agricultural practices in a way that increases (crop)
   productivity and resilience to the impacts of climate change."

   Based on the above-mentioned unpacking of the PDO, the PDO will be parsed based on two complementary
   objectives as follows:

   Objective 1: To sustainably improve irrigation and drainage services, including infrastructure.

   Objective 2: To sustainably improve agricultural practices by farmers.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by four components as follows:

    1. Improved Irrigation Water Management (appraisal cost: US$9.50 million, of which IDA: US$8.00
   million, actual cost: US$3.13 million, of which IDA: US$2.83 million). This component would improve
   institutional capacity for modern, efficient, and accountable irrigation and drainage service delivery. The
   establishment of a financially self-reliant and transparent water services sector will enable reductions in
   recurring government expenditure on operation and maintenance of irrigation systems in all project
   provinces and at Ministry level. The component would include: (i) formation or strengthening of water user
   organizations/ associations and the application of the concept of irrigation management transfer; (ii)
   enhancing irrigation and drainage asset management and investment planning at provincial and scheme
   levels; (iii) updating and applying efficiency and performance standards for water user organizations and
   associations and IDMCs; and (iv) installation of supervisory, control and data acquisition systems for
   improved water management, with associated logistical support.

    2. Irrigation and Drainage Scheme Level Improvements (appraisal cost: US$170.50 million, of which
   IDA: US$146.00 million, actual cost: US$148.05 million, of which IDA: US$133.89 million). The poor
   condition of irrigation and drainage infrastructure in the project area was a major factor in poor water service
   delivery and low efficiency. This component represented the bulk of infrastructure investments in the project
   areas (83,400 ha). It aimed to improve bulk water delivery to irrigation systems, service delivery, and
   management in the selected irrigation and drainage schemes through: (i) physical improvement of selected
   existing large, medium, and small-scale irrigation and drainage infrastructure such as canals, pumps, weirs,
   pipes, and control structures; (ii) improvement and protection works for existing dams; (iii) rehabilitation and
   construction of small multi-purpose village ponds; and (iv) construction of measuring devices.

   3. Support Services for Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (appraisal cost: US$23.00 million, of
   which IDA: US$20.00 million, actual cost: US$17.94 million, of which IDA: US$16.24 million). This

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



  component would build on the improved irrigation infrastructure and water delivery activities realized under
  component 2 to improve the productivity and quality of
  agriculture, increase farmers’ incomes, and reduce their vulnerability to adverse climatic events. It woud
  involve: (i) enhancing on-farm systems for crop intensification and diversification; (ii) provision of laser land-
  leveling services; (iii) advisory services to facilitate shifts towards feed and horticultural crop production; iv)
  identification and implementation of measures to reduce the water and environmental footprints of cropping
  systems; (v) stimulating modernization by promoting the use of sprinkler and drip irrigation systems; and (vi)
  application of remote sensing
  imagery for the monitoring of crop performance. Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) and other methods
  information would be disseminated and field demonstrations will be organized. Each province would
  undertake research projects on technical and policy-related issues to resolve specific problems which occur
  with regard to water management and agricultural production as a result of climate change. This research
  would be carried out during the first two years so that results can be applied during the last four years of
  project implementation. A part of this component would support Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
  Development (MARD) in information dissemination on climate smart agriculture and contribution to the
  national effort on Green-House Gases (GHG) emission from rice production.

  4. National Policy Development, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project Management (appraisal
  cost: US$7.00 million, of which IDA: US$6.00 million, actual cost: US$6.17 million, of which IDA:
  US$5.58 million). This component would support the operating costs of the implementing agencies
  including MARD and the selected provinces/Departments of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARDs). It
  will finance: (a) incremental operating costs; (b) equipment and vehicles purchase; (c) monitoring and
  evaluation, including third-party monitoring; (d) staff training; (e) internal and external audits; and (f) various
  consultancies for the design, construction supervision, quality control support, a gender action plan, and
  safeguards compliance.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost over a six-year implementation period was estimated at US$210 million.
  This amount was revised downwards to US$204.77 million. The actual cost according to the ICR Data
  Sheet (page 2) was US$175.31 million or about 86% of the revised amount.



  Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD Loan worth US$180.00 million. This amount was
  revised downwards to US$174.77 million. The actual amount disbursed according to the ICR Data Sheet
  (page 2) was US$158.85 million or about 91% of the revised amount. Also, according to the ICR (paragraph
  70) US$5.77 million was cancelled "because payments were not submitted by the borrower before the end
  of the disbursement grace period, and the works were then (consequently) funded by counterpart funds."



  Borrower Contribution. The Government of Vietnam was expected to contribute US$30.00 million of
  counterpart funds. The actual contribution according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$16.46 million
  or about 55% of the estimated amount at appraisal.




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)




   Dates. The project was approved on January 14, 2014 and became effective seven months later on July
   22, 2014. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on October 11, 2017 or about 3.5 years after
   effectiveness, which was reasonable for a six years project. The PAD did not specify a date for the MTR.
   The project was expected to close on December 31, 2020. The actual closing date was six months later on
   June 30, 2021. The project was restructured once (Level 2) on December 23, 2020, when the amount
   disbursed was US$137.68 million, in order to extend the loan closing date from December 31, 2020 to June
   30, 2021 and to reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   Rationale for changes and implication for the Theory of Change (ToC). According to the ICR
   (paragraph 18) "the extension of the project closing date by six months allowed for the completion of a few
   ongoing activities and the use of project savings to carry out some additional activities in line with the PDO,
   to fully achieve and in some instances exceed the PDO. The extension of the closing date was needed to
   compensate for the unexpected delays that occurred in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic social
   distancing and movement restriction and the severe floods and landslides in the fall of 2020" Also, US$14
   million of IDA fund savings due to competitive procurement and unused contingencies were allocated to 13
   additional activities that were aligned with the PDO and increasing the scope of the project, including
   rehabilitation of over 10 km of additional secondary irrigation canals under component 2 and construction of
   facilities for seed centers and support for farmers in the application of organic cultivation under component
   3. Finally, the financing agreement was amended to "to clarify the expenditures that would be eligible for
   financing during the extended period" (ICR, paragraph 19).

   This Review is in agreement with ICR (paragraph 19) that the "restructuring had no implications (for) the
   ToC." In addition, the restructuring does not suggest the need for a split rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In 2013, with 9.6 million ha of cultivated land, Vietnam was the top global producer
of pepper, the second largest producer of coffee, the second largest exporter of rice, the third largest
exporter of aquaculture products, and the fifth largest exporter of tea (ICR, paragraph 1). Among the
cultivated area, about 4.5 million ha or 46% were irrigated and about 2.5 million ha or 26% had drainage
(PAD, paragraph 2), indicative of the impact of irrigation and drainage investments in the agriculture
sector. However, over half of the irrigation and drainage systems were deteriorating and/or operating below
their potential capacity. Further, irrigation water use was inefficient and overwhelmingly dedicated to
intensive, low-value crops, notably rice, in some regions. This project aimed at addressing these issues
through improving irrigation and drainage services and improving agricultural practices by farmers.

Previous Bank Experience. This project was closely linked to the Bank's portfolio in Vietnam, including
investment projects and analytical work. At the time of appraisal, the Bank had several active irrigation
projects in Vietnam. Small-scale investments in irrigation were also included in the Second Northern
Mountains Poverty Reduction Project. The Bank also supported policy and institutional development in the
irrigation sector in the ongoing Climate Change Development Policy Operation series. Finally, the Bank has


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



extensive global experience in designing and implementing irrigation projects in different countries including
China, India, Pakistan and Egypt, among others.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Vietnam Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY2012-FY2016) with respect to: (i) strengthening competitiveness through
increased productivity and land-use efficiency; (ii) enhancing sustainability through improved water
productivity; and (iii) broadening access to social and economic opportunity through improved access to
water services.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Bank's Vietnam Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY2018- FY2022). The CPF aimed to support Vietnam in its ambitions to “balance economic prosperity with
environmental sustainability, promote equity and social inclusion, and strengthen state capacity and
accountability (CPF paragraph 5).” This project’s ambition aligns with the CPF’s objective and was
specifically listed as part of the World Bank Group program contributing to both CPF Objectives 10 and 11
in Focus Area 3: To ensure environmental sustainability and resilience. The PDO was also in line with CPF
Objective 10: To increase climate resilience and strengthen disaster risk management, which was
contributing to the indicator: area with climate resilient land and water management practices (hectare);
and indicator: area of sustainable rice farming with reduced water use. In addition the PDO was in line with
CPF Objective 11: to strengthen natural resource management and improve water security, contributing to
the indicator: area with climate resilient land and water management practices.

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the national scheme
“agricultural restructuring towards raising added values and sustainable development” which was issued on
June 10, 2013, by the Prime Minister. The PDO was also in line with the Sustainable Development
Strategy (April 12, 2012), which emphasized "converting the growth model to harmonious development
between the breadth and depth, step by step implementation of green growth, low-carbon economic
growth.” At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Government priorities and the same
strategies at appraisal continued to be in place.

Assessment of Relevance of Objectives. The ambition of the PDO was relevant to the challenges facing
the sector during appraisal. However, the PDO statement could have benefited from a more specific
description of the term "sustainability of irrigated agricultural production systems" for example by stating
improving sustainability in terms of what elements would indicate the likelihood of achieving sustainability of
irrigated agricultural production systems. The PDO was in line with the CPS at the appraisal stage and the
current CPF at completion. The PDO was also consistent with the Government priorities for irrigation
and the sustainability of the irrigation systems is expected to continue to be a priority for the Government in
the future.

Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To sustainably improve irrigation and drainage services, including infrastructure.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). Since the two project objectives were complementary, this ToC applies to the
               achievement of both objectives. The project would improve irrigation and drainage infrastructure, provide
               capacity building activities for Water User Associations (WUAs) and Irrigation and Drainage Management
               Companies (IDMCs), provide support for asset management and investment planning, install irrigation control
               systems and improve data acquisition and supervision. Using the opportunities offered by improved and more
               efficient irrigation infrastructure the project would apply Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices, enhance
               systems for crop diversification and intensification, made possible by sprinkler and drip irrigation technologies,
               and the organization of seasonal farmer field schools (FFS) to transfer knowledge to farmers. The TOC
               included the expectation that irrigated agricultural systems would be sustained. Anticipated long-term
               outcomes included: improved productivity and quality of agriculture leading to better farmer livelihoods;
               reduced vulnerability to climatic events and reduced GHG emissions; associated with effective institutions to
               support irrigation and drainage services.

               The achievement of the TOC was underpinned by one assumption: continued uptake by farmers or WUAs of
               irrigation and drainage services, and improved production technologies.

               The activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal results chain and the
               stated assumption was logical and realistic. However, the ToC could have benefitted from a more
               comprehensive view of other assumptions that could have underpinned the achievement of the PDO, such as
               the sustainability of irrigated agriculture systems.

               The achievement of both objectives was underpinned by one assumption: continued uptake by farmers or
               WUAs.

               The activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal results chain and the
               stated assumption was logical and realistic. However, the ToC could have benefitted from a more
               comprehensive view of other assumptions that could have underpinned the achievement of the PDO, and
               more detail on the included assumption.

               Outputs

               The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, unless referenced otherwise):

                     7 provinces developed and implemented five year and annual modernized agricultural plans (target: 7,
                      achieved).
                     Improved performance of IDMC was achieved.
                     42 WUAs-PIM agreements were established and implemented (target: 20, substantially exceeded).
                     92% of WUAs assessed service delivery by IDMC as satisfactory (target: 90%, exceeded).



                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 27) acknowledged that the PAD did not provide a clear definition of sustainability. The
PAD stated that sustainability was a core project principle factored into the project design through:
institutional reform, adequate human and financial resources for O&M of the investments, and improved
capacity for service delivery and physical asset maintenance and management. The PAD also referred to the
institutional and technical, financial, and environmental (including climate) aspects of sustainability that the
project would support.

Achievement of this outcome was measured by four PDO indicators and seven intermediate results
indicators (IRIs). By project completion, the project met or exceeded all PDO indicators. The project
benefitted 251,540 households (target: 243,000, exceeded), which represents the extent of the project’s
direct benefit to the local population affected by activities across all three components (ICR, paragraph 26).
Improved irrigation and drainage services covered 94,860 ha (target: 83,400 ha, exceeded). The project
provided 955,005 water users with improved irrigation and drainage services (target: 674,800, exceeded).
The project also helped 32,045 households (target: 15,700, exceeded) to adopt improved agricultural
techniques. There were 42 WUOs/WUAs which amalgamated and improved irrigation services at the tertiary
level (target: 20, exceeded).

The project achievements of Objective 1 are discussed under the following elements:

1. Improved crop yields due to water availability in dry periods as a result of irrigation and drainage
infrastructure works and the adoption of CSA practices. By project completion, irrigation intensity
reached 211% compared to a target of 205% (IRI 5, target exceeded). Crop yields for paddy and maize
reached 1.47 metric tons/year compared to a target of 1.40 metric tons/year (IRI 6, target exceeded).
Improved irrigation and drainage services allowed irrigation services to be sufficiently delivered in dry weather
conditions. According to the ICR (paragraph 20) "the project-supported irrigation systems providing irrigation
water more efficiently, which increased the availability of water at the farm level. No agricultural area was
negatively affected by the localized drought contributed by the improved irrigation systems supported by the
project." This was demonstrated in the winter-spring crop of 2020 when the rice production and quantity in
Central North Region areas were unaffected despite a record drought that extended to 69 days in one area or
73 days in another without rain. Finally, a survey of beneficiaries showed that 80% of respondents
experienced an increase in productivity of crops in the Central Coastal Region and up to 86% in the Northern
Mountainous Region. A sample survey on 629 farming households in the project area found that 73% of the
respondent households observed a reduction in the required duration of irrigation to the fields due to better
flow rates and lower water demand (ICR, paragraph 40).

2. Improved institutional arrangements for the management of irrigation and drainage infrastructure.
The project supported the establishment of new or strengthening of existing Water User Organization
(WUOs). A total of 42 WUOs were established and strengthened compared to a target of 20 and 2 WUAs
were amalgamated (IRI 3, exceeded). The WUOs and WUAs that benefited varied in size, ranging from 10.2
ha to 397.7 ha with an average size of 207 ha of land under cultivation, which demonstrated that the
approach applies to a large range of scales. WUOs/WUA - Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM)
agreements were signed for all 42 strengthened WUOs. According to the ICR (paragraph 31) "the
agreements provided a participatory approach to encourage a sense of ownership and collective outcome for
the WUO. These agreements are specified in the charter and internal regulations of the WUOs and reflected
in the water supply contracts with the IDMCs."


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



Prior to the project, tertiary and on-farm systems were poorly operated and maintained by farmers,
since IDMCs were predominantly focused on primary and secondary irrigation and drainage
infrastructure (ICR, paragraph 32). The project facilitated the delegation of the O&M of tertiary and on-farm
irrigation and drainage infrastructure to the WUOs or WUAs. Service contracts were signed between the
WUAs and the IDMCs to provide clear service standards and delegation of O&M tasks along with cost share
arrangements to fund the O&M activities. Before the planting season, the WUAs prepared O&M plans and
present it for approval at the members’ meeting (including estimated cost contributions and mobilization
of labor). The plans were implemented, and results were reported back at the members’ meeting at the end of
crop or year.

3. O&M expenditures of Irrigation and Drainage Management Companies (IDMCs) in the project
provinces increased throughout implementation, demonstrating increased focus on O&M. Prior to the
project, O&M of irrigation and drainage infrastructure at the tertiary and on-farm levels was underfunded (ICR,
paragraph 33). Across all the largest participating WUOs/WUAs, expenses at project closing were
predominantly directed on O&M activities. Increased expenditure by WUAs towards O&M activities ranged
from 67% to 100% depending on the sub-project area. At the same time the IDMCs O&M expenditure
between 2014/15 and 2019/20 also increased by 38% to as much as 189%, which was up from an increase
of 16% in 2014.

4. Creating the basis for sustainable operations by strengthening the capacity of IDMCs,
WUOs/WUAs, and farmers. The project organized around 30 training sessions for 2,015 participants to
improve the capacities of the IDMCs, WUAs, and WUOs such as to increase their awareness and knowledge
on the management and utilization of irrigation facilities and implementation of CSA models. A scorecard to
rate the improvements in IDMC performance was pilot tested in two provinces only (IRI2). By project
completion, seven project provinces (target: 7, achieved) developed and were implementing five-year and
annual modernized irrigated agriculture plans (IRI 1). These five-year and annual irrigation modernization
plans included plans for O&M, repairs, and future investments, all of which were critical elements to achieve
sustainability and continue to retain the benefits beyond the project life (ICR, paragraph 34).

According to the ICR, at the MARD level, planned implementation of the 2017 Irrigation Law and
improvement of the capacity of IDMCs were achieved, including (a) review of MARD’s Circular No. 65/2009
(on decentralization and irrigation management transfer) and Circular No. 56/2010 (on guiding the ‘supply-by-
order’ mechanism in irrigation service management), (b) development of criteria for evaluating the
performance of IDMCs, (c) establishment of a GIS map database for seven IDMCs and for use by the
Directorate of Water Resources of MARD, (d) development of a database for managing irrigation
infrastructure assets, and (e) development and adoption of guidelines for managing irrigation infrastructure
(paragraph 35).

Based on the above-mentioned achievements, there is enough evidence to confirm that the project
established the basis for sustainably improving irrigation and drainage infrastructure and services. Therefore,
and given that all PDO outcome indicators were achieved or exceeded, the efficacy with which Objective 1
was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To sustainably improve agricultural practices by farmers.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support farmers to apply climate
smart (CSA) agriculture practices, enhance systems for crop intensification and diversification, promote the
use of efficient on-farm irrigation systems, namely, sprinkler and drip irrigation, and organize seasonal farmer
field schools (FFS) to facilitate knowledge transfer to beneficiary farmers. These activities were expected to
result in improved agricultural practices by farmers, which in combination with objective 1 would result in
sustainable
irrigated agricultural production systems. Anticipated long-term outcomes included: improved productivity and
quality of agriculture leading to better farmer livelihoods; reduced vulnerability to climatic events and reduced
GHG emissions; and effective institutions to support irrigation and drainage services.

The achievement of both objectives was underpinned by one assumption in the ToC; continued uptake by
farmers or WUAs of irrigation and drainage services, and improved production technologies.

The activities reflected in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain and the stated
assumption was logical and realistic. However, the ToC could have benefitted from a more comprehensive
view of other assumptions that could have underpinned the achievement of the PDO, such as the
sustainability of irrigated agriculture systems. and more detail on the stated assumption.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1, unless referenced otherwise):

1. 709 Seasonal Farmers Field Schools (FFSs) were established to transfer knowledge to farmers (target:
670, exceeded).
2. 21,155 ha were under Integrated Crop Management (ICM) cultivation (target: 20,000, exceeded).
3. 49 new cropping system technologies were applied (target: 28, exceeded).
4. 394 ha were under drip irrigation (target:698 ha, 56% achieved). The ICR (annex 1) explained that: "three
modified types of irrigation were applied in the project provinces: (i) drip irrigation, which was suitable for high
value crops under water scarce conditions, (ii) sprinkler irrigation, and (iii) underground (buried) irrigation
methods. The total area of irrigation achieved under these three water-saving methods so far is 1,006 ha
exceeding target of 698 ha."

Outcome

To improve productivity and quality of agriculture, increase farmers’ incomes, and reduce their vulnerability to
adverse climatic events, the project introduced techniques to reduce farming inputs, and therefore reduce
production costs, and improve productivity while promoting climate appropriate practices. By project
completion, 32,045 farmer households in the scheme area adopted improved production techniques
(target:15,700, target exceeded). Finally, 86% of the surveyed households said that they would continue to
apply the techniques introduced by the project – suggesting credible evidence for sustainability of agricultural
practices.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



Notable achievements towards sustainable improvement of agricultural practices by farmers as a result of the
project activities included:

1. Reducing agricultural inputs as a result of CSA techniques. According to the ICR (paragraph 41) and
based on the project monitoring data, the amount of rice seeds sown was reduced from 90–100 kg per
hectare to 60–70 kg per hectare (reduced by 20–25%). Also, rotating rice with other crops reduced the use of
pesticides, and the number of times pesticides were used was reduced by three to six applications per crop
compared to conventional rice farming. Also, a survey conducted by the M&E consultants on the cost of
fertilizers, 77% of the interviewed households reported that the costs were reduced, and 50% confirmed that
the costs were reduced significantly (ICR, paragraph 41).

2. Reducing crop water demand for rice areas by applying alternate wet-dry irrigation and the rice
areas converted to vegetables and other crops. According to the ICR (paragraph 42) and based on the
irrigation monitoring data under the project, the reduction in water demand by converting rice cultivation to
vegetable crops ranged from 10% to 111% (56.5% on average). By applying alternate wet-dry irrigation, the
water demand was reduced between 2.5% and 37% (19.9% on average). A survey of farmers who
participated in the project, 86% of the farming households indicated a desire to continue applying smart
agriculture farming practices. The ICR (paragraph 42) concluded that farmers applying wet-dry irrigation
practice confirmed that water service provision was reliable and adequate. This confirmed that farmers were
comfortable to dry out their fields since they were confident that the irrigation services in place would allow
fields to be wet again.

3. Reducing Green House Gas (GHG) emissions in the project area. GHG emission reduction was added
to the scope of M&E activities during the course of project implementation. According to the ICR (paragraph
44) "the potential annual GHG emission reductions were estimated based on the results from eight types of
farming models implemented by the project. Rice production using methods introduced as part of this project
and conversion of rice-growing land to growing of vegetables gave the best results in terms of reducing GHG
emissions of 4.3-4.42 tons of CO2-equivalent per hectare per year."

4. Increasing incomes of rice farmers and improving livelihoods. Project beneficiaries benefitted from
improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure and services and agricultural techniques. This resulted
in improved crop yields, cost savings from reducing farming inputs, saved water, and increased
incomes. Farmers who participated in CSA were estimated to have increased their incomes by between
US$169 and US$943 per hectare per crop (ICR, paragraph 45). The increase in crop yields resulted in
increased produce for farmers to market and generate better incomes, which was a proxy indicator of
improved livelihoods. As noted for Objective 1, a sample survey on 629 farming households in the project
area found that 76% of the interviewed households confirmed an increase in household incomes because of
their participation in the project-supported models; of those, 60% observed an income increase of more than
10%. Also, 80% of the households reported that crop productivity increased compared to similar crops in the
control areas.

Based on the above-mentioned assessments, and given that the project exceeded its PDO outcome indicator
and met or exceeded all its IRI, except with regard to the area under drip irrigation, the efficacy with which
Objective 2 was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. There was enough evidence that the project established the basis
                            for sustainably improving irrigation and drainage infrastructure and services. Also, despite the absence of an
                            indicator for “improving sustainable agricultural practices by farmers” there is evidence on sustainability based
                            on a beneficiary survey and M&E which confirmed that improved production techniques, and reduced inputs,
                            Green House Gas (GHG) emissions and crop water demand for rice areas were achieved. All PDO outcome
                            indicators and most IRIs were either fully achieved or exceeded.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex-ante

                               Economic Analysis. The economic analysis at appraisal estimated the overall economic rate of return at
                                  18.16% with a net present value at a 10% discount rate of US$66 million. The analysis also indicated
                                  that irrigation rehabilitation was economically viable in all the regions, with internal economic rates of
                                  return (ERRs) ranging
                                  from 14% to 24%.
                                 Financial Analysis. The overall Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was estimated at 15.15%. The
                                  farm-level analysis indicated that annual net margins for a typical 0.34 ha fully gravity-irrigated farm
                                  increases by around US$88 annually at full project development. For the partially irrigated and pumped
                                  0.34 ha farm the increase was US$ 107 annually. Overall, the PAD estimated that about 243,000 families
                                  would benefit directly from improved irrigation and drainage.
                                 Various analyses examined the impact of the project investments in the following areas: (i) Increased
                                  agricultural production and revenues from increases in irrigated area and yields; and (ii) Lower
                                  production costs due to reduction in private pumping and labor costs to bring water to the fields.
                                 Assumptions used in the analysis: the life of project civil works would be 31 years including the six-year
                                  investment period; total project cost, net of taxes, was estimated at US$ 152.492 million; and no
                                  allowance would be made for any possible reduction in operation and maintenance as a result of project
                                  improvements to irrigation infrastructure.
                                 Sensitivity Analysis. Three scenarios were analyzed: if costs increased by 20% the economic internal
                                  rate of return (EIRR) dropped to 15.31%, if benefits decrease by 20% the EIRR dropped to 13.92%, and
                                  lastly if costs increase by 20% and benefits dropped by 20% the EIRR dropped to 11.57%. These results

                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 19
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



         showed that the EIRR would still remain robust even under the extreme condition of a 20% reduction in
         benefits combined with a 20% increase in costs.

ex-post

      Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA). The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
         project was estimated at 18.5% compared to 18.16% at appraisal, and (using a 12% discount rate) a
         NPV of US$70.19 million over a period of 30 years. The overall financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of
         the project was estimated at 16.9% percent compared to 15.15% at appraisal.
        Both the financial and economic analysis followed the same approach as at appraisal. They were
         based on component 2 investments, specifically on their ability to provide sustainable irrigation services
         over the long term. The financial and economic analysis used a cost-benefit approach to reassess the
         project’s ex post economic viability at completion, similar to the analysis done at appraisal.
        Sensitivity Analysis. The ICR analysis used four scenarios: increase in project costs by 10%, increase in
         incremental O&M costs by 10%, 10% decrease in yearly project benefits, and 20% decrease in yearly
         project benefits. The results of the sensitivity analysis indicated that under all tested scenarios the
         estimated EIRRs ranged from 15.5% to 18.6% which were above the 12% discount rate. The
         EIRRs were economically viable for changes in the sensitivity scenario parameters.
        Implementation efficiency. While the project closing date was extended by six months, the extension did
         not have any adverse effects on efficiency measures (ICR, paragraph 50). According to the ICR
         (paragraph 50) by the time of project extension, the targets for PDO indicators were already achieved or
         exceeded. The project was efficient in terms of cost savings. These were achieved through competitive
         procurement and unused contingencies (ICR, paragraph 18) as well as through labor cost savings due to
         changes in work volume and more cost-effective construction methods (ICR, paragraph 47). Costs
         were also reduced due to the Government’s decision not to use IDA credit to finance the installation
         of the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system under the project. Cost savings
         amounted to US$14 million and were used to fund 13 additional activities (ICR, paragraph 47).
        Other benefits. The potential annual GHG emission reductions were estimated between 4.3 - 4.42 tons of
         carbon dioxide equivalent emissions per hectare per year (ICR, paragraph 44).

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. At completion, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project
was estimated at 18.5% slightly exceeding the 18.16% estimated at appraisal. The evidence also pointed to a
conclusion that the project was implemented efficiently despite minor delays. Therefore, Efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate Available?          Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  18.16
                                                                                       Not Applicable

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              18.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. There was enough
evidence that the project was successful in establishing the basis to sustainably improve irrigation and drainage
services, including infrastructure. Also, the project succeeded in improving sustainable agricultural practices by
farmers as evidenced by adopting improved production techniques, reducing inputs, Green House Gas (GHG)
emissions and crop water demand for rice areas. All PDO outcome indicators and most IRIs were either fully
achieved or exceeded. Efficiency was rated Substantial as the ex-post economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
the project was estimated at 18.5%, which was slightly exceeding the 18.16% estimated at appraisal. The
evidence also point that the project was implemented efficiently despite minor delays.

Based on the above-mentioned ratings for the three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy and
Efficiency) reflected minor shortcomings in the project’s achievements. The project’s overall Outcome is
therefore rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Two main risks were discussed by the ICR:

1. The risk related to farmers not continuing with the adoption of Integrated Crop Management (ICM)
practices. ICM practices and the application of drip, sprinkler, or furrow irrigation were promoted by the
project through farmer field schools (FFS) under component 3 (Support for Practicing Climate-Smart
Agriculture). If farmers were to abandon the adoption of such practices and revert to previous methods of
agriculture, the project outcomes would not be sustained. That said, the M&E survey showed that the
majority of farmers intended to continue with current practices since adopting CSA practices carried multiple
savings to farmers, which acted as a strong incentive to farmers continue their adoption and application
(ICR, paragraph 85). Overall, the ICR (paragraph 85) rated this risk as low to moderate.

2. The risk related to insufficient funding towards the O&M of the irrigation system. The Irrigation and
Drainage Management Company (IDMC) expenses including O&M expenditures are covered by the
Government. If there is a change in the Government policy to stop funding O&M costs, other alternatives will
need to be explored including a paid-services model funded by the increase in farmer incomes. The ICR
(paragraph 86) noted that "institutional strengthening activities including the drafting of five-year plans and
strengthening of and creation of new WUAs as part of the project may mitigate some of the risks of O&M
funding being insufficiently allocated within the IDMCs’ internal budgeting process."



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Government of Vietnam requested World Bank support to fund selected irrigation infrastructure
  investments and institutional strengthening measures associated with irrigated agriculture in selected
  provinces located in the Central Coastal and the Northern Mountainous Regions (PAD, paragraph 10).
  The project objectives were in line with Bank strategies and the Government priorities (see section 3 for
  details). The project design aimed to improve irrigation infrastructure and agricultural practices
  and ensure the sustainability of the project interventions to meet current and future sector challenges.
  However, the PAD could have benefited from a clearer definition of sustainability.

  Overall, design was comprehensive and featured irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation, institutional
  improvements, and technology adoption with capacity building. The inclusion of Farmer Field Schools
  (FFS) ensured that Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) demonstrations would, as the ICR noted, be scaled
  up within and beyond the project areas (paragraph 63). The ICR (paragraph 82) also mentioned that
  project design could have benefited from including other water saving technologies rather than relying on
  drip irrigation only, which was suitable for high value crops under water scarce conditions (this was
  addressed during implementation and sprinkler and furrow irrigation were included). Also, design could
  have included a marketing activity to ensure that farmers could successfully market their agricultural
  products. Implementation arrangements were adequate and benefitted from CPMU experience and
  familiarity with the Bank's projects. A notable design shortcoming was the overestimation of the costs and
  contingencies which the ICR (paragraph 61) attributed to the lack of detailed designs at appraisal.

  Seven risks were identified at appraisal with an overall risk rating of Moderate. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 64) "potential risks were well-articulated in the PAD along with explanations and risk
  mitigation and were adequately managed throughout." According to the ICR (paragraph 80)
  "environmental and social safeguards instruments were well prepared."

  M&E design included a logical Results Framework (RF) that reflected appropriate indicators for most
  aspects of the activities. Also, M&E design benefited from an online database which enabled easy
  reference and monitoring of project progress (ICR, paragraph 62).

  Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory despite some minor shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 17 implementation support missions. During the late stage of implementation, and
 due to COVID-19 travel restrictions, virtual supervision missions and consultations were organized to
 address the potential delay of the key project activities. Missions included adequate staff and resources for


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



 project implementation support (ICR, paragraph 83). Implementation benefited from an experienced task
 team whose members provided timely appropriate and practical recommendations to the Central Project
 Management Unit (CPMU). Safeguard policy compliance and fiduciary management were well covered
 during implementation support missions (ICR, paragraph 83). According to the ICR, the cordial and close
 rapport that was developed between the Bank teams and the client facilitated implementation.

 The task team was proactive in restructuring the project to allow more time to complete activities and use
 savings to progress the PDO. Delayed counterpart funds and IDA allocations were flagged early to the
 counterparts and closely monitored by the Bank team.

 Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory. The Bank team navigated implementation delays and led the
 project through a difficult time during the COVID-19 travel restrictions to successfully achieve the project
 objectives.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings related to Quality at Entry.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and
        the results indicators as reported in the PAD. Overall, the ToC in the ICR was sound and reflected
        the relation between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes.
       The Results Framework (RF) included four PDO outcome indicators to measure the achievement of
        the PDO as follows: (a) Area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; (b) Number of
        female and male water users provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; (c) Number
        of farmers adopting improved agricultural practices; and Operational WUAs created and/or
        strengthened. While these outcome indicators were specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and
        time-bound (SMART), they were mostly pitched at the intermediate outcome level. Also, the RF
        lacked outcome indicators that could directly assess the sustainability aspect which was an integral
        part of the PDO.
       The RF also included eleven intermediate outcome indicators to track project progress to achieve
        the PDO. These were relevant and directly connected to the stated activities and reflected some
        aspects of sustainability in terms of yield, number of crops diversified, number of farmers trained,
        number of CSA practices, improved capacity, planning and cost recovery.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



       Overall, M&E design was logical and included relevant indicators. However, the PAD lacked a clear
        definition of sustainability and consequently the RF did not include indicators that could directly
        measure sustainability.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 71) "the M&E data collection and reporting system was
         embedded in the project management structure, with a dedicated M&E consultant."
        A farmer survey was conducted by the M&E consultant to better understand the outcomes of the
         project and complement the RF. The consultant also modeled GHG emission reductions to
         further assess the environmental impacts of the project.
        M&E data collection was efficient and the M&E consultant validated the information to ensure the
         quality of the data collected (ICR, paragraph 72).



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E data analyses were used to inform project management, track implementation
         progress, and inform the ICR. Also, the project restructuring was informed by the M&E data.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 73) "the M&E system, as designed and implemented, was
         practical and adequately assessed all indicators for the project."

  Assessment of M&E Quality. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial despite minor design
  shortcomings. While M&E design was clear, it could have benefited from a clear description of
  sustainability in the PAD to reflect relevant indicators in the RF. M&E implementation and utilization were
  both adequate. The M&E consultant assessed the project impact further beyond the RF through a
  beneficiary survey and GHG emission reduction modeling.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Environmental risk rating of the project was Category B (Partial assessment). The project triggered a
   total of seven safeguard policies, five environmental and two social safeguard policies as follows: (a)
   Environmental Safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International
   Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), (b) Social Safeguards: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous
   Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The overall environmental impacts of the project were expected to be positive. The
   improvement and upgrading of irrigation and drainage infrastructure and on-farm irrigation and drainage
   were expected to lead to more efficient and productive use of irrigation water and increased crop yields.
   There were no significant, irreversible or long-term adverse environmental impacts anticipated and that any

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



   identified adverse impacts could be effectively addressed through appropriate preventative or mitigating
   measures (PAD, paragraph 14).

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The environmental safeguard policies were implemented
   through the Environmental and Social Management Framework prepared for the project and Environmental
   and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Environmental Codes of Practices. According to the ICR
   (paragraph 76) "no noncompliance of the ESMP was detected at the construction sites."

   Compliance with Social Safeguards. The social safeguard policy was implemented through the
   Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), GAP, and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP). According to the
   ICR (paragraph 76) "the project complied with all safeguards policies and no noncompliance was recorded."
   Households affected by land acquisition received full amounts of compensation and support for relocation
   (ICR, paragraph 77). Two project provinces with a large number of affected ethnic minority households
   implemented the Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) to "ensure that ethnic minorities benefit from
   the project in a fair, effective, and sustainable manner (ICR, paragraph 79)." Finally, the Gender Action Plan
   was implemented to integrate gender outcomes into specific activities such as seminars, and training,
   including training for capacity building and FFSs.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR (paragraph 47) stated that "the procurement and financial management performance were
   satisfactory." Also, the ICR (paragraph 56) stated that "at the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
   Development (MARD) level, all 23 consultancy contracts in the approved procurement plan have been
   completed."

   No further information was provided on fiduciary compliance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



Quality of ICR                     ---               Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Combining irrigation infrastructure improvement and agriculture technology enhancement
as an integrated operation with appropriate interventions maximizes synergies and ensures
that multiple needs are addressed in one operation. The project successfully combined
interventions from the irrigation sector along with those from the agricultural sector. Such an
approach is innovative and addresses multiple needs in one operation. This creates a synergistic
effect on both sectors as they are interdependent, and benefits from one sector spill over smoothly
to the other. In conclusion, cross-sector and cross-disciplinary approaches maximize the greatest
synergies.

2. The long-term success and sustainability of the irrigation and agriculture sectors, is
enhanced by the ability of relevant institutions to adequately plan for effective O&M. The
project experience emphasized that improving the capacity of institutions to design, operate, and
maintain irrigation infrastructure as well as CSA practices are critical elements to ensure long-term
success and sustainability of the irrigation and agriculture sectors. This was done through designing
and adoption of O&M plans along with training sessions for different institutions. Training was also
given to farmers to help them understand how CSA practices can improve their crop productivity and
resilience to climate change. The project also spent considerable effort to develop technical
guidelines, norms, and standards to be adopted for broad utilization by the sector. These combined
interventions created the conditions for better O&M and long-term adoption of CSA practices.

3. Improving dam safety management of small reservoirs ensures water security for multiple
uses by downstream communities, and reduces the downstream risks from potential dam
failure. The project supported the issuance of guidelines on dam safety management for small
reservoirs. The economic optimization from dam safety improvement should be encouraged by
modernizing downstream irrigation infrastructure so that people could maximize the benefits gained
from both dam safety and irrigation modernization while practicing climate-smart agriculture
techniques.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Irrigated Agriculture Improvement (P130014)



Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from an adequate M&E system that successfully tracked the progress
of activities and the achievement of the PDO. The ICR also benefitted from the beneficiary survey and the GHG
emission reduction modeling as both provided information on the project impacts beyond the RF.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linkages between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on
outcomes. However, sustainability was not fully assessed in the ICR due to the absence of an indicator to
directly measure this element of the PDO.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the two objectives.
The discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and
what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify most of the
assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was adequate. The efficiency analysis provided good justification on
the validity of the project investments.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. While the reporting on safeguards included an explicit statement on
compliance, the ICR lacked any comments on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Pest Management
(OP/BP 4.09), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The ICR
also lacked coverage on fiduciary compliance, and the status of the final audit reports was not reported in the
ICR. Finally, the ICR could have benefitted from reporting/stating specific information rather than using the non-
specific term "and so on", which was used on seven different occasions.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial but with notable shortcomings.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
