     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022910

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P143064                                     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53590,TF-A1263                          30-Sep-2019                                             9,451,902.74

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Feb-2014                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              2,000,000.00                                      8,168,587.00

 Revised Commitment                               9,494,480.40                                      7,494,480.40

 Actual                                           9,451,902.74                                      7,494,480.40




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives (PDOs) were to improve pay and performance management in
   participating ministries and strengthen payroll management in the civil service in the Recipient's territory
   (Financing Agreement, p. 5). For this ICRR, the PDOs are: (i) improve pay management in participating
   ministries, (ii) improve performance management in participating ministries, and (iii) strengthen payroll
   management in the civil service in the Recipient's territory.



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The components of the project were as follows:

   Component 1: Improve Pay Management (estimated cost US$3.18 million, actual cost US$2.25 million).
   This component was designed to support the civil service in attracting and retaining competent managerial
   and professional staff and addressing low levels of motivation and engagement among civil servants. This
   was achieved by supporting the mapping of civil servants into appropriate grades, conducting a comparative
   remuneration survey, revising the human resource (HR) policy manual to include pay administration and
   grading procedures, training Civil Service Agency (CSA) staff in key HR functions, developing a pay
   strategy, and conducting an information awareness campaign on pay management. These activities
   facilitated improved wage bill management and provided a clear and fair basis for accountability for results
   among civil servants.

   Component 2: Strengthen Payroll Management (estimated cost US$3.05 million, actual cost US$2.58
   million). This component aimed to address the lack of effective payroll discipline that enabled entries into
   the payroll without due process and weak payroll management, which led to an escalating wage bill.
   Activities included preparing and disseminating HR planning procedures, identifying staff requirements,
   strengthening personnel records and issuing biometric cards, decentralizing the HR management
   information system in at least four CSA outreach centers, conducting an independent payroll and HR
   systems audit by the General Auditing Commission, training ministry staff in payroll management functions,
   completing the cleaning and updating of personnel files for all civil servants so that they have complete
   electronic files.

   Component 3: Improve Performance Management (estimated cost US$3.38 million, actual cost US$2.45
   million). To address overlapping mandates, weak management structures in the civil service, and the
   inability to effectively hold staff accountable for their performance in service delivery, the Public Sector
   Modernization Project (PSMP) supported organizational development and HR management. Under
   organizational development, key activities included: mapping existing organizational structures and revising
   the current organizational design model, conducting mandate and functional reviews of participating
   ministries, undertaking an organizational diagnosis of each ministry (including staffing and skills gaps), and
   preparing legislation to amend the structure and functions of ministries. In terms of HR management,
   support would be provided to implement performance management in the civil service, supporting the
   implementation of a policy framework for civil service management in participating ministries, supporting
   training and career development, developing a policy framework for establishing a civil service commission,
   and developing a policy framework for the appointment of principal administrative officers.

   Component 4: Project and Program Management (estimated cost US$1.1 million, actual cost US$2.37
   million). A Project Management Unit was put in place to support coordination and the delivery of the project.
   Key activities included project coordination, communication and change management, monitoring, and
   evaluation, and fiduciary compliance and management.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The original amount approved for the project was US$10.7 million. The revised amount was
   US$9.7 million, with the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) reducing its financing by US$1
   million. The actual amount disbursed was US$9.992 million, given the interest accrued on the parent Trust
   Fund.

   Financing. At the time of project approval, the financing was expected to be met by World Bank financing
   (US$2 million) and non-World Bank financing (US$5.04 million from USAID and US$3.67 million from the
   Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA)). As indicated above, USAID later reduced
   its contribution by US$1 million.

   Borrower contribution. The borrower didn't contribute.

   Dates. The project was approved on February 10, 2014 and became effective on April 8, 2014. The World
   Bank held the mid-term review on September 29, 2017. The original closing date for the project was
   September 30, 2019. The actual closing date of the project was June 30, 2021, with six restructurings taking
   effect on March 29, 2019, May 29, 2019, July 31, 2019, August 30, 2019, December 17, 2020, and
   February 21, 2021. The purposes of the restructurings were to revise the amount allocated across the four
   components of the program, to modify the allocation across performance-based conditions (PBCs) and
   technical assistance, to revise the wording of PBCs, to revise the results framework, and to extend the
   program's closing date. The Ebola and the COVID-19 pandemics, along with capacity constraints due to
   Liberia's fragile context, were the main causes for these implementation delays. (see table on restructuring
   and/or additional financing featured on p. 3 of the ICR)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of project appraisal, Liberia had a bloated and unskilled civil service, which limited the
government's ability to deliver public services and achieve a sustainable and inclusive development
path. Liberia's civil service was confronted with political interference, low salaries, poor motivation, and
weakened capacity. Loss of confidence in key institutions before the conflict further deteriorated in the
aftermath of the civil wars. There was a mass exodus of experienced staff due to falling salaries. In
addition, civil service hiring during the transitional governments led to a bloated and inefficient civil service,
as a significant portion of the new staff hired were unskilled. This was related to the CSA losing control of its
statutory recruitment role and struggling to enforce compliance with personnel management across the civil
service. While there were efforts to revitalize the civil service following the civil wars, progress was limited.
The government adopted the 2009-2011 Civil Service Reform Strategy, which yielded mixed results within a
post-conflict context characterized by low capacity and poor coordination across institutions, politically
sensitive reforms, and time required to implement such reforms. One of the notable results consisted in
removing 1,077 ineligible individuals from the payroll, representing savings of US$1,814,695 per year
measured between FY2010-2012 (representing 1 percent of the estimated public spending on wages and


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



salaries in FY2012). Authorities also reviewed the mandates and functions across 14 ministries to identify
redundancies in roles and functions. The strategy had the following objectives:

    1. Restructuring and right-sizing: A lean government that clarifies the mandates and functions of
         ministries and agencies, rationalizes organizational structures and staffing configuration, and aligns
         competencies.
    2.   Pay and pension reforms: A compensation package that attracts, retains, and contributes to a civil
         service incentivized to be productive in implementing its roles and responsibilities and adequately
         rewarded upon retirement.
    3.   Improving service delivery: Increased and strengthened quantity of public services to the
         population through a delivery mechanism that values the public as customers and focuses on their
         needs and expectations.
    4.   HR management: A competent and professional civil service that meets the workforce needs of the
         government in delivering its development programs.
    5.   Leadership development: A strong managerial leadership capacity in the civil service to enhance
         institutional performance, particularly in policy management and service delivery.
    6.   Gender equity: Gender-sensitive institutions provide equal opportunities to men and women at all
         civil service levels and protect all employees against sexual discrimination and harassment.

The objectives pursued by the PSMP were highly relevant to the challenges facing Liberia at the
time of project design. These challenges consisted, most notably, of the civil services' low pay, poor
alignment between skills and functions, inadequate HR management processes, weak payroll controls, and
political interference. Furthermore, these challenges were compounded by the CSA's deteriorating ability to
manage the civil service, its inadequate internal capacity, low salaries, and budget. Therefore, the PSMP
identified seven participating ministries instead of all ministries, selected based on their respective size,
willingness to reform, and implementation capacity. The seven participating ministries comprised 26,000
civil servants, representing 75 percent of the entire civil service.

The objectives pursued by the project were consistent with the country's Civil Service Reform
Strategy and the World Bank's strategy. The objectives pursued by the project were consistent with the
government's 2009-2011 Civil Service Reform Strategy, with the first five of the six objectives being aligned
with the strategy. Furthermore, it was consistent with the Agenda for Transformation from the 2012-2017
Poverty Reduction Strategy, which identified capacity constraints in the civil service as a critical impediment
to economic growth. Finally, it was consistent with the Liberia Country Partnership Strategy for FY13-17
(Report No. 74618-LR), identifying "Governance and Public Institutions" as a focus area. This constituted a
priority area for the government, confronted with a bloated and unskilled workforce, which limited its
capacity to deliver public services efficiently and limited its ability to provide public services to place the
country on a sustainable and inclusive development path.

The PDOs remained relevant by the time of the Implementation Completion and Results process.
Objective 1 of Liberia's Country Partnership Framework for the period FY19-24 (Report No. 130753-LR)
consisted of Greater Transparency, Accountability, and Efficiency in Public Institutions with a pillar focused
on strengthening institutions and creating an enabling environment for inclusive and sustainable. The
Country Partnership Framework mentions explicitly that the PSMP focuses on "improving the management
of the civil service, eliminating irregularities from the civil service payroll, and providing a clear framework
for assessing the performance of civil servants." The Country Partnership Framework was well aligned with
Liberia's five-year development plan known as the Pro-poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development, which
covered the July 2018-June 2023 period. According to the Pro-poor Agenda for Prosperity and

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



               Development, “the government will strengthen public sector effectiveness through programs that foster
               equality and equity relating to employment, pay levels, pay grades, and incentive-based rewards in the civil
               service. A critical intervention will be completing the public sector modernization project that will standardize
               civil service employment, clean payrolls, and review mandates and functions across the public sector.
               Additionally, this intervention will seek to improve competitiveness and equity in the civil service pay levels
               and ensure incentive-based rewards in response to performance and productivity." (ICR, par. 25)

               The ICR provides a reasonable justification for the use of PBCs. The ICR notes that “Investment
               Project Financing (IPF) with PBCs was the right choice of instrument. It placed the focus on results and
               incentivized the achievement of the desired outcomes. In particular, the use of PBCs anchored the project’s
               results chain. The IPF also supported technical assistance to ensure delivery of the required capacity
               building that would support the achievement of the desired outcomes. This was particularly important given
               the documented capacity constraints in Liberia. In the end, the PBC–linked disbursements accounted for
               38.4 percent of the total project financing while the technical assistance accounted for 61.6 percent.” (ICR,
               par. 7) IEG agrees with the justification provided for the choice of instrument as the IPF provided the right
               set of incentives and an adequate level of technical assistance to support the achievement of the desired
               outcomes.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improved pay management in participating ministries

                             Rationale
                             Relevance of the PDO indicator. The PDO of improved pay management in participating ministries was
                             intended to: (i) improve the alignment of grades to jobs performed by civil servants; (ii) improve fairness in the
                             remuneration structure by eliminating discretionary allowances; and (iii) improve knowledge and awareness of
                             salary-related aspects among civil servants. It responded to the challenges of weak payroll controls and low
                             salaries, which had led to a bloated public sector wage bill and an unskilled workforce, undermining the
                             delivery of public services. The PDO indicator (at least 30 percent of P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants in
                             participating ministries paid according to approved pay grades for at least six consecutive months by June 30,
                             2021) was clearly defined and measurable, with credible data available to the ICR, including baseline data.

                             The achievement of this PDO was within reach despite Liberia's fragile context. Therefore, the relevance of
                             the PDO is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



PBCs 1, 4, 5, and 6, which also constituted intermediate result indicators, supported achieving the
overarching objective of improved wage bill management in participating ministries pursued by Objective 1.
More specifically, the PBCs supported:

      Institution of the Pay Strategy (PBC 4);
      Assignment of at least 30 percent of P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants into approved pay grades in
       order to support HR management by matching skills and functions (PBC 5);
      Assignment of at least 30 percent of TAS 1-3 grade civil servants into approved pay grades in order to
       support HR management by matching skills and functions (PBC 6); and
      Payment of at least 90 percent of P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants in participating ministries
       according to approved grades for six months. (PBC 1, dropped)

Outputs.

The project aligned grades to jobs through job grading and classification to allow recruitment to be based on
merit and fulfill the requisite qualifications for the advertised positions. Furthermore, the project elaborated job
descriptions for 3,000 civil service positions to detail staff duties and responsibilities.

The Interagency Wage Bill Task Force developed a single harmonized payroll for each of the 107 entities
under the CSA's purview, including data on recruitment processes such as civil service testing, processing
personnel action notices, and promotions and transfers. This single harmonized payroll also applied to
personnel on the supplementary payroll.

PBC 4 was achieved with the CSA preparing and submitting a Pay Strategy for Cabinet approval. The project
achieved PBC 5 with 100 percent of participating ministries assigning P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants into
approved pay grades by June 30, 2021. Finally, the project achieved PBC 6 with 100 percent of participating
ministries assigning at least 30 percent of TAS 1-3 grade civil servants into approved pay grades by June 30,
2021.

Outcome. The project achieved the outcome of improved pay management in participating ministries, with 30
percent of P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants in participating ministries paid according to approved pay
grades for at least six consecutive months by March 2020 (which continued until the project closed in June
2021), in line with the target of at least 30 percent. Therefore, the efficacy of the PDO is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improved performance management in participating ministries

Rationale
Relevance of the PDO indicator. The PDO of improved performance management in participating ministries
sought to: (i) improve parity between the personnel listing and the payroll based on authorized positions in


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



the budget; and (ii) support payroll integrity by strengthening the CSA's capacity to control and oversee
payroll entities. It responded to the challenge posed by the inadequate performance of participating ministries
due to issues such as their poor organizational structure, a misalignment between their mandate and their
functions, and their staffing and skills gap, which contributed to a bloated public sector wage bill and
inefficient delivery of public services. The PDO indicator (P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants in seven
participating ministries that have achieved satisfactory performance rating or above on their quality ensured
annual performance appraisal) was clearly defined and measurable, with credible data available to the ICR,
including baseline data, and the achievement of this PDO was within reach despite Liberia's fragile context.
Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is rated Substantial.

PBCs 3 and 9 supported achieving the overarching objective of improved performance management in
participating ministries pursued by Objective 2. The PBCs supported the institutionalization of the annual
performance appraisal process in participating ministries. More specifically, they supported:

      Completion of one annual cycle of the performance appraisal process for P and E grade civil servants
       (PBC 3); and
      Completion of three annual cycles of the performance appraisal process for P and E grade civil
       servants. (PBC 9, dropped)

Outputs.

Concerning the support to organizational development, key activities consisted of:

      The mapping of existing organizational structures and the revision to the current design model;
      The conduct mandate and functional reviews of the participating ministries (i.e., the Ministries of
       Education, Foreign Affairs, Finance, and Development Planning, Health, Internal Affairs, Justice, and
       the Ministry of Information, Culture, and Tourism);
      The undertaking of an organizational diagnosis of each ministry, including staffing and skills gaps;
      The preparation of legislation to amend the structure and functions of the ministries (for all the
       ministries, except the Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Information, Culture, and Tourism). This was
       essential for facilitating a lean government with clear mandates and functions of ministries and
       agencies, rational organizational structures, and staffing configuration. In Liberia, the legislature
       adopts the mandates, functions, and organizational structures of an institution; and
      The preparation, acceptance and passage of the amendment to legislation relating to the Ministry of
       Health and the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning structures. The mandate and functional
       reviews conducted under the project proposed changes that needed to be adopted/ accepted through
       amendments to the existing legislation.

Concerning strengthening HR management, this primarily consisted in supporting:

      The individual ministries and the CSA assessed staffing skills in the participating ministries;
      The project completed a policy framework for civil service management--selection, appointment,
       promotion, and retirement— the Cabinet approved it;
      The project developed policy frameworks for establishing a civil service commission and appointing
       principal administrative officers;



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)




      The project implemented performance management in the civil service as well as a policy framework
       for civil service management in participating ministries;
      The project trained a total of 519, exceeding the target of 500, and 50 women participated in the
       Female Leadership Training Program; and
      The project supported the training and career development of civil servants. The elaboration of job
       descriptions and the grading of positions defined the career streams of civil servants and allowed the
       training and career development activities to develop the necessary skills and expertise for civil
       servants to advance in their technical field in support of capacity development.

The project achieved PBC 3 (participating ministries completing one annual cycle of the performance
appraisal process for P and E-grade civil servants by June 30, 2019). All seven participating ministries
reported to having completed it by June 30, 2019. Participating ministries in fact completed two annual cycles
of the performance appraisal process for P- and E-grade civil servants by June 30, 2019, according to an
intermediate result indicator monitored through the Results Framework. PBC 9 on three annual cycles of the
performance appraisal process for P- and E-grade civil servants was not achieved as it was dropped.

Outcome. The project exceeded the PDO target of improved performance management in participating
ministries, with 93 percent of P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil servants in participating ministries having achieved
satisfactory performances rating or above on their quality ensured performance appraisal, compared to the
target of 60 percent. Therefore, the efficacy of the objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthened payroll management

Rationale
Relevance of the PDO indicator. This PDO sought to: (i) define appropriate mandates for each ministry; (ii)
align organizational structures with their respective mandate and institute a system to measure staff
performance in participating ministries; and (iii) mainstream gender issues in the mandates and the functions
of participating ministries by developing a policy framework for integrating gender equality measures. It
responded to the challenge of participating ministries and civil servants' ministries failing to meet the
mandate, and their respective roles and responsibilities, in support of improved and more efficient public
service delivery. This PDO indicator (The discrepancy between current payroll (salary) and personnel listing
at no more than 8 percent by June 30, 2021) was clearly defined and measurable, with credible data available
to the ICR, including baseline data. The achievement of this PDO was within reach despite Liberia's fragile
context. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is rated Substantial.

PBCs 2, 7 and 8 supported achieving the overarching objective of strengthened payroll management pursued
by Objective 3. More specifically, they supported:




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)




      The reduction in the discrepancy between current payroll (salary) and personnel listing at no more
       than 8 percent to reduce payroll padding (PBC 2);
      The issuance of employment appointment letters to all of the participating ministries’ staff on the
       personnel listing to support parity between the personnel listing and the payroll on authorized
       positions in the budget to improve payroll integrity by removing duplicate names, ghost workers, and
       identity misrepresentations (PBC 7); and
      The elimination of supplementary payroll in the participating ministries to support parity between the
       personnel listing and the payroll of authorized positions in the budget. (PBC 8)

Outputs. The outputs of the project include, most notably:

      The preparation and dissemination of HR planning procedures;
      The identification of staffing requirements;
      The strengthening of personnel records and the issuance of biometric cards;
      The decentralization of the HR Management Information System to at least four CSA outreach
       centers;
      The conduct of an independent payroll and HR systems audit;
      The training of ministry staff in payroll management; and
      The completion and the updating of files for all employees such that every civil servant has a complete
       electronic file.

The project exceeded the PBC 2 target (no more than 8 percent discrepancy) with no discrepancy between
current payroll (salary) and personnel listing by June 30, 2021. The project achieved PBC 7, with all
participating ministries having issued employment appointment letters to all of their staff on the personnel
listing by June 30, 2021. Finally, the project achieved PBC 8, with none of the participating ministries having
supplementary payrolls by June 30, 2021.

Outcome. The project achieved the outcome of strengthened payroll management. The discrepancy between
the current payroll (salary) and personnel listing was 0 percent, which exceeded the target of no more than 8
percent by June 30, 2021.

Additional outcomes of the program under this objective included, most notably:

      Some 46,000 civil servants were biometrically verified and enrolled, and 30,000 biometric cards were
       issued, representing 67 percent of all civil servants.
      Eighty-seven percent of the civil servants in the participating ministries now have complete electronic
       personnel files. In addition, all participating ministries issued employment appointment letters to all
       staff on the personnel listing, and none of the ministries has a supplementary payroll.
      The participating ministries’ mission and vision statement were revised to reflect relevant gender
       equality issues and a policy framework for integrating gender equality measures was developed.
      Furthermore, the CSA's capacity to control and oversee payroll entries has increased, given that it is
       responsible for onboarding civil servants while the MoFDP is responsible for paying them. This
       approach limits the risk of ineligible additions to the payroll, thereby improving payroll integrity.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)




                                   From a qualitative perspective, the reforms helped foster new behaviors regarding payroll
                                    management coordination across government (such as the need to work together to introduce
                                    biometric cards and electronic files for employees).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved the PDO indicator 1 target on improved pay management in participating ministries. At
                            the same time, it exceeded the targets of PDO indicators 2 and 3 on improved performance management in
                            participating ministries and strengthened payroll management (Table 1). The PBCs supported achieving the
                            overarching objectives pursued by the PDOs. Furthermore, PDOs were substantially relevant to the project's
                            overarching objective. Notwithstanding these achievements, the overall efficacy of the project is rated
                            Substantial, given that legislation, informed by the recommendations from the mandate and functional reviews
                            (MFRs), was not prepared for all participating ministries and that the performance management system was
                            not fully implemented in all units. While all seven participating ministries conducted MFRs, only five out of the
                            seven participating ministries adopted the recommendations of the reviews and amended their laws. There
                            was low interest in the reforms outlined in the MFRs at the Ministry of Justice because of insufficient
                            continuity due to leadership changes. The ICR states that "[b]etween 2014, and the time the project closed,
                            there were three Ministers of Justice. Each time a new minister was appointed, the Governance Commission
                            essentially had to restart the process of explaining the importance of implementing the recommendations
                            from the MFR and securing the necessary buy-in to move forward with preparing the legislation. In the end,
                            such buy-in was not secured. The Ministry of Culture, Information and Tourism did not accept the
                            recommendations from the MFR except the establishment of a Tourism Authority." (ICR, par. 28) Therefore, it
                            was not possible to prepare legislation to amend the structure and functions of the Ministry of Justice.

                            Furthermore, the full implementation of the performance management system did not occur due to the
                            COVID-19 pandemic, which affected the final face-to-face evaluation of employees from March 2020 for the
                            third performance management cycle.

                            Table 1. PDO Performance Indicators

                                                                                   Baseline     Target       Actual


                            PDO indicators                                                                                Status
                                                                                   2015         2021         2021
                            Improved pay management in participating
                            ministries
                            At least 30 percent of P1-4 and E1-3 grade civil
                                                                                   0            30           30           Achieved
                            servants in participating ministries paid according to

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR notes that neither the project appraisal nor ICR teams conducted an economic analysis. However, the
ICR notes that "according to data on the MoFDP website, in FY2020/21, Liberia's wage bill was US$300.6
million, a reduction from US$316.6 million in FY2018/19, and the draft budget for 2022 proposes a wage bill
under US$300 million. Also, according to the CSA, the wage bill in June 2019 (before the harmonization
exercise) was US$327 million. The project's cost may be offset by savings made because of a clean payroll that
enables the government only to pay legitimate civil servants, hire and retain the right type and number of civil
servants to enhance service delivery" (ICR, par. 32). The task team indicated during the ICR Review process
that the reduction in the public sector wage bill was attributable to the project’s activities. This was achieved
through (i) the new harmonized salary structure; (ii) the payroll cleaning exercise (by reconsidering employee
records, establishing biometric registration and identification of civil servants, and the removal of duplicate
names from the payroll), which removed ineligible individuals from the payroll; and (iii) the use of the funds
obtained through the accomplishment of the PBCs to allow civil servants who had reached the pensionable age
to obtain their pension and be removed from the payroll. The ICR Review also concludes that economic analysis
was impossible given the data credibility and availability issues.

The ICR also considers implementation aspects—such as delays in implementation, financial management
issues, procurement issues (including procurement delays), and cost overruns—which may have affected
efficiency. For example, regarding implementation delays, the ICR and the interview indicated that these were
primarily related to the Ebola pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic, the presidential elections, and capacity
constraints. Furthermore, the ICR notes that "there were no major procurement issues and delays that caused
inefficiency neither was there any cost overruns. In fact, the project underspent by approximately US$680,000,
and all the envisaged activities were implemented.” (ICR, par. 34)

The efficiency of the project is rated Substantial. The project reduced the public sector wage bill through the
implemented activities. Furthermore, there were no significant challenges with project implementation, except for
factors beyond the task team's control, such as the Ebola and COVID-19 pandemics, the presidential elections,
and capacity constraints. Despite the delays caused by these factors, the project still underspent by
approximately US$680,000 relative to the budget.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated High, given that the PDOs were aligned with the government and the
World Bank's priorities for the country. The overall efficacy is rated Substantial rather than High. While all
targets for the PDOs were met or exceeded, performance management was limited because legislation,
informed by the recommendations from the MFRs, was not prepared for all participating ministries, and that full
implementation of the performance management system in all units was lacking. The efficiency of the project is
also rated Substantial.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk to the development outcome of the project relates to the possibility that the reforms are not
sustained over time if the rest of the public sector beyond the seven participating ministries does not adopt
the reforms. As indicated in the ICR, "[e]nlarging the reach of the reforms to all ministries, agencies and
commissions will embed the fundamental principles and systems related to pay management, performance
management and payroll management across the entire civil service. This will help to avoid the reversal of
reforms." (ICR, par. 74) Furthermore, the ICR indicates that the sustainability of the reforms could be at risk
because 74 spending entities have still not adopted the biometric system, which may lead to payroll padding,
thereby undermining the results achieved through the reforms implemented through the project.
Finally, another risk to the development outcome is the CSA not being adequately resourced in terms of
financial resources and human capacity to fulfill its mandate.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR document elaborates on the following measures taken by the task team at the project design
  stage:

  Activities identified under the project are reported in the ICR to have been "informed by the TTL's in-
  depth experience living and working in Liberia, as well as the successes and failures of previous reforms
  and projects implemented by the Government and other development partners." (ICR, par. 44) This

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



  allowed a realistic ambition of the project, including the PBCs. Furthermore, the project design was
  simple, adhering to the basics-first principle, and the project made a deliberate effort to build on and
  complement reform already undertaken by the country. This was particularly important given the FCV
  nature of the country. Furthermore, lessons from prior experience in FCV contexts informed the project's
  design to a large extent. Some of the key lessons included: keeping the design simple, ensuring that
  reforms are politically feasible, implementing reforms in/through a few institutions, and then scaling up
  based on the lessons learned, the use of ministry level and system level PBCs, ensuring that training is
  continuous to fortify capacity in key areas, leveraging relationships with other development partners to
  push reforms forward, and providing strong co-creation of the project to encourage ownership and buy-in
  of the reforms. The task team also relied on several analytical underpinnings at the design stage, which
  included:

        World Bank (2012). "Liberia: Options for Fiscal Space Enlargement",
        Kithinji Kiragu (2012). "Rebuilding the Civil Service in Liberia: Consolidating the Gains" World
         Bank Draft Report.
        Chemonics (2013). "Liberia Governance Stakeholder Survey": Monrovia (USAID).
        World Bank (2013): Liberia: Political Economy and Governance. Washington DC: World Bank.

  The components featured under the project and their respective activities were structured and well-
  sequenced. The results-based approach adopted for this project rewarded the ministries directly for
  meeting specific targets, supported the drive for reforms and ensured collective action. In addition, the
  Appraisal Team carefully considered the selection of the participating ministries, which helped the
  successful implementation of the project.

  The World Bank task team closely engaged with development in the preparation of the project, which
  forged strong alliances and avoided duplication of efforts, and helped to mobilize additional resources for
  the PSMP, which was co-financed by USAID and SIDA. In addition, the World Bank facilitated training at
  Georgetown University on public administration leadership in which Deputy Ministers of participating
  ministries took part. During preparation, the authorities established the Internal Reform Committees as
  part of the institutional and implementation arrangements, which consulted and represented
  employees at all levels in their respective ministries, supported ownership, and increased awareness
  about the reform process.

  Parallel technical assistance was avoided right from the beginning when USAID and SIDA established a
  Multi-Donor Trust Fund. As a result, development partners had no parallel training or support. Also, the
  PSMP built on and consolidated reforms/work already initiated under the USAID Governance and
  Economic Management project and other reforms started under the 2008 strategy. Therefore, there was
  no duplication. Instead, the reforms continued by pooling resources from the development partners who
  were active in the sector.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



 The World Bank task team provided continuous engagement and training, which was particularly important
 following the 2017 elections to ensure that politicians in authority remained committed to the prescribed set
 of reforms. In addition, the World Bank task team provided adequate support to the client throughout the
 implementation stage. The project team held weekly check-in meetings with the client. There was a strong
 World Bank presence in the field, making it easier to engage with the client and address any bottlenecks.
 The World Bank team also assisted the government with developing ToRs and providing extensive
 comments on outputs while balancing the need to provide relevant and sufficient support without taking
 over the implementation of the project or curtailing capacity-building efforts.

 The level of coordination and engagement across the tripod (i.e., CSA, Liberia Institute of Public
 Administration and Governance Commission) and other ministries, and the CSA and Ministry of Finance
 and Development Planning, which remained strong throughout the implementation period, supported the
 achievement of the objectives pursued by the project. Furthermore, the strong commitment from the CSA
 allowed the removal of ineligible names from the payroll during the election period, despite fierce
 resistance by participating ministries.

 The World Bank task team documented implementation issues in Aide Memoires and Implementation
 Status Reports, outlining how these could deter the achievement of the PDOs consistently and on time.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The indicators featured in the Results Framework were selected such that they can easily be measured
 and monitored over time. The CSA was responsible for the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project
 and received the data from the different institutions. The task team designed the M&E framework such that
 one of the PBCs was also a PDO level indicator and the remaining eight PBCs were intermediate result
 indicators so that the relationship between the PDO, PBCs, and intermediate result indicators was clear
 and the sequencing of reforms and their achievements was logical and clear.

 While the IPF was not subject to a gender tag, the project advanced in addressing gender inequality in the
 civil service. For example, some 50 female civil servants participated in the Female Leadership Training
 Program. The training taught skills such as managing a meeting, facilitation skills, team leadership skills,
 and effective people management skills. This consisted of an intermediate result indicator under improved
 performance management. Furthermore, at the time of the ICR, more females were involved in
 implementing Component 2 activities on strengthening payroll management (ICR, para. 38).




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



b. M&E Implementation
  The project formally verified PBC achievements in Annual Verification Reports. When the task team
  faced challenges in obtaining the necessary data, interactions with HR managers were required. An M&E
  specialist in the CSA collected and analyzed the data from the participating ministries and updated the
  component leads and the Results Framework as needed. There were numerous instances of training of
  staff of participating ministries to ensure that the performance calculations made were correct. Periodic
  meetings reiterated the importance of the data collection exercise. They re-explained the benefits
  associated with the project, which contributed to stakeholders taking ownership of the reform process and
  meeting the targets established under the Results Framework. The project team modified the wording
  and the allocation of money for all PBCs during the fourth restructuring, except for PBC 4, which incurred
  no change. The ICR indicates that PDO indicators and intermediate result indicators were modified to
  better measure progress towards the achievement of the PDO and redefine two PDO indicators and
  intermediate result indicators' target date or value. PBCs 1 and 9 (PBC 1 – "At least 90 percent of P1-4
  and E1-3 grade civil servants in participating ministries paid according to approved pay grades for at least
  six consecutive months by March 30, 2020"; and PBC 9 – "Participating ministries have completed three
  annual cycles of the performance appraisal process for P & E grade civil servants by December 31,
  2019") were dropped following a reduction of funding by US$1 million at the MDTF trustee level. USAID
  reduced its contribution to the MDTF by US$1 million, with the new U.S. government at the time reducing
  allocations to USAID globally, thereby affecting the allocation to USAID Liberia. The DPO on direct
  project beneficiaries with a target of 500, of which 25 percent are female, was dropped. There was
  already an intermediate indicator that measured leadership training provided to women in the civil
  service, which better captured the value-added provided by the project. These changes, which remain
  relatively minor, were justified within the context of delays caused by the Ebola and the COVID-19
  pandemics and the reduction in USAID allocation. (see ICR, Table 4)

  Given the difficulties in collecting data at the country level, data were filtered upstream to the central
  ministries and collated and collected from there. In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, the M&E
  specialist at the CSA had to rely on secondary source data shared by the ministries. There was limited
  field access, and Internet connectivity remained poor.

  At the time of the ICR, the M&E specialist at the CSA indicated that the M&E structures and
  arrangements under the project would be maintained to ensure that data continued to be collected and
  analyzed.

  In all, the ICR gives credible evidence that the project team fully implemented the M&E plan.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E structures and arrangements in place contributed to informing project implementation, either
  strategically or operationally, as evidenced by the restructurings. These M&E structures were also tools
  to engage with the government when implementation challenges that could pose a risk to the
  achievement of PDOs erupted. One of the prime examples cited in the ICR concerns the difficulties with
  data sharing on general and special allowances. The government resolved this following the issuance of
  a Presidential Order. The project also shared M&E data with the public—through periodic appearances
  by the CSA officials on radio stations—to provide evidence of the progress made and explain the
  reforms and their importance to the citizens of the country. The CSA also had a dedicated hour each on


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



  the ECOWAS radio show where each component lead explained in the local dialect the progress made
  concerning the reforms.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   n.a.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   n.a.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   An unintended impact consisted of other ministries and institutions approaching the CSA requesting similar
   support in recruitment and career advancement for their civil servants. Furthermore, pay harmonization
   allowed the salaries of employees in the security sector and immigration to increase to a minimum of
   US$170 per month from US$100-120. This benefitted at least 35 percent of all employees. Teachers on
   the supplementary payroll who were earning less than teachers on the general payroll got pay increases
   when the CSA moved them to the harmonized payroll.

   Although the World Bank did not conduct a Poverty and Social Analysis (PSIA), none of the PBCs or PDOs
   had the potential to increase instability or violence. On the contrary, the reforms were designed to increase
   stability and put Liberia on a path toward stronger economic growth.



d. Other
   There are two unexpected benefits of the project:

          1. There is much stronger cooperation and coordination between the CSA and the Ministry of Finance
             and Development Planning, as well as other line ministries; and
          2. There is much stronger cross-institutional learning to emulate good practices.



11. Ratings


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                   High

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

In addition to the lessons included in the ICR, IEG adds these lessons:

    1. A public sector modernization project that measures the project's direct effect in terms of
       administrative processes should include a parallel assessment of the impact on the quality
       and the efficiency of public service delivery. The project activities were intended to gradually
       generate a positive impact on the quality and the efficiency of public service. It would have
       been useful to have a results indicator to assess this, as well as any unintended negative
       impact the project activities may have had. For example, with all the positive personnel
       assessments enabled by the project, one would expect the overall performance of the seven
       ministries to improve. While the full impact of such reforms takes longer than the project
       duration to be realized, there may have been initial stage improvements that could be
       measured.
    2. Sufficient and continuous professional development is needed so that public sector workers
       can sustain improvements in the delivery of public services. Liberia is confronted with
       significant capacity constraints, which limit gains in the quality and in the efficiency of public
       service delivery. Sufficient and sustained professional development would be required to
       sustain improvements in public service delivery. Professional development would also create
       more and better employment opportunities for civil servants, which would create an added
       incentive for raising individual professional performance.
    3. Limited capacity states achieve better results by focusing on a few key reform measures that
       are realistically sequenced and get coordinated support from development partners.
       However, reform successes need to be gradually scaled up to protect advances made and
       widen the benefits. In the Liberia case, civil servants in the participating ministries may be
       lured by positions in the rest of the public sector, which might be offering higher salaries and
       allowances without being subject to annual performance reviews. A plan for gradually
       modernizing the rest of the public sector and making it subject to the same conditions as in
       the seven participating ministries will be needed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Public Sector Modernization (FY14 (P143064)



  Please Explain
  It is unusual to see such a successful civil service reform project supported by the Bank in a fragile state. It is
  helpful to find out more about why it was successful. On the other hand, maybe the better processes have
  changed the form, but not functionality, and haven’t produced a better overall performance by the seven
  ministries. We don’t know without doing more assessment.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is judged Substantial. The ICR document provided a relatively comprehensive and
detailed analysis of the project context, the objectives which were sought by the project, and the achievement
of results. The overview of World Bank performance, the M&E, and other issues were also quite detailed and
clear. The ICR could have benefitted from a more detailed efficiency analysis even if an economic analysis
could not be performed. The ICR task team could have made an effort to quantify the benefits directly
associated with the project. This information could have been supplemented by more granular data on wages
and allowances prior to and following the implementation of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 18
