     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0023008

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P129920                                       BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53810                                     30-Jun-2020                                        516,952,498.76

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Feb-2014                                   30-Jun-2021

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              600,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               584,370,005.44                                              0.00

 Actual                                           516,952,498.76                                              0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kishore Laxmikant             J. W. van Holst               Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni                      Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives were to reduce system losses and enhance capacity in the rural
   distribution network of primarily the Eastern part of Bangladesh (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, dated
   June 19, 2014 and Project Appraisal Document, para. 21).

   The project development objectives (PDOs) remained unchanged during project implementation.



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



   For the ICRR, the original PDOs are parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To reduce system losses in the rural distribution network of primarily the Eastern part of
   Bangladesh.

   Objective 2: To enhance capacity in the rural distribution network of primarily the Eastern part of Bangladesh.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD, paras. 24 to 29 and ICR paras. 15 and 16).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Any changes in these components during project
   implementation are discussed later in Section 2 under the respective restructurings.

   Component A: Rural Grid Augmentation and Rehabilitation: (appraised cost - US$485.1 million; actual
   cost - US$425.6 million).

   This component was to consist of construction of new transmission and distribution lines and substations as
   well as upgrading of existing lines, including re-conductoring and pole replacement, covering 39 PBSs (Palli
   Bidyut Samities or Rural Electricity Cooperatives) out of a total of 80 PBSs in Bangladesh.

   Component B: Transmission Enhancement: (appraised cost - US$106.0 million; actual cost -
   US$88.0 million).

   This component was to include: (i) investments in six new 132/33 kV substations; (ii) rehabilitation of five
   existing grid substations with large sized transformers; (iii) construction of new transmission lines (230 kV
   and 132 kV); and (iv) upgrading of 132 kV lines, including re-conductoring and rehabilitation.

   Component C: Institutional Strengthening: (appraised cost - US$9.00 million; actual cost -
   US$8.00 million).

   This component was to include support for institutional strengthening as follows: For BREB (Bangladesh
   Rural Electricity Board), technical assistance and capacity building to support:(i) development of a Master
   Plan; (ii) improvement of system reliability and operational performance; (iii) standardization of
   specifications; (iv) financial management, including design and implementation of an Integrated Financial
   Management Information System; (v) development of a GIS (Geographical Information System) framework
   for BREB and PBSs; (vi) environmental and social management; (v) development of a tariff methodology;
   and (vi) training and capacity building of staff. For PGCB (Power Grid Company of Bangladesh), technical
   assistance and capacity building to support: (i) project management; (ii) contract and procurement


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



   management; (iii) financial management; (iv) safeguards management; and (v) grid planning, operation, and
   maintenance.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$837 million. During project
   restructuring, the total cost was revised to US$821.37 million. At project completion, the total cost was
   estimated to be US$641.52 million. (ICR Data Sheet). The estimated actual cost was lower by about
   US$195.5 million (23 percent) than the appraisal estimate.

   Financing: At appraisal, the Project was financed by an IDA grant of US$600 million. During project
   restructuring, the grant amount was reduced to US$584.37 million. At project completion, the total amount
   disbursed was US$516.95 million (about 86 percent of the original amount). The unutilized balance was
   cancelled.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution was US$237 million. At project completion,
   the actual Borrower contribution was US$124.57 million (about 53 percent of the originally planned amount).

   Dates: The Project was approved on February 27, 2014 and became effective on September 16, 2014. The
   original closing date was June 30, 2020. It was extended once by 12 months to June 30, 2021.

   Mid-Term Review (MTR): A Mid-Term Review was carried out in April 2019.

   Restructurings: The Project underwent three Level 2 restructurings. The original PDOs, as well as the
   PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators (IRIs), were not changed under the restructurings.

   First Restructuring (June 27, 2018 - disbursed amount US$294.54 million). This was to reallocate amounts
   between disbursement categories to reflect changes emerging during implementation. A resulting surplus in
   the amount of US$2.5 million was reallocated from Component A (Rural Grid Augmentation and
   Rehabilitation) to Component C1 (Institutional Strengthening of BREB) to cover an increase in the estimated
   costs for this component.

   Second Restructuring (May 27, 2020, disbursed amount US$445.37 million). This was to extend the closing
   date by 12 months from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021 to allow for completion of additional substations
   and distribution lines by BREB utilizing cost savings realized during implementation.

   Third Restructuring (June 23, 2021, disbursed amount US$496.30 million). An unutilized amount of
   US$15.63 million was cancelled from the original loan amount.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 9 and ICR paras. 1 to 9).

Country Context: Bangladesh, with a population of about 150 million and a land area of 147,570 square
kilometers (kms), is among the most populated countries in the world. More than 60 percent of the
population live in rural areas. Agriculture contributes about 20 percent of the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). Since the country's independence in 1971, economic growth had been accelerating. At the time of
appraisal in 2013, GDP per capita was about US$830. Poverty had declined from about 49 percent in 2000
to about 31 percent in 2010. The sustained economic growth led to higher demand for infrastructure
services, including electricity, transport, and telecommunication. Infrastructure deficits widened as the
demand rose faster than the investments. In 2013, Bangladesh ranked 118th (out of 144 countries) on the
Global Competitiveness Index and 134th on the quality of electricity supply. Nevertheless, at the time of
appraisal, Bangladesh was judged to be on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) for
poverty reduction; infant and child mortality; primary school enrolment; and gender priority in education.

Sectoral and Institutional Context: The Bangladesh Power Development Board (BPDB) was set up in
1972 as a vertically integrated utility with responsibility for power generation, transmission and distribution.
In 1977, the Bangladesh Rural Electricity Board (BREB) was established, with responsibility to supply
electricity in rural areas. BREB was made responsible for planning, financing and constructing the rural
electrification network of the country, and to expand access to electricity through rural electricity
cooperatives called Palli Bidyut Samities (PBSs) which provide retail service to the rural consumers, as well
as operate and maintain the rural network. The transmission system is operated by a single transmission
company Power Grid Company of Bangladesh (PGCB). BPDB acts as the single buyer of electricity in
Bangladesh and sells it to the distribution companies. Tariffs for electricity are set by the Bangladesh
Electricity Regulatory Commission (BERC).

At the time of appraisal in 2013, the electricity sector in Bangladesh faced insufficient generation capacity
coupled with dependency on expensive liquid fuel; inadequate transmission and distribution capacity; and
an electricity access rate of 60 percent. Although Bangladesh had a low per capita electricity consumption
rate (270 kWh per year), electricity demand was rising induced by strong economic performance. However,
electricity supply additions did not keep pace, leading to acute power shortages. As an interim measure, the
Government of Bangladesh (GoB) contracted over 2.3 GW of expensive liquid-fuel based generation plants
which increased the cost of electric power. The GoB also made substantial investments in extension of low-
voltage grids to support new connections. However, significant gaps remained in the medium voltage (33-
11 kV) network, particularly the construction of substations, primary distribution lines, and associated
transmission lines. This led to system overloading and frequent load-shedding. The required investments
involved complex technical issues and large investment outlays which BREB and the PBSs were unable to
mobilize. Despite a decrease in the rural electricity system losses over time, including reduction in
commercial losses, the overall rate remained at about 13.5 percent which was higher than the rate of about
10 percent achieved by some of the urban area distribution companies in Bangladesh. In addition, the
institutional capacity in BREB and the PBSs needed to be strengthened for them to operate and maintain a
rapidly growing network. The financial situation of the PBSs was poor due to insufficient revenues to cover
their costs caused by weaknesses in the tariff system that did not fully cover the taxes that the PBSs had to
pay as a part of purchasing power. In 2013, only nine out of 72 PBSs were profit-making. These financial
constraints left BREB and the PBSs incapable of financing the investments needed to enhance the capacity
of the medium-voltage distribution system.

At appraisal in 2013, Bangladesh had seven divisions (Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi,
Rangpur, and Sylhet). BREB and its associated PBSs provided electricity to more than 90 percent of

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



Bangladesh's districts covering all the divisions. The World Bank financed Rural Transmission and
Distribution Project (RTDP) was to support grid augmentation and rehabilitation in three divisions (Dhaka,
Chittagong and Sylhet) covering 39 PBSs in the Eastern part of Bangladesh. A similar project was being
implemented with support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) that covered three
divisions (Rajshahi, Khulna and Barisal) with 33 PBSs in the Western part of Bangladesh. The RTDP was
to cover about 2 percent of the distribution lines, 20 percent of the distribution substations, and 5 percent of
the transmission grid in Bangladesh at the time of appraisal.

Alignment with national priorities: The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were aligned, and
remain aligned, with national priorities at the time of appraisal as well as the priorities at the present time.
The PDOs were consistent with the GoB's Perspective Plan for 2010 to 2021 which included among its
objectives ensuring energy security, increasing the electricity sector's efficiency, and improving reliability
and quality of electricity supply by 2021. These priorities continued under the GoB's Sixth Five Year Plan
(2011 to 2015) and Seventh Five Year Plan (2016 to 2020). Both these plans included specific and
progressive targets to achieve increased electricity access rates and reduce electricity system losses. (ICR
para, 25).

Alignment with Country Assistance Strategy/Country Partnership Framework: The PDOs
were aligned, and remain aligned, with the World Bank Group (WBG) CAS (Country Assistance Strategy)
for FY 2011 to FY 2014 at the time of appraisal and with the latest Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for FY 2016 to FY 2020. Regarding the CAS for FY 2011 to 2014, under Pillar 1 of the CAS, the Project
contributed to Outcome 1.3: increased infrastructure provision, access, and efficiency. The CPF for FY
2016 to FY 2020, provides, under its Focus Area 1: Growth and Competitiveness, that WBG (World Bank
Group) activities will seek to remove barriers to growth through increasing electricity supply and
improving transport connectivity, among other areas. (CPF Table 7: Key Priorities for Action). The CPF also
states that the WBG will seek to help Bangladesh to narrow the growing gap between demand for, and
supply of, power (which is one of the transformational priorities under the CPF). This will include
strengthening of rural transmission and distribution networks to reduce losses and to increase carrying
capacity in rural areas, and supporting efforts to improve the financial capacity and operational efficiency of
PGCB (Power Grid Company of Bangladesh). (CPF, para. 49).

Prior Bank Experience: The World Bank has been involved in Bangladesh's electricity sector over several
years, including financing of investment projects as well as sector work. The RTDP was preceded by the
Siddhirganj Transmission Line Project implemented by PGCB and the Rural Electrification and Renewable
Energy Development Project (RERED) which was carried out in two phases and implemented by BREB. In
2009, the Bank supported preparation of a sector study that identified areas with potential for improvement,
including strengthening the institutional capacity of BREB and PBSs. Experience under these
interventions fed into the design and preparation of the RTDP.

Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDOs were
consistent, and remained consistent, with the priorities in the national programs and the WBG Country
Assistance Strategy/Country Partnership Framework. The PDOs were pitched at the right level taking into
account the development needs and the country's capacity for implementation.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To reduce system losses in the rural distribution network of primarily the Eastern part of Bangladesh.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the theory of change (TOC) and the
               results chain from activities to outcomes. The overall TOC (applicable to both Objectives 1 and 2) was that, to
               meet the rapidly increasing demand for electricity in Bangladesh, it was necessary to (i) increase
               power generation and (ii) strengthen the transmission and distribution power delivery systems. Increase in
               power generation and meeting the electricity needs of non-rural areas was being addressed by GoB through
               interventions other than the RTDP. In regard to providing increased and improved power supply in the rural
               areas, it was necessary to improve operational efficiency and enhance capacity of the rural transmission and
               distribution networks which were being overloaded resulting in frequent load shedding, poor voltage profiles,
               and high technical losses. The RTDP was to cover 39 PBSs (out of a total of 80 PBSs) primarily in the
               eastern part of Bangladesh. A complementary project, supported by JICA (Japan International Cooperation
               Agency) was to cover 33 PBSs in the western part of Bangladesh. The RTDP would provide inputs through
               investment financing and technical assistance. The inputs for investment financing would directly lead to
               relevant physical outputs including: For Rural Grid Augmentation and Rehabilitation (i) construction of new,
               and rehabilitation of existing, 11 kV and 33 kV lines; and (ii) construction of new 33/11 kV substations and
               switching stations. For Transmission Enhancement (i) construction of new, and upgrading of existing, 132 kV
               and 230 kV lines; (ii) construction of new grid substations; and (iii) installation of new transformers to augment
               the capacity of older substations. The inputs through financing of technical assistance would lead to capacity
               building outputs for strengthening the institutional capacity of BREB, the PBSs, and PGCB in regard to
               carrying out their responsibilities in providing improved quality and reliability of power supply services. These
               outputs would lead to the outcome of providing an adequate and more efficient electricity transmission and
               distribution system in primarily the eastern parts of Bangladesh by (i) reduction in system losses and (ii)
               enhancement of capacity in the rural distribution networks. The higher-level outcomes would be improved
               health, living conditions, and economic well-being of the rural population in the areas targeted for support.

               The causal links and full results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 1 (as well as Objective 2 below) were
               clear. To measure the achievement of the PDOs, three PDO indicators and ten Intermediate Results
               Indicators (IRIs) were used. The adopted PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were
               generally relevant, measurable, and appropriate for assessing the achievement of Objective 1 (as well as
               Objective 2). One limitation was in regard to the PDO indicator related to measuring reduction in system
               losses. The PAD acknowledged (para. 114) that measuring actual reductions in losses was challenging as
               parts of the 11 kV network did not have meters to measure losses. It was therefore agreed with BREB that
               the losses would be measured across the entire distribution system and used as indicators to measure
               project performance.




                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and
ICR paras. 28 to 30).

For Objective 1, the Project overachieved the targets for outputs and IRIs as follows:

        Distribution lines constructed under the Project (baseline 0; target 5,362 km; actual 5,744 km; target
         overachieved).
        Distribution lines rehabilitated under the Project (baseline 0; target 877 km; actual 2,147 km; target
         overachieved).
        Number of distribution substations constructed/rehabilitated under the Project (baseline 0; target 110;
         actual 117; target overachieved).

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and ICR paras. 28 to 30).

For Objective 1, the outcome was to be assessed based on a single PDO indicator "Electricity losses per year
in the Project area". The PAD (para. 114) specified that the losses were to be calculated by dividing total
electricity losses by the total net injected generation in the Project area. Because of difficulties in measuring
actual losses due to lack of meters in parts of the 11 kV system, it had been agreed with BREB that losses
measured across the entire distribution system would be used as indicators to measure project performance.

The targeted outcome was overachieved both in terms of quantity and timelines (ICR para. 30). All related
intermediate results indicators (IRIs) relating to construction/rehabilitation of transmission/distribution lines
and distribution substations were overachieved as indicated above. Achievement of these targets contributed
directly to achieving the target outcome for reduction of system losses. Compared to the baseline of 13
percent and target of 10.5 percent, actual achievement was significantly higher with losses reduced to 10.2
percent in 2019 and 8.9 percent in 2021. For comparison, the system loss for the entire BREB served area
was 9.7 percent in June 2021. The loss reduction targets were exceeded even though there was a significant
expansion of the low voltage network with more than 11 million new connections added in the project area
during the project period. (ICR para. 30). In regard to attribution, in addition to the RTDP, there were other
investments made by BREB and the PBSs in network upgrading, low voltage system expansion, and
increasing consumer connections, but given their relatively smaller share (35 percent) in total investments, as
compared to the RTDP (65 percent), the achievement of reduction of losses in the Project area can be
substantially attributed to the interventions under the Project. (ICR para. 36).

Based on the above, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated High.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance capacity in the rural distribution network of primarily the Eastern part of Bangladesh.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)




                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change: The Project's overall Theory of Change (TOC) and results chain, relevant for both
                            Objective 1 as well as Objective 2, were presented earlier under Objective 1 above.

                            Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and
                            ICR para. 31).

                            The Project overachieved or achieved its targeted output and IRIs as follows:

                                    Distribution lines constructed or rehabilitated under the Project: (baseline 0 km; target 6,249 km;
                                     actual 7,891 km; target overachieved).
                                    Number of distribution systems constructed or rehabilitated under the Project: (baseline 0; target 110;
                                     actual 117; target overachieved).
                                    Transmission lines constructed or rehabilitated under the Project: (baseline 0 km; target 389 km;
                                     actual 388 km; target almost fully achieved).
                                    Number of grid substations constructed under the Project: (baseline 0; target 6; actual 6; target
                                     achieved).
                                    Optical ground wire (OPGW) stringing for the 132 kV line: (baseline 0 km; no target; actual 101.7 km).

                            Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and ICR para. 31).

                            Targets for four related intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were overachieved or achieved as indicated
                            above (the fifth IRI did not have a specific target). Achievement of these results contributed directly to
                            achievement of the PDO for enhancement of capacity in the rural distribution network primarily in the eastern
                            part of Bangladesh. While the PDO focused on enhancing the electricity system capacity at the distribution
                            level, capacity enhancement at the transmission level and renovation of transmission lines were essential to
                            transmit the increased power to the augmented rural distribution capacity. The single PDO indicator was
                            "MVA capacity addition in the the 33 kV network of the Project supported PBSs". Against the baseline of zero
                            and target of 1,800 MVA, the actual achievement was 2,370 MVA, 30 percent higher than the target. The
                            outcome target was overachieved.

                            Based on the above, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed earlier in Section 4, the Project overachieved or fully achieved its targeted two objectives in
                            regard to (i) reduction of system losses and (ii) enhanced capacity in the rural distribution networks in
                            primarily the eastern part of Bangladesh. System losses were reduced below the targeted levels well before
                            project closing. The capacity in the rural distribution network was enhanced and complemented with

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



  additional capacity at the transmission level. These achievements can be substantially attributed to the
  interventions under the Project. The Project also fully met the core PDO target of the number of direct
  beneficiaries (both total and female). The Project benefited about 5 million new households (with an average
  of 5.3 persons per household). The target was 25 million beneficiaries (of which 56 percent female); the
  estimated actual achievement was 25.12 million beneficiaries (of which 56 percent female). Project
  interventions to strengthen the transmission and distribution networks enabled additional flow of electricity
  through the system - the electricity sales of the Project-supported PBSs increased from 10,350 GWh at
  appraisal to 25,000 GWh at project completion. (ICR para. 35).

  Institutional Strengthening: In addition to the defined PDOs, the Project supported institutional capacity
  building in BREB, the PBSs, and PGCB which was a significant factor in the achievement of the PDOs as well
  as for future sustainability of the Project's outcomes. This is discussed below in Section 10 under 'Other
  Impacts' - Institutional Strengthening.

  Based on the above, the efficacy with which the Project achieved its objectives is rated High.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

At appraisal: The economic efficiency of the Project was assessed using a cost-benefit methodology based on
an incremental net benefits approach i.e. incremental costs and benefits attributable to the Project derived from
a comparison of the 'with-project' and 'without-project' scenarios. Economic costs included capital investment
costs and estimated operations and maintenance expenses. Economic benefits included the additional energy
delivered to the consumers in the Project area. Regarding economic benefits, the baseline situation was that
very little additional power could be delivered to the consumers because of constraints in the transmission and
distribution network. Therefore, any increase in power supplied was attributable to the interventions to be carried
out under the Project including reduction in technical losses and enhancing capacity of the transmission and
distribution system. All costs and benefits were estimated net of taxes and duties. The incremental electricity
supplied was valued based on the estimated consumers' willingness to pay. The indicators of economic viability
adopted were the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) at a
discount rate of 10 percent estimated over a period of 20 years. On this basis, the EIRR was estimated at 71
percent and the ENPV at BDT127,408 million (equivalent to about US$1,633 million).

Post-Completion: The completion analysis was carried out using the same methodology as at appraisal but
updated for actual results and values observed during implementation. On this basis, the post-completion
estimates are: EIRR of 43 percent and ENPV of BDT161,330 million (US$1,861 million equivalent). (ICR Annex
4). Factors contributing to the lower EIRR as compared to appraisal were (i) a delay of about two years in start
of operations of the Project financed interventions and (ii) lower electricity distribution tariffs than projected at
appraisal.(ICR Annex 4).



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



Rating: Despite being significantly lower than the estimates at appraisal, the post-completion EIRR is
substantially higher than the discount rate of 6 percent to 8 percent prescribed under the World Bank guidelines
for economic assessment of investment projects. The estimated post-completion ENPV is higher than the
estimate at appraisal. Based thereon, the Project's economic efficiency is rated Substantial.

Implementation Efficiency

Project Cost: The Project was carried out within the cost estimated at appraisal. At completion, the project
cost was US$641.57 million, lower by about US$195.5 million than the appraisal estimate of US$837 million. All
the planned interventions under the Project were carried out. In addition, cost savings were realized which were
utilized by BREB to carry out additional investments to further strengthen the transmission and distribution
networks.

Project Duration: The implementation period estimated at appraisal was 78 months (6.5 years). The actual
implementation period was 90 months (7.5 years). While all the investments planned at appraisal were
completed by the original closing date (June 30, 2020), the closing date was extended by 12 months (to June
30, 2021) to allow for completion of additional investments being carried out by BREB utilizing cost savings
realized under the Project.

Rating: Based on the above, the Project's implementation efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   71.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                43.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Project's outcome is rated on the basis of (i) Relevance of Objectives, (ii) Efficacy, and (iii) Efficiency.

As discussed in Section 3, the Relevance of Objectives is rated High.

As discussed in Section 4, the Project's Efficacy is rated High.



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



As discussed in Section 5, the Project's Efficiency is rated Substantial.

Based on the above, there were no shortcomings in the Project's relevance and achievements and only minor
shortcomings in the Project's efficiency. The Project's outcome is therefore rated Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risks: These are rated Moderate. While BREB and PGCB have the institutional capacity and
experience to operate and maintain the physical infrastructure and facilities, at the rural power distribution
level, the PBSs will continue to be responsible for operating and maintaining the infrastructure and facilities.
In addition to availability of technical assistance and support as needed, timely and sufficient availability of
funds will be important for them to carry out their responsibilities. This will depend upon the GoB's willingness
and ability to continue with its policies of allowing adequate cost recovery through tariffs.

Financial risks: These are rated Moderate. The PBSs will require timely and adequate availability of funds
to efficiently carry out their operations and maintenance activities. The GoB has been following a policy of
progressively increasing tariffs to full cost recovery levels, but during the implementation period, the tariff
levels did not fully cover the amount of taxes payable by the PBSs. This resulted in varying degrees of
financial deficits for the PBSs. The Project provided for technical assistance to BERC to improve the
tariff methodology towards ensuring full cost recovery. Prior to the closing of the Project, a tariff application
that fully covered relevant costs was submitted based on the revised methodology supported by the
Project. The policy of ensuring adequacy of tariffs will need to be continued in future. Changing economic
and social environments, and the ensuing social impacts, could influence the GoB's policies in regard to tariff
setting in future.

Institutional capacity risks: These are rated Moderate. The institutional capacity of BREB, PGCB and
BERC have been strengthened under the Project, but sustainability of these gains will require continued
commitment from their respective managements along with strong support from the government. Lacking
these, the gains could be progressively eroded.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  (Reference ICR paras. 59 to 61 and 85).

  The strategic relevance and the PDOs were well aligned, and continued to be well aligned, with the
  priorities in the national programs and in the WBG Country Assistance Strategy/Country Partnership
  Framework. The project design was built on a generally sound theory of change and the Results
  Framework was adequate for the purposes of monitoring and evaluating implementation progress. The

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



  Project benefited, to some extent, from the earlier Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy
  Development (RERED) Project Phase I, and the then ongoing RERED Project Phase 2. This enabled a
  relatively quick preparation of the Project in a period of about eight months from Project Concept to Board
  Approval. Technical, financial and economic aspects were generally well covered. Since the GoB was
  already supporting expansion of low-voltage networks and connections, the Project design focused on
  improving the efficiency of the network to facilitate more electricity being supplied from the existing power
  generation capacity while also strengthening the medium voltage distribution system to enable delivery of
  additional electricity as new generation capacity came online. Environmental and social aspects were
  adequately covered through preparation of the relevant Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) and site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs). Attention
  to policy and institutional aspects included the preparation by the GoB of a Governance and
  Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) and technical assistance to BERC for improving tariff-setting
  methodology. Regarding procurement, drawing on experience from earlier projects, including RERED,
  particular attention was given to setting up the procurement processes, including bid evaluation and
  award. Implementation arrangements were generally well covered with appropriately staffed Project
  Management Units (PMUs) being set up in BREB and PGCB and relevant technical assistance being
  provided to them. The risk assessments and mitigation measures proposed were generally adequate.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During project implementation, the Bank supervision team remained focused on development, and was
 generally proactive in identifying emerging or anticipated issues and seeking solutions with the
 counterparts. The Project was relatively procurement-intensive, involving large-value supply and
 installation contracts, goods contracts, and several small-value goods and service contracts. This required
 intensive effort on the part of the team to engage with the clients to understand emerging procurement-
 related issues and seek adjustments while ensuring that the procurement processes remained consistent
 with the Bank guidelines. Safeguards and fiduciary compliance issues were well monitored
 throughout implementation.

 During the implementation period of 7.5 years, the Bank supervision team carried out a total of 15
 supervision missions. The missions were adequately supported by specialists as required, including
 safeguards and fiduciary specialists who generally remained with the Project through the implementation
 period. Special attention was given to procurement aspects given the large assortment of large-value and
 small-value procurement packages. Technical specialists and consultants provided assistance and
 support to the PMUs as needed. Implementation progress, issues, guidance, and detailed action plans
 agreed with the counterparts were recorded in Aide-Memoires and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs)
 which were regularly filed in a timely manner. The Back-to-Office reporting was generally candid and
 highlighted issues for the information of the management e.g. the PDO and IP (Implementation Progress)
 ratings were kept at 'Moderately Satisfactory' from time to time to reflect delays in procurement and
 disbursement when they occurred.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



 Overall, the Bank's supervision performance contributed significantly to the Project's implementation
 efficiency which is rated Substantial (in Section 5 above).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was based on a generally sound theory of change. The Results Framework was
 adequately designed with PDOs well aligned with national and WBG CAS/CPF priorities. The PDO
 indicators and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were relevant, measurable, and generally adequate
 for attribution of results to the Project's interventions. Baselines and targets were well specified. The data
 collection and processing arrangements were adequate with the main responsibility assigned to BREB and
 PGCB and their PMUs. Recognizing the importance of governance and accountability aspects in the
 Project context, the design provided for preparation of a Governance and Accountability Action Plan
 (GAAP) that was agreed with the GoB. Two areas where PDOs could have been considered
 were (i) enhancement of transmission capacity and (ii)institutional strengthening of BREB and PGCB. (ICR
 para. 67). However, these were covered through relevant IRIs and the information was adequate to assess
 the outcomes. The ICR reports (para. 68) that design and monitoring of the PDO indicator on beneficiaries
 could have been improved. The design of this indicator was based on one-time estimates and may have
 understated the number of beneficiaries (ICR para. 68).



b. M&E Implementation
  The PMUs in BREB and PGCB were responsible for collecting and processing relevant data, including
  from the Project-supported PBSs. Data collection, monitoring and evaluation were reported to have been
  generally regular. The quality and timeliness of required M&E reporting was satisfactory (ICR para. 70).
  The status in regard to implementation of the GAAP was regularly followed up. The ICR does not report
  any significant issues with the M&E system during implementation. In addition to the regular M&E reports,
  an Impact Evaluation Study was carried out in 2021 based on feedback from Project beneficiaries (ICR
  paras. 55 and 56). (Further details in Section 10). The shortcoming in regard to the PDO indicator related
  to the number of beneficiaries (mentioned above) was not addressed during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used to report on project progress, including both positive as well as negative
  aspects. The system helped identify emerging issues in regard to procurement activities which enabled
  timely remedial actions to be taken. Results were communicated to the GoB and Project agencies

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



  involved and used for periodic reporting of the Project's progress in the Implementation Status Reports
  (ISRs).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   (Reference ICR paras. 74 to 79).

   At appraisal, the Project was designated a Category B project. The Project triggered the following
   safeguards: Environmental Assessment (EA) - OP 4.01); Involuntary Resettlement (IR) OP 4.12; and
   Indigenous Peoples (IP) OP 4.10.

   Environmental: To mitigate potential environmental impacts, the Project developed the following
   instruments: (i) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) jointly prepared by BREB and
   PGCB; (ii) site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs); and (iii) Environmental and
   Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESIAs were prepared and updated in a timely manner by the
   concerned entities during implementation. The ICR reports (para. 75) that most of the adverse impacts were
   limited to the local environment and issues were addressed through the implementation of the ESMP. The
   overall compliance status of the ESMP at various subproject sites under BREB and PGCB was satisfactory
   throughout the implementation period. Both BREB and PGCB obtained the required certificates of
   environmental clearance from the Department of Environment and shared it with the Bank. (ICR para. 75).

   Social: Based on screening outcomes and census surveys, BREB and PGCB prepared Resettlement
   Action Plans (RAPs); BREB prepared one RAP and PGCB five RAPs. These were cleared by the Bank and
   disclosed to relevant stakeholders. The ICR reports (para. 76) that implementation of the BREB RAP was
   satisfactory with 348 entitled persons (EPs) (out of a total of 349) being fully compensated; the remaining
   EP was partially compensated with full compensation expected after submission of required documents.
   Under the PGCB RAPs, 167 landowners (out of a total of 192) were fully compensated. Compensation for
   the remaining 25 landowners was delayed due to legal disputes and identification issues. The funds
   involved have been kept in an escrow account. (ICR para. 77). A segment of a 1.5 km 132 kV transmission
   line remained incomplete at project closing due to disputes regarding siting of the towers. PGCB has agreed
   to build the towers with its own funds after the disputes are resolved. (ICR para. 77).

   Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM): The ICR reports (para. 78) that community consultations and
   GRM procedures were put in place with BREB and PGCB and were functioning. During implementation,
   PGCB received seven grievances, all related to tower location. Five were resolved. The remaining two,
   raised by the Bangladesh Inland Water Authority (BIWA), are being addressed through consultations
   between PGCB and BIWA. (ICR para. 79).




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (Reference ICR paras. 80 to 84).

  Procurement: The Project was procurement-intensive with more than 90 percent of the project cost
  resulting from procurement contracts. All major procurement activities were completed without any major
  issues. Substantial cost savings were realized which can, at least partly, be attributed to efficient
  procurement activities and project implementation. (ICR para. 80). The ICR does not report any case of
  mis-procurement or other non-compliance in regard to procurement guidelines. The rating for Procurement
  in the last ISR filed prior to project closing was Moderately Satisfactory.

  Financial Management: At appraisal, the financial management risk was rated substantial based on
  assessment of the financial management capacity in BREB and PGCB. To address this, technical
  assistance was provided under the Project to both agencies. With regard to BREB, the ICR reports (para.
  82) that BREB submitted the required FM reports (unaudited or audited) generally in at timely manner.
  BREB also completed a strategy for implementing an Integrated Financial Management Information
  System (IFMIS) including BREB and the PBSs. (ICR para. 82). The ICR does not report any instance of
  non-eligible expenditures in the case of BREB. Regarding PGCB, the ICR does not provide information
  concerning PGCB's compliance with agreed FM requirements. The rating for Financial Management in the
  last ISR filed prior to project closing was Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Fire Incident at the Keraniganj 230/132/33 kV GIS Substation: A fire broke out at the nearly completed
  substation in February 2019. St the time, the substation was not commercially energized and had not been
  handed over by the contractor to PGCB. No injuries to personnel were reported. However, the incident
  caused delay in the completion of the Project which was exacerbated by the impacts of the COVID
  pandemic. The reconstruction of the substation was carried out by the contractor at its own cost and
  insurance coverage. The substation has been put into operation. (ICR para. 65).



d. Other
  (Reference ICR paras. 48 to 56).

  Gender: The Project was not gender-tagged. However, during project preparation and implementation,
  beneficiary consultations carried out by BREB and PGCB included both male and female beneficiaries. At
  appraisal, a Gender Responsive Social assessment Study was carried out to assess the impact of the
  Project on women, both as customers as well as employees of BREB and PGCB). This resulted in several
  recommendations made to improve the participation of women in the work forces at BREB and PGCB. The
  number of women employees in BREB and Project PBSs increased from 1,814 in 2013 to 3,390 in 2021
  due to several initiatives taken to attract female participation in the work force. Building on the Bank's

                                                                                               Page 15 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



engagement in 2020, BREB also became a partner to the WePOWER initiative which is a voluntary
women's professional network in the Energy and Power Sector in South Asia. BREB is implementing some
gender activities related to this initiative. (ICR para. 49).

Institutional Strengthening: Although not defined as a specific project development objective, institutional
strengthening in BREB, PGCB and the PBSs was a significant component under the Project.

BREB: Fourteen activities were commissioned out of which eleven were completed and the remaining three
almost completed (BREB will complete these using its own funds). (ICR paras. 32, 50 and 51).

        Development of a Master Plan for the rural electrification program.
        Development of a Geographic Information System (GIS) framework for use in BREB and the PBSs.
        Environmental and Social Management support and training.
        Support for implementation of an Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) for
         BREB and the PBSs.
        Improvement of system reliability and performance through enhanced data acquisition, improved
         control schemes, and protection of distribution networks.
        Establishment of specifications for materials, equipment, construction standards, and planning
         criteria for BREB's power system development program.
        Support for development of a tariff calculation methodology and model for BREB and PBSs.
        Training and capacity building for more than 200 BREB/PBS staff.
        Review of course curricula and preparation of training manuals.
        Support for review and update of BREB and PBS Policy Instruction manuals.
        Forensic audit of selected contracts.
        Translation into English of BREB 2013 Act and Rules.
         Evaluation of the Socio-Economic Impact of the Project.
        Supporting the PMU with a Financial Management Specialist.

PGCB:

      Training programs to strengthen capacity for project/contract management; procurement
       management; financial management; and grid modernization and maintenance.
      More than 600 PGCB staff trained on various aspects through local and international trainers.
      Study tours on selected aspects.

Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The Project was carried out by the state-owned BREB and PGCB
and did not involve private sector financing. The ICR reports (para. 53) that the GoB has indicated an
intention to build a part of the transmission network with private investment and has identified several grid
lines for implementation on a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) basis. A Draft Private Sector Transmission
Policy has been prepared but has not yet been approved. (ICR para. 52).

Poverty Reduction and Prosperity Sharing: The Project made more electricity available to the Project-
supported PBSs and their customers which include also the more vulnerable and lower-income groups. An
Impact Evaluation Study carried out under the Project confirmed that the beneficiaries in the targeted




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



   Project-supported rural areas reported a range of positive outcomes from the improved electricity services
   enabled by the Project. (ICR para. 54).



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 89 to 94).

The ICR lists a number of lessons drawn from the Project experience which have relevance for
similar projects carried out in comparable environments. From these, IEG derives the following
lessons:

Investment in infrastructure coupled with policy and regulatory reforms can allow efficient
utilization of assets and sustainability of project outcomes: Under the GoB's objectives at the
time, expansion of power generation and low-voltage networks were to be addressed through other
investments that would complement the IDA-financed RTDP. The Project's design therefore focused
on addressing weaknesses in the medium-voltage and transmission networks that were constraining
additional supply of electricity to the distribution network in the Project-supported rural areas. While
the planned investments were successfully carried out, sustainability of the gains require that
appropriate operations are carried out to address issues such as inefficient dispatch and lack of
wholesale markets that constrain the efficiency of the overall system. Optimization of dispatch
operation is being addressed under the successor World Bank financed Power System Reliability
and Efficiency Improvement Project (P159807) approved in 2017.

To ensure accurate measurement of the Project outcomes and benefits, it is important to
design a comprehensive and quantifiable Results Framework that is adaptable to changing
conditions: In the case of the Project, the effects of complementary expansions in power
generation and improving electricity grid coverage were not adequately captured in the Results
Framework. This resulted in an understatement of the benefits realized under the Project.

Early possession of land is critical for projects focusing on infrastructure creation: Land
acquisition processes can be cumbersome and protracted. Learning from experience under earlier
projects, to expedite acquisition of land, BREB decided very early in the Project to purchase land on
a willing buyer - willing seller basis rather than follow the cumbersome processes of land acquisition.
BREB was successful in this and the early handover of land to the contractors was an important

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)



factor in timely completion of infrastructure facilities, particularly the transmission grid enhancements
for which changes to route alignment are more difficult to make than for expansion of electricity
distribution systems.

Institutionalizing of the environment and social safeguards management in project
implementing agencies helps in adequate and timely resolution of safeguard challenges
during project implementation: The Project design supported establishment and capacity building
of Environmental and Social Units in BREB and PGCB to mainstream environmental and social
considerations in all BREB and PGCB operations. This contributed to the proactiveness of the
implementing agencies and the Bank task team in timely monitoring of environmental and social
issues, their mitigation, and achievement of overall compliance with environment and social issues.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and generally follows the OPCS's ICR Guidelines (except in regard to length -
24 pages compared to the recommended 15 pages or less). It provides an adequate theory of change in regard
to the causal links and full results chain, and the reporting is outcome focused. The analysis is generally
evidence based but constrained to some extent by some relatively minor weaknesses in the Project's M&E
system. The ICR provides lessons learned from the Project's experience that have broader relevance for similar
projects executed in comparable environments. Given the nature of the project interventions, which included
significant investments in medium- and high- voltage transmission lines, further elaboration regarding the
safeguards issues encountered, and their resolution, would have been useful.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BD: Rural Electricity T and Distribution (P129920)




                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
