      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0022830

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                  Operation Name
 P156858                                       PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL

 Country                                       Practice Area (Lead)
 Peru                                          Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-85830                                  18-Feb-2019                                          1,250,000,000.00

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  11-Feb-2016                                 30-Sep-2020

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                          1,250,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Revised Commitment                           1,250,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Actual                                       1,250,000,000.00                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Antonio M. Ollero             Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller                IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective of Peru Boosting Human Capital and Productivity Development Policy
Financing With a Deferred Drawdown Option (DPF-DDO) was "to support Peru's efforts to boost human
capital and productivity by: (i) enhancing the education policy framework to enable better quality of skills, (ii)
facilitating the entry, operation, and exit of firms; and (iii) reducing transaction costs in trade."


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



For purposes of this ICR Review, IEG parses the objectives into:

Objective 1 - To boost human capital and productivity by enhancing the education policy framework to enable
a better quality of skills;
Objective 2 - To boost human capital and productivity by facilitating the entry, operation, and exit of firms; and
Objective 3 - To boost human capital and productivity by reducing transaction costs in trade.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The DPF-DDO had three pillars.

Pillar 1 - Enhancing the Education Policy Framework to Enable Better Quality of Skills supported: (a)
the adoption of a new recruitment and promotion system for teachers and principals under the merit-based
Teaching Career System; (b) the introduction of an extended school-day model for secondary schools; (c) the
provision of performance-based financial incentives for sub-national school administrators; (d) the
establishment of the General Directorate for School Infrastructure; and (e) the creation of the National
Superintendence of University Education (SUNEDU) and the General Directorate of University Education
(DIGESU).

Pillar 2 - Facilitating Entry, Operation, and Exit of Firms supported: (a) the introduction of business online
registration by the National Superintendence of Public Registry (SUNARP); (b) the provision of financial
incentives for large municipalities covering operating licenses for businesses; (c) the introduction of a risk-
based classification system for technical safety inspections; (d) the adoption of measures empowering the
National Competition and Consumer Protection Agency (INDECOPI) to sanction non-compliance with the
national legal framework for business regulation; (e) the simplification of the withholding regime for value-
added tax (VAT) payments; (f) the introduction of electronic auctions for asset foreclosures; (g) the creation of
a registry for judicial delinquent debtors; and (h) the modification of the general law on insolvency.

Pillar 3 - Reducing Transactions Costs in Trade supported: (a) the modernization of the Customs Law to
incorporate critical elements of the revised Kyoto Convention on the Simplification and Harmonization of
Customs Procedures and the Bali World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement; (b) the
elimination of all stamp duties for customs declaration to reduce trade transaction costs; and (c) the
establishment of the National System for Quality and the National Quality Institute (INACAL) to enhance the
system of metrology (scientific measurement), standardization, and accreditation of export products in support
of enhanced export competitiveness.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The DPF-DDO was estimated to cost US$1.25 billion at appraisal and was
financed with an IBRD development policy loan of the same amount to the Republic of Peru. The loan was fully
disbursed.

Dates. The Bank approved this stand-alone DPF-DDO on February 11, 2016, it became effective on April 28,
2016, and it closed on September 30, 2020, nineteen months after the original closing date of February 18, 2019.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Binding Constraints. This program aimed to help the government address "key bottlenecks" in three of six
 "priority areas for action" (micro-structural reforms) identified in the Systematic Country Diagnostic of February
 2017 – raising human capital, reducing factor and product market rigidities, and improving government
 capacity, coordination, and law enforcement.

       The "low quality of services in education" was a critical bottleneck to raising human capital: (a) despite
        some progress, Peru still lagged other countries in student performance in Reading, Mathematics, and
        Science, according to the 2012 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) of the
        Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and there were
        significant disparities in performance among socio-demographic groups and across geographic
        regions; (b) the lack of qualified teachers posed a significant obstacle to improving the quality of
        education; (c) school infrastructure was particularly inadequate in rural areas; (d) although it rose lately,
        spending on education remained low by international standards.
       "Regulatory barriers to competition that hampered productivity and formalization" were
        critical bottlenecks to reducing factor and product market rigidities: (a) bureaucratic barriers to operate
        and compete, especially those posed by licenses and permits, was considered by formal firms as one
        of the top five constraints to growth, according to most enterprise surveys; (b) meanwhile, regulatory
        constraints accounted for half of the difference in labor informality between Peru and Chile (Loayza.
        2016. “La productividad como clave del crecimiento y el desarrollo en el Perú y el mundo,” Banco
        Central de Reserva, Revista Estudios Económicos 31); (c) regulatory barriers to competition were
        significant – Peru ranked poorly among Latin America and Caribbean countries in terms of the costs to
        start and close a business; (d) many of the laws, rules, and procedures which hindered entry and
        competition and raised firms’ operating costs occurred at the subnational level – investment projects
        worth around US$670 million were stalled by one-to-three years because of regulatory restrictions and
        arbitrary actions by local authorities (Goodwin, Licetti, and Villaran. 2015. “Peru-Tackling Regulatory
        Barriers to Competition and Local Economy Development”. World Bank).
       The "low level of government coordination and red tape" was a key bottleneck to improving
        government capacity: (a) inefficiencies in government service delivery reflected a lack of coordination
        among, and within, institutions; and (b) the policy coordination failures surfaced in business
        environment and science, technology, and innovation. Moreover, both the "regulatory barriers to
        competition" and the "low level of government coordination" impinged on the country's export
        performance: (a) commodity exports, predominantly of hydrocarbons, minerals, and metals, continued
        to account for 70 percent of total exports well into 2014-15, and total exports, for 25 percent of GDP;
        (b) non-mining firms traded very little, with most firms not integrated or poorly integrated into global
        value chains; (c) the economy lost revealed comparative advantage (RCA) in three, but gained RCA
        in only one, medium-technology sector in 2000-2010; (d) in contrast, a special economic regime for
        agribusiness had helped drive an eleven-fold increase in agribusiness exports since 2000, offering a
        model for business-friendly policies that could help expand non-traditional exports.

 Country Priorities. The program objective was consistent with the development priorities of the government.

       The National Education Project to 2021 (NEP) envisioned a renewed educational system that would
        help build a modern, democratic, and efficient state. Therefore, the program objective to enhance the

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



       education policy framework was consistent with the strategic objectives of the NEP, including equal
       educational opportunities for all citizens, relevant and quality learning delivered by educational
       institutions, well-qualified professional teachers, and higher quality education for national development.
      The National Competitiveness Agenda 2014-2018 (NCA) aimed to increase competitiveness and foster
       formal employment. The program objective to enhance the education policy framework was consistent
       with the second of nine NCA strategic objectives, "to strengthen human capital," in particular
       by improving the quality of education, improving teachers' performance through better incentive
       mechanisms, implementing the New University Law, and increasing investment in school infrastructure,
       especially in remote areas. The project objective to facilitate the entry, operation, and exit of firms was
       consistent with the sixth NCA objective, "to develop conditions for a productive business environment,"
       in particular by eliminating existing barriers to entrepreneurship, reducing the complexity of the
       regulatory procedure, and eliminating the administrative burden on start-ups. Finally, the project
       objective to reduce transaction costs in trade was aligned with the seventh NCA objective, "to facilitate
       conditions for foreign trade in goods and services."

Bank Group Strategy. The program objective was aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Peru at appraisal
and closing.

      The Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Peru for the Period FY12-FY16 (CPS) committed
       Bank Group support to the country's development strategy organized around four "strategic
       objectives" – increased access and quality of social services for the poor, connecting the poor to
       services and markets, sustainable growth and productivity, and improved public sector performance for
       greater inclusion. The program objective on education policy was aligned with the first CPS strategic
       objective, in particular with two "results areas" – "a national strategy for a more efficient and results-
       oriented education system" and "an education model adjusted to most disadvantage context," as well
       as with the third CPS strategic objective, in particular with three results areas – "increased number of
       higher education programs and institutions with accreditation," "policy and regulation framework for
       safe public health and education infrastructure," and "investment projects pipeline generated for
       reinforcement of public education and health infrastructure in metropolitan Peru." In addition, the
       program objectives to facilitate the entry, operation, and exit of firms and reduce transaction costs in
       trade were aligned with the fourth CPS strategic objective, particularly with the results area
       "administrative bottlenecks removed to speed up private investment development."
      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Peru for the Period FY17-FY21 (CPF)
       committed Bank Group support to the government's development strategy organized around three
       "pillars" – productivity for growth, services for citizens across the territory, and natural resource and
       climate change risk management. The program objectives to facilitate the entry, operation, and exit of
       firms and reduce transaction costs in trade were aligned with the first CPF pillar, in particular with the
       objective "to ease barriers to formalization."




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



Objective 1 - Boost Human Capital and Productivity by Enhancing the Education Policy
Framework to Enable a Better Quality of Skills
PA1 - The Borrower, through MINEDU, has increased the teaching quality of education in economically
disadvantaged areas by introducing a balanced and equitable system for recruiting and promoting
qualified teachers and principals within the merit-based Teaching Career System, as evidenced by
Resolution of the General Secretariat No. 813-2014-MINEDU of June 16, 2014, and Vice-Ministerial
Resolution No. 021-2015-MINEDU of May 15, 2015.
PA2 - The Borrower, through MINEDU, has improved the school graduates' learning outcomes by: (i)
introducing an extended school-day model for secondary education that strengthens the teaching of
Mathematics, Science, English language, and soft skills; and (ii) creating performance-based financial
incentives for subnational government institutions that manage schools to improve the learning
environment in schools, as evidenced by Ministerial Resolution No. 451-2014-MINEDU of September 30,
2014, and Ministerial Resolution No. 591-2014-MINEDU of December 30, 2014.
PA3 - The Borrower, through MINEDU, has created the General Directorate for School Infrastructure
within MINEDU, to foster the participation of the private sector in school infrastructure upgrading, and to
separate the functions of policy formulation and planning from construction, as evidenced by Supreme
Decree No. 001-2015-MINEDU published in the Official Gazette on January 31, 2015.
PA4 - The Borrower, through MINEDU, has improved the framework of university education by creating
the National Superintendence of University Education (Superintendencia Nacional de Educacion
Universitaria - SUNEDU) and the General Directorate of University Education (Direccion General de
Educacion Superior Universitaria - DIGESU) within MINEDU, to guarantee that university programs and
institutions meet quality standards and to lead the implementation of the university reform, as evidenced
by Law No. 30220 published in the Official Gazette on July 9, 2014; Supreme Decree No. 012-2014-
MINEDU published in the Official Gazette on December 31, 2014; and Decree No. 001-2015-MINEDU
published in the Official Gazette on January 31, 2015.
Objective 2 - Boost Human Capital and Productivity by Facilitating Entry, Operation, and Exit of
Firms
PA5 - The Borrower has adopted policies for the facilitation of business entry of firms by: (i) integrating
online registration procedures into the system of public registries under the management of SUNARP; (ii)
creating financial incentives for large municipalities to deliver operating licenses faster than required by
Law No. 28,976 of February 4, 2007; and (iii) introducing a more effective risk-based classification system
for technical safety inspections for new firms, as evidenced by the issuance of Supreme Decree No. 007-
2014-JUS published in the Official Gazette on September 13, 2014, Supreme Decree No. 015-2014-EF of
January 16, 2014, and Legislative Decree No. 1200 published in the Official Gazette on September 23,
2015.
PA6 - The Borrower has taken measures to limit the discretion of all government bodies to impose
regulations and administrative procedures outside the national legal framework, by strengthening
INDECOPI's power to sanction non-compliance with the national legal framework, as evidenced by the
enacting of Law No. 30230 published in the Official
Gazette on July 12, 2014, modifying Law 27444 of April 10, 2001 (Ley de Procedimiento Administrativo
General), and Legislative Decree No. 1212 published in the Official Gazette on September 24, 2015.
PA7 - The Borrower has taken measures to simplify the withholding regime for VAT payments to reduce
operating costs for firms, as evidenced by the enactment of Law 30230 published in the Official Gazette
on July 12, 2014, modifying Law 29173 of December 23, 2007.
PA8 - The Borrower has adopted policies to facilitate the exit of firms by: (i) introducing electronic
auctions for asset foreclosures to reduce costs and risks of insolvency; (ii) creating the registry for judicial
delinquent debtors, simplifying the legal framework for insolvency; and (iii) modifying the general law of

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



the insolvency system in terms of quality and registry of administrators and liquidators, simplification of
administrative procedures under the responsibility of INDECOPI, and the system of offenses
and penalties, as evidenced by the enactment of Law No. 30229 of July 12, 2014, Law 30201 published
in the Official Gazette on May 28, 2014 and Legislative Decree No. 1189 published in the Official Gazette
on August 21, 2015.
Objective 3 - Boost Human Capital and Productivity by Reducing Transactions Costs in Trade
PA9 - The Borrower has improved the customs regime through: (i) the modernization of the Borrower's
Custom Law enacted by Legislative Decree No. 1053 published in the Borrower's Official Gazette on
June 27, 2008 by introducing key elements of the revised Kyoto Convention on the Simplification and
Harmonization of Customs Procedures of February 3, 2006 and the Bali WTO Trade Facilitation
Agreement of November 27, 2014, particularly improving the authorized economic operators' regime, and
adopting a more targeted system of fines; and (ii) the elimination of all stamp duties for
Customs Declaration reducing transaction costs and in alignment with the Bali WTO Trade Facilitation
Agreement, as evidenced by the enactment of Legislative Decree No. 1235 published in the Official
Gazette on September 26, 2015 and Law 30230 published in the Official Gazette on July 12, 2014.
PA10 - The Borrower has established the National System for Quality and INACAL to enhance the
system of accreditation, standardization and metrology, supporting export competitiveness and access to
markets, as evidenced by the enactment of Law No. 30224 published in the Official Gazette on July 11,
2014.


Objective 1 - Enhance the Education Policy Framework to Enable a Better Quality of Skills

      PA1. The quality of the teaching staff, vital to the quality of education, was poor. Law 2994 (Teacher
       Reform Law) of 2012 adopted a merit-based system for the hiring and promotion of tenured teachers
       but lacked incentives to attract teachers and principals to poorer areas outside of Lima and Callao. In
       addition, 70-90 percent of teachers in rural areas were employed as contract teachers and not covered
       by the Teaching Career System. This prior action introduced an algorithm-based system setting the
       location for promotion slots and new tenure positions, and open them up to competition. In addition,
       underserved regions would be allocated a quota for entry-level and mid-level positions. These incentives
       would encourage qualified teachers to compete for higher level posts outside of Lima and Callao.
       However, it might still be that additional economic incentives, like pay differentials and hardship
       allowances would be needed to attract the best qualified teachers. Therefore, the relevance of PA1 is
       rated moderately satisfactory.
      PA2. Learning outcomes were inferior: (a) despite higher net enrollment rates in secondary schools (78
       percent in 2009 from 69 percent in 2000), the quality of education remained deficient across the board,
       according to the 2012 PISA; (b) only 33 percent of students in secondary schools (versus 83 percent in
       the OECD) reached the basic PISA level ("Level 2") of proficiency for Reading Comprehension; (c) only
       25 percent of 15-year-olds (versus 77 percent in the OECD) reached the basic level ("Level 2") of
       proficiency in Mathematics. This prior action would improve learning outcomes: (a) the extended
       school-day reform would add 10 hours to the weekly school schedule focused on strengthening
       instruction in English, Mathematics, and Science; (b) the link between extended school-day reform and
       learning outcomes was provided by a study which found that increasing the number of teaching hours in
       public high schools raised Mathematics and Reading scores on standardized tests by the end of the first
       year (Aguero and Favara. 2021. “Do More School Resources Increase Learning Outcomes? Evidence
       from an Extended-Day School Reform”); and (c) the performance-based incentives for the subnational
       agencies would provide financial rewards for the Regional Education Directorate (DRE) and the Local


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



       Education Management Unit (UGEL) to include learning outcomes in their institutional
       objectives. Therefore, the relevance of PA2 is rated satisfactory.
      PA3. Education infrastructure was deficient: (a) 75 percent of school buildings lacked ownership titles,
       34 percent lacked access to water or sanitation, and 69 percent would not survive a high-magnitude
       earthquake; (b) the infrastructure was poorer in rural areas, where 900,000 students did not have
       access to basic facilities; (c) the institutional responsibilities for infrastructure overlapped among three
       levels of government and the private sector did not participate in infrastructure investment. This prior
       action would reform institutional responsibilities to meet infrastructure deficiencies: (a) a new General
       Directorate for School Infrastructure (DIGEIE) would be responsible for infrastructure planning; (b) the
       DIGEIE would facilitate private sector participation in infrastructure construction and
       maintenance. However, while it created a new body with a focused mandate, this prior action did not
       offer a more concrete program for mobilizing private investment in education infrastructure. The reform
       of the legal and institutional framework for public-private partnerships (PPPs) had not been completed at
       the time of this operation, rendering PPP vehicles inaccessible for private investment in education
       infrastructure. Therefore, the relevance of PA3 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
      PA4. The quality of higher education was low: (a) the country only had a few institutions of
       comparatively high quality; (b) on average, the quality of higher education was low and marked by wide
       variations across programs and institutions; (c) weak institutional capacity, low qualification of
       professors (only 40 percent had post-graduate degrees), and outdated academic programs marred
       higher education. This prior action would institute a quality assurance system for higher education: (a)
       Law 30220 (New University Law) would enable the government to regulate the education sector better,
       accelerate the quality assurance process, and clarify the responsibility of the MINEDU in higher
       education; (b) the SUNEDU would license and issue operation permits to universities based on the
       latter’s degree of compliance with binding quality standards in eight areas (Las Condiciones Basicas de
       Calidad [https://www.sunedu.gob.pe/8-condiciones-basicas-de-calidad/]) – academic objectives and
       study plans for degrees and academic titles issued, educational offerings compatible with the academic
       objectives, infrastructure and facilities, academic research programs, qualified teaching staff,
       complementary educational services, job placement programs, and transparency mechanisms; and (c)
       the DIGESU would ensure the efficient supervision of higher education. Therefore, the relevance of
       PA4 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - Facilitate Entry, Operation, and Exit of Firms

      PA5. Administrative processes posed barriers to business entry: (a) 20 percent of firms in Peru
       (versus 5 percent in the OECD) cited business licenses and permits as a significant constraint to
       business; (b) the time required to start a business was 26 days in 2014 (versus median 14 days among
       176 countries); (c) the time spent to obtain a license from the municipality was 15 days (technical
       inspections consumed part of that time). This prior action would streamline processes to facilitate
       business entry: (a) online registrations (proved to be effective in promoting entry into the formal sector,
       according to the Bank’s World Development Report 2016 - Digital Dividends) would be shifted from the
       Prime Minister's Office to the SUNARP – the SUNARP would be more efficient than the Prime Minister’s
       Office at managing online business registrations because it maintained an extensive back-office of
       notaries, had direct communication lines to the tax and customs administration, and operated an
       integrated technology system using electronic signatures; (b) large municipalities would be offered
       incentives to issue operating licenses within 10 days; and (c) safety inspections would be shifted to a
       risk-based system that focused on firms whose plant, structures, and machinery posed significant safety
       hazards. Therefore, the relevance of PA5 is rated satisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



     PA6. Regulations hindered business operations: (a) complaints against bureaucratic barriers rose
      sharply in 2014; (b) however, the authority of the INDECOPI to reduce regulatory barriers and promote
      competition was constrained by inadequacies in the legal framework; (c) moreover, 75 percent of the
      complaints against bureaucratic barriers in 2013 were related to the actions of local governments, with
      municipalities controlling essential aspects of the regulatory environment and imposing most of the
      barriers for the operations of local businesses. This prior action would improve the legal framework for
      business regulation: (a) the INDECOPI's power to sanction non-compliance with national laws would be
      strengthened – the INDECOPI would now have the authority to sanction rules, procedures, and fees at
      any level of government; (b) at the national level, the discretion of agencies to impose regulations
      outside of the national legal framework would be restricted, with regulatory bodies issued mandates to
      align their processes with best practice – public officials who imposed regulatory barriers declared illegal
      would be sanctioned; and (c) at the sub-national level, the discretion of local governments to
      discriminate among firms in the application of business rules and regulations would be
      curtailed. Accordingly, the relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.
     PA7. The withholding system for VAT payments was inefficient: (a) the perception regime required a
      seller to collect a portion of the VAT ultimately due from the buyer, but before the delivery of a good to
      the buyer; (b) the withholding regime required the buyer (usually a large firm) to retain a portion of the
      VAT that would have otherwise been left with the seller (usually a small firm) and forward the amount
      directly to the National Customs and Tax Administration Superintendence (SUNAT); (c) the detraction
      regime required a buyer to deposit a portion of the VAT in an account of the seller with the National
      Bank. This prior action would simplify the VAT withholding regime and shift more goods toward the
      regular VAT payment channels: (a) the number of goods subject to the perception regime would be
      reduced from 41 to 12; (b) for the detraction regime, from 39 to 26; and (c) detraction rates would be
      reduced for the 26 goods remaining in the detraction regime. However, the impact of these reforms
      on VAT revenues does not appear to have been firmly settled at appraisal. According to the Central
      Reserve Bank of Peru, as cited in the Program Document (page 21), "[the] reforms could potentially
      reduce VAT revenues by up to 800 million [Peruvian] Soles (about US$250 million)." However, Program
      Document (page 21) contended that the reforms would not reduce VAT revenues if the dues and
      payments were properly audited, i.e., "if [the] tax authorities used the historical transaction information
      stored in the accounts at the National Bank or SUNAT effectively for tax auditing." Therefore, the
      relevance of PA7 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     PA8. Administrative processes posed hurdles to business exit: (a) the bankruptcy regime delayed the
      winding down of the least productive firms; (b) it raised the cost of insolvency; and (c) reduced the value
      of asset recovery – only 28.5 percent of asset values were recovered on average in Peru in 2014
      (versus 36 percent in Latin America and 72 percent in the OECD). This prior action would facilitate
      winding down businesses: (a) Law 30229 (Law Adjusting the Use of Information and Communications
      Technologies in the Judicial Auction System) would modify the general law on insolvency, facilitate the
      exit process, and increase the recovery rate of insolvent firms’ assets; (b) Law 30201 (Law Establishing
      the Registration of Delinquent Debtors) would create the Registry for Judicial Delinquent Debtors,
      which would be public, free of charge, and managed by the judiciary; and (c) Legislative Decree 1189
      (Modifying Law 27809, General Law of the Bankruptcy System) would adopt more stringent criteria for
      liquidators and administrators, separate business from non-business disputes, and set penalties for non-
      compliance with reporting requirements. Therefore, the relevance of PA8 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 3 - Reduce Transactions Costs in Trade

     PA9. Customs services were deficient: (a) Peru launched the Authorized Economic Operators (AEO)
      regime in 2013 – the framework promoted by the World Customs Organization to secure and facilitate

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



        global trade – but only 21 firms had been certified as AEOs (qualified to obtain advanced customs
        clearance) by 2015, servicing just 2 percent of the country's exports; (b) the system of fines and
        penalties imposed by the customs office did not distinguish between fraud and administrative errors; and
        (c) stamp duties on documents imposed an additional administrative burden on firms. This prior action
        would reduce the administrative burden and transactions costs in trade: (a) Legislative Decree 1235
        (Amending the General Customs Law) would now include critical elements of the 2006 Kyoto
        Convention on the Simplification and Harmonization of Customs Procedures and the 2014 Bali WTO
        Trade Facilitation Agreement; (b) the amended Customs Law would improve the AEO regime,
        simplify accreditation, and adopt a targeted system of fines; and (c) Law 30230 (Law Establishing Tax
        Measures, Simplification of Procedures and Permits for the Promotion and Revitalization of Investment)
        would scrap all stamp duties for customs declarations. Therefore, the relevance of PA9 is rated
        satisfactory.
       PA10. The export accreditation system was lacking: (a) the country lacked an internationally-recognized
        system of technical standards and quality accreditation for international trade; (b) mandates over
        technical standards overlapped between the INDECOPI and line ministries; (b) there was no national
        system for quality accreditation, with few laboratories for product testing. This prior action would
        upgrade the country's system of technical product standards, testing laboratories, and quality
        accreditations to help improve the competitiveness of exporters: (a) the government would adopt the
        National Policy on Quality which would establish a system to enhance the competitiveness, productivity,
        and trade of goods and services; (b) Law 30224 (Law Creating the National System for Quality and the
        National Quality Institute) would unify the disconnected systems for quality accreditation and trade
        facilitation and create the INACAL as the sole agency issuing technical regulations, establishing testing
        laboratories, and certifying quality standards; (c) the adoption of the National Policy on Quality and the
        creation of the INACAL would be included as essential parts of the National Competitiveness Agenda
        2014-2018, the five-year program to diversify the economy, facilitate transport connectivity, and foster
        formal employment. Therefore, the relevance of PA10 is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

 Results        Associated Relevance      Baseline             Actual Value Actual
                                                          Target                        Achievement
 Indicator      Prior      Rating                                           Change in Rating
                Action                                                      Results
                                                                            Indicator
                                                                            Relative to
                                                                            Targeted
                                                                            Change
 Objective 1 - To boost human capital and productivity by enhancing the education policy framework
 to enable a better quality of skills


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



RI1 - Increase PA1        Moderately     60 percent      80 percent    75 percent    75 percent    Substantial
the share of              Satisfactory   (2014)          (2020)        (2019)        of targeted
programmed                                                                           change
merit-based
promotions
and
appointments
for teachers
and school
principals
within the
Teaching
Career outside
Lima and
Callao
RI2 - Increase PA2        Satisfactory   41.5        44.5         45.5               133 percent Substantial
in the                                   percent Sci percent Sci percent Sci         of targeted
proportion of                            ence        ence         ence               change
students that                            33.9        36.9 percent 39.7               Science
attain the                               percent Mat Mathematics percent Mat         193 percent
Level 2 or                               hematics    49.1 percent hematics           of targeted
higher for                               46.1        Reading      45.7 percent       change
Science,                                 percent Rea (2018)       Reading            Mathematics
Mathematics                              ding                     (2018)             -13 percent
and Reading                              (2015)                                      of targeted
                                                                                     change
                                                                                     Reading
RI3 - Increase PA3        Moderately     0 (2014)        US$300        US$ 23.9      8 percent of Negligible
private sector            Satisfactory                   million       million       targeted
investment                                               between       between       change
(commitments                                             2015 and      2014 and
through signed                                           2020          2017 (2020)
contracts for                                            (2020)
works for
taxes and
PPPs) in the
construction
and/or
maintenance
of public
schools
RI4 - Increase PA4        Satisfactory   0 percent       100 percent 95 percent      95 percent    Substantial
in the number                            (2014)          (2020)      (2020)          of targeted
of universities                                                                      change
and university
programs
under review
to be licensed

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



Objective 2 - To boost human capital and productivity by facilitating entry, operation, and exit of
firms
RI5 - Increase PA5       Moderately   0 (2014)    40,000         41,778       104 percent High
in the number            Satisfactory             (2020)         (2019)       of targeted
of new firms                                                                  change
incorporated
online in the
System of
Online
Registration
(Sistema de
Intermediación
Digital - SID)
RI6 - Increase PA6       Satisfactory 91 (2013)   6,000          17,555       296 percent High
in the number                                     (2020)         (2019)       of targeted
of bureaucratic                                                               change
barriers
voluntarily
removed from
the legal
framework by
entities of the
Public
Administration
due to an
action of
INDECOPI
RI7 -           PA7      Satisfactory 0 (2014)    180,000,000 42,000,000 23 percent Negligible
 Reduction in                                     (2020)         (May 2020) of targeted
the average                                                                   change
amount of
monthly
withholdings
(which would
increase
liquidity for
firms) due to
the system
RI8 - Increase PA8       Moderately   0 (2015)    3,500          4,627        132 percent Substantial
the number of            Satisfactory             (2020)         (2019)       of targeted
electronic                                                                    change
auctions for
asset
foreclosures
Objective 3 - To boost human capital and productivity by reducing transactions costs in trade




                                                                                            Page 11 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



RI9 - The time PA9        Moderately     155 hours,      93 hours,    65 hours,   145 percent Substantial
to import                 Unsatisfactory monthly         monthly      monthly     of targeted
(measured as                             average         average      average     change
TTLM - total                             (2014)          (2020)       (June 2020)
time to release
good imports)
(decline of
40% by 2020
compared to
2014)
RI10 -          PA10      Moderately     115             190          228          151 percent Substantial
 Increase in              Unsatisfactory (2014)          (2020)       (March       of targeted
the number of                                                         2020)        change
Conformity
Assessment
Bodies for
products,
processes,
and
management
systems


Objective 1 - Enhance the Education Policy Framework to Enable a Better Quality of Skills

     RI1 – Share of programmed merit-based promotions and appointments for teachers and school
      principals within the Teaching Career System outside of Lima and Callao – was mainly adequate
      to measure the extent to which disparities in the availability of teachers across geographic
      locations would have been remedied as a result of PA1. An increase in the indicator would imply a
      reduction in the locational imbalances in teacher deployment that previously disadvantaged
      peripheral and poorer areas. However, this indicator omits any reference to the sizable number of
      contract teachers in rural areas. The inclusion in the merit-based Teaching Career System would
      have been similarly vital to addressing imbalances in teacher deployment across geographic
      locations. Therefore, the relevance of RI1 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     RI2 – Proportion of students that attain the "Level 2" or higher for Science, Mathematics and
      Reading – was fully adequate to measure how much learning outcomes in secondary schools
      would have improved by adding a total of 10 hours of schooling per week, devoted principally to
      Reading, Mathematics, and Science, and providing performance-based incentives to sub-
      national bodies to improve the learning environment. Accordingly, the relevance of RI2 is rated
      satisfactory.
     RI3 – Private sector investment (commitments through signed contracts for "works for taxes" and
      PPPs) in the construction and/or maintenance of public schools – was mainly adequate to
      measure the extent to which the newly-created General Directorate for School Infrastructure would
      have raised private sector participation in the provision of infrastructure for education ("works for
      taxes" is a scheme in Peru by which private companies execute priority public works in exchange
      for compensatory reductions in their income tax liability). Measuring the value of private
      investment, the indicator lacked the equivalent target on the infrastructure volume to be built (e.g.
      the number of school buildings constructed or rehabilitated). Hence, the degree to which the

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



       shortfall in infrastructure would have been closed cannot be ascertained. Moreover, private
       investment was narrowly defined to mean "commitments" rather than "actual outlays or
       expenditures," making the results target weaker than it appears. Nevertheless, the relevance of
       RI3 is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI4 – Number of universities and university programs under review to be licensed – was fully
       adequate to measure the degree to which universities would have met the new quality assurance
       standards for higher education set by the newly-created SUNEDU and the DIGESU. Assuming
       that the standards were sufficiently stringent (a license, granted after a systematic review, would
       be valid for 6-10 years and an institution denied a license must cease operations in 2-3 years),
       then the attainment of this target would reflect an enhancement to the quality of university
       education as set in the program objective. Therefore, the relevance of RI4 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - Facilitate Entry, Operation and Exit of Firms

      RI5 – Number of new firms incorporated under the System of Online Registration – was
       mainly adequate to measure the result of one of three actions to facilitate business entry –
        the integration of online registration procedures into the system of public registries managed by
       SUNARP. However, there were no indicators to measure the results of two other actions – the
       provision of incentives for large municipalities to issue operating licenses within 10 days and the
       adoption of a risk-based classification system for the safety inspection of new firms. Therefore,
       the relevance of RI5 is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI6 – Number of bureaucratic barriers voluntarily removed from the legal framework by the Public
       Administration entities due to an action of INDECOPI – was fully adequate to measure the result
       of limiting the discretion of government agencies to impose regulations outside of the national legal
       framework. The intended result of the legislative and administrative reform was the removal of
       those bureaucratic barriers to the operations of businesses that were extraneous to the national
       regulatory framework. Therefore, the relevance of RI6 is rated satisfactory.
      RI7 – Average amount of monthly withholdings (which would increase liquidity for firms) due to the
       system – was fully adequate to measure simplifying the withholding system for VAT
       payments. The intended result of the reform was the shift toward more "regular" VAT payment
       channels and, hence, the reduction of the amounts of VAT payments withheld from
       businesses. Therefore, the relevance of RI7 is rated satisfactory.
      RI8 – Number of electronic auctions for asset foreclosures – was mainly adequate to measure the
       result of one of three actions to facilitate business exit – the introduction of electronic auctions for
       asset foreclosures. However, there were no indicators to measure the results of two other
       actions – the creation of a registry for judicial delinquent debtors, and the modification of the
       general law on insolvency, which, among others, aimed to upgrade the quality of liquidators and
       administrators. Therefore, the relevance of RI8 is rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 3 - Reduce Transactions Costs in Trade

      RI9 – Total time to release good imports – only partly measured the collective effect of three
       actions meant to reduce trade transactions costs – harmonizing customs procedures with
       international norms, improving the AEO regime, and scrapping stamp taxes on customs
       declarations. A material reduction in the time it would take the customs office to release imported
       goods would signify an improvement in customs processes and hence a decrease in trade
       transactions costs. However, this indicator would not reflect the result of improvements to the


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



                    AEO regime or the adoption of the targeted system of fines under Legislative Decree
                    1235. Therefore, the relevance of RI9 is rated moderately unsatisfactory. Additional indicators,
                    including the number of exporters, importers, and shippers acting as AEOs, would reflect the
                    results of the other prior actions.
                   RI10 – Number of Conformity Assessment Bodies for products, processes, and management
                    systems – only partly measured the result of actions to enhance accreditation, standardization,
                    and metrology. An increase in the number of these certification bodies, inspections units, and
                    testing laboratories that evaluate compliance with technical regulations and consensus standards
                    would only partially reflect the result of PA10. The indicator does not measure the extent to which
                    the volume of accreditation, standardization, and product measurement would have expanded with
                    the increase of these service providers. The relevance of RI10 is rated moderately
                    unsatisfactory. Indicators, such as the number of quality assurance certifications issued by
                    Conformity Assessment Bodies, would better measure of the degree to which the system of
                    accreditation, standardization, and metrology was enhanced.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To boost human capital and productivity by enhancing the education policy framework to enable a better
               quality of skills

               Rationale
                    The share of programmed merit-based promotions and appointments for teachers and school
                      principals within the Teaching Career System outside of Lima and Callao (where the number of
                      teachers was 320,000 in both urban and rural areas, compared to 80,000 in Lima and Callao, also
                      both urban and rural) rose from 60 percent in the baseline to 75 percent by closing, almost achieving
                      the target of 80 percent. Therefore, the achievement of the target is rated substantial. Additionally,
                      the government started to consider "regularizing" contract teachers, but based on merit, according to
                      the Bank staff.
                     The proportion of students who attained the "Level 2" or higher score for Science increased from 41.5
                      percent in the baseline to 45.5 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 44.5
                      percent. For Mathematics, the proportion increased from 33.9 percent to 39.7 percent, exceeding the
                      target of 36.9 percent. For Reading, the proportion decreased from 46.1 percent to 45.7 percent,
                      failing to meet the target for an increase to 49.1 percent. Therefore, the achievement of the target is
                      rated substantial.
                     Private sector investment (defined as commitments through signed contracts for "works for taxes" and
                      PPPs) in the construction and/or maintenance of public schools amounted to US$23.9 million between
                      2014 and 2017. However, there is no data for the period from 2018 to 2020, and thus insufficient
                      evidence to determine if the government met the investment target of US$300 million between 2015
                      and 2020. Therefore, the achievement of the target is rated negligible.

                                                                                                              Page 14 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)




      The number of universities and university programs under review to be licensed rose from a baseline
       of 0 percent to 95 percent (94 of 99 university programs) by closing, almost meeting the target of 100
       percent. The remaining five of the 99 university programs were awaiting licensing at
       closing. Therefore, the achievement of the target is rated substantial. Post-closing, three of the five
       university programs under review were granted licenses while two were denied licenses, according to
       the Bank staff.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To boost human capital and productivity by facilitating the entry, operation, and exit of firms

Rationale
     The number of new firms incorporated online in the System of Online Registration (Sistema de
       Intermediación Digital) rose from 0 in the baseline to 41,778 by closing, exceeding the target of
       40,000. Therefore, the achievement of the target is rated high.
      The number of bureaucratic barriers voluntarily removed from the legal framework by Public
       Administration entities due to actions by INDECOPI rose from 91 in the baseline to 17,555 by closing,
       exceeding the target of 6,000. Therefore, the achievement of the target is rated high.
      The average amount of monthly withholdings due to the system – which would increase liquidity for
       firms – rose from US$0 in the baseline to US$42 million by closing, failing to meet the target of
       US$180 million. Therefore, the achievement of the target is rated negligible.
      The number of electronic auctions for asset foreclosures rose from 0 in the baseline to 4,627 by
       closing, exceeding the target of 3,500. However, because the results indicator does not
       completely measure the impact of all facets of the prior action, the achievement of the target is rated
       substantial instead of high.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To boost human capital and productivity by reducing transaction costs in trade.

Rationale
     The "time to import" – measured as tiempo total de liberación de mercancías, the total time to release
       goods imports – declined from a monthly average of 155 hours in the baseline to a monthly average of
       65 hours by closing, exceeding the target for a reduction to a monthly average of 93 hours. However,
       despite exceeding the target, the achievement is rated substantial rather than high because of

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 23
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



                             shortcomings with the results indicator. Although not included as a results indicator, the number of
                             AEOs rose from 21 in the baseline to 280 by closing, according to the Bank staff, providing additional
                             evidence of the efficacy of PA9 to achieve the objective to reduce the transaction costs in trade.
                            The number of Conformity Assessment Bodies for products, processes, and management systems
                             rose from 115 in the baseline to 228 by closing, exceeding the target of 190. However, despite
                             exceeding the target, the achievement is rated substantial rather than high because of
                             shortcomings with the results indicator. The number of Conformity Assessment Bodies increased
                             further post-closing to 263 by 2021. Although not included as a results indicator, the number of firms
                             with International Organization for Standardization (ISO) certifications issued by Conformity
                             Assessment bodies rose from 1,981 in the baseline (2016) to 3,774 by closing, according to the Bank
                             staff, providing additional evidence of the efficacy of PA10 to achieve the objective to reduce the
                             transaction costs in trade.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With the efficacy of the first, second, and third objectives rated moderately satisfactory, the overall efficacy of this
operation is rated moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The relevance of the prior actions is rated satisfactory. The four prior actions for the objective to enhance the
      education policy framework were satisfactory or moderately satisfactory. The same holds for the four prior
      actions for the objective to facilitate the entry, operations, and exit of firms, while the two prior actions for the
      objective to reduce transactions costs in trade were both satisfactory. The overall efficacy is rated moderately
      satisfactory. The program either exceeded or mostly achieved three of four results targets for the objective to
      enhance the education policy framework. The same holds for three of four results targets for the objective to
      facilitate the entry, operations, and exit of firms, while the program exceeded the two results targets for the
      objective to reduce transactions costs in trade. The outcome of this operation is rated moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                                     Page 16 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk. Political risk to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this operation may arise
from various sources.

      According to the ICR (page 27), measures to enhance the accountability of teachers were unpopular
       with teachers' unions. With the teachers unions gaining newfound political power under the current
       administration, any attempt to derail teacher accountability measures would pose risks to teacher
       reform under the first objective.
      The omnibus nature of Law 30230 embroiled this operation in challenges to other provisions of the
       legislation, the enactment of which was part of PA6. For example, in October 2017, two local
       Indigenous organizations filed a Request for Inspection with the Bank's Inspection Panel, claiming
       harm caused by the passage of Law 30230. Although conceding that the law simplified doing
       business processes, the complainants contended that the law significantly weakened environmental
       and social regulations in Peru, "reducing or eliminating the government's capacity to guarantee the
       territorial rights of Indigenous peoples and prevent local communities from being affected by oil
       spills and other environmental harms caused by extractive industries." The Inspection Panel did not
       register the request, responding that this operation neither supported Law 30230 in its entirety, nor
       any of the provisions which were alleged to impact the environment and land rights negatively, but
       only those provisions that pertained to the reduction of bureaucratic barriers related with INDECOPI,
       the withholding of VAT, the modernization of the Customs Law, and the elimination of stamp duties
       on customs declarations. Complaints against environmental provisions of the omnibus Law 30230
       muddles public support for those parts of the legislation that advanced the second and third
       objectives of this operation.
      Electoral politics and the chronic political polarization in Peru typically raise the intensity of
       political risk to reform programs. For now, however, it does not appear that either the ruling or the
       opposition political parties oppose the development objectives of this operation. However, at the sub-
       national level, opposition by local governments to the incursions by the INDECOPI into their
       regulatory powers poses risks to gains made under the second objective of this operation.

Institutional Capacity Risk. This operation supported the creation of several new government bodies – the
General Directorate for School Infrastructure, SUNEDU, DIGESU, and INACAL – the organizational and
technical capacity of which would have to be progressively built up over time to enable them to fulfill their
mandates. Continuing technical assistance and advisory services would help mitigate the institutional
capacity risks expected in newly created organizations, according to the Program Document (page
33). Otherwise, the sustainability of outcomes achieved under the first and second objectives would be at
risk.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



Rationale


Analytic Foundations. The design of this program was informed by analytic work produced by the Bank,
including various background papers prepared for the flagship report, Peru - Building on Success: Boosting
Productivity for Faster Growth (World Bank, 2015). The program design was also underpinned by
technical assistance provided by the Bank and the IFC to Peru in the policy areas supported by this
operation.

      Pillar 1 – “Giving Peru a Productivity Boost: Towards a System of Continuous Education and
       Training," “XXI Century Challenges in Education in Peru," “Innovation and Firms’ Productivity in
       Peru,” “Tertiary Education in Peru,” and Analysis of School Trajectories, Career Choice, and
       Insertion into the Peruvian Labor Market (World Bank, 2010) informed PA1–PA4. Analysis of
       School Trajectories, Career Choice, and Insertion into the Peruvian Labor Market traced the
       mismatch between higher education and the labor market – 60 percent of university graduates did
       not work in their area of academic training and specialization – to the poor relevance and low
       quality of university education. The paper advocated for quality in higher education. The prior
       action enacting the New University Law and creating the SUNEDU and DIGESU would institute
       quality assurance system for university education.
      Pillar 2 – "Investment Climate and Competitiveness in Peru" and “Peru - Tackling Regulatory
       Barriers to Competition and Local Economy Development" informed PA5–PA8. Technical
       assistance was obtained from the: Strategic Plan for the Judiciary Advisory Services (P152242,
       FY2015), Effectiveness of Competition Policy Advisory Services (P152834, FY2015), and
       Improving Technical Security Inspections for Business Entry (IFC 600550, FY2015). “Peru -
       Tacking Regulatory Barriers to Competition” found that a third of all municipalities did not comply
       with the national legal framework for issuing operating licenses to business establishments. This
       included municipalities that “outrightly refused to issue operating licenses or construction permits to
       new establishments to protect local incumbents.” This finding about anti-competitive behavior by
       local regulators prompted the prior action to limit the discretion of local governments to impose
       rules and procedures that contravened competition objectives.
      Pillar 3 – "The Role of Imports for Exporter Performance in Peru" and "Services Trade Performance
       and Productivity in Peru: A Comparative Analysis" informed PA9–PA10. Technical assistance was
       obtained from the Strengthening Custom Risk Management Advisory Services (P151971,
       FY2016). “The Role of Imports for Exporter Performance in Peru” concluded that the greater use of
       imported intermediate imports was significantly correlated with higher exports and that advanced
       clearance procedures to clear customs for imports would boost the performance of exporters. The
       conclusion motivated the prior action to modernize the Customs Law and improve the AEO
       regime.

Linked Operations. This operation's program objectives and policy pillars complemented the objectives
and components of three active investment projects at the time of this operation.

      Pillar 1 – The Basic Education Project (P123151), approved in 2013, aimed to improve the capacity
       of the MINEDU to evaluate student learning, instructional practice, and school leadership in basic
       education, and the Higher Education Quality Improvement Project (P122194), approved in 2012,
       aimed to improve the higher education quality assurance system through the promotion of self and
       external evaluations, the financing of improvement plans, and the provision of information.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



      Pillar 2 and Pillar 3 – The Strengthening the Science, Technology, and Innovation System in Peru
       Project (P156250), approved in 2017, aimed to strengthen the science, technology, and innovation
       system to improve research skills and firm-level innovation.

Financing Instrument. The choice of the development policy loan with a deferred drawdown option as
the instrument for funding this operation was appropriate, ex-ante. Peru did not need an immediate
disbursement of the budget support provided by this operation because its fiscal position was relatively
strong – although the fiscal account was in deficit at -2.3 percent of GDP at the time of the approval of this
operation in 2016, the gross public debt remained low at 23.9 percent of GDP, and net public debt, 6.9
percent of GDP. Gross international reserves were also healthy at US$61.7 billion, or 15.5 months-imports
and 342 percent of short-term external debt. Ex-post, the choice proved advantageous, according to the
ICR – five disbursements from December 2018 through August 2020 allowed Peru to gain funds in time to
help address the challenges posed by the coastal El Niño in 2017 and 2020 and the COVID-19 pandemic
in 2020.

Stakeholder Consultation. According to the Program Document (page 27), the National Education
Project and the National Competitiveness Plan 2014-2018, which underpinned this operation, were
submitted by the government to extensive consultations with stakeholders, including universities, research
and policy institutes, trade unions, private business groups, and non-governmental organizations. The
National Competitiveness Plan 2014-2018 was the product of joint work between the Ministry of Economy
and Finance and the private-sector Competitiveness Council, with all pertinent materials made widely
available in the Ministry's and the Council's websites. In addition, proposed laws were subject to the 30-
day compulsory consultation process.

Donor Coordination. The Bank coordinated the design of parts of this operation with other development
partners, including the International Monetary Fund (on tax administration, and on private investment),
the Development Bank of Latin America (on competition policy), and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation (on the implementation of the National Competitiveness Plan 2014-2018), according to
the Program Document (page 27).

Risk Analysis and Mitigation Measures. The Bank assessed the operational risk to the project to be
moderate overall and proposed several mitigation measures that it deemed were ex-ante adequate to
address the risks. To mitigate institutional capacity risk, particularly in implementing innovative measures
supported by the operation (e.g., introducing technical safety inspections), the Bank proposed and
committed additional and continuing technical assistance to implementing agencies. Stakeholder risks
would be addressed through continuing policy dialogue with the private sector. Political risk was
considered moderate and would be mitigated by the strong commitment of the bureaucracy to the reform
program. Ex-post, it would turn out that some of the risks were more substantial than initially thought,
derailing the achievement of some of the results targets.

Shortcomings at Design. The Bank overestimated the readiness of the private sector to invest and
participate in education infrastructure construction and maintenance. The legal and institutional framework
for public-private partnerships, concurrently the target of a separate Bank development policy operation,
was not ready for the targets set by this operation. The Bank also overestimated the pace by which the
withholding system for VAT payments could be quickly overhauled and the scale by which the amounts
withheld from businesses could be reduced.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Supervision. The Bank filed three Implementation Status and Results Reports for the operation, each with
extensive comments on progress with the results targets. The Bank also filed three Aide Memoires for the
supervision missions of December 2017, December 2018, and May 2020.

Adaptation. The Bank revised several results indicators after program approval to improve the relevance and
measurability of the indicators. The Bank also adjusted some of the results targets to reflect the extension of
the duration of the program and the higher-than-expected progress with the reforms.

      The Bank dropped the "increase in the number of secondary schools that implement the new school-day
       model" as a results indicator for Pillar 1 after the government achieved the target in 2017, and instead
       focused on learning outcomes – the "increase in the proportion of students that attain the Level 2 or
       Superior [score] for Sciences, Math and Reading (RI2)" – as the relevant results indicator for PA2. The
       results indicator "include learning outcomes in the stated targets of the performance-based financial
       incentive mechanism for subnational entities" was dropped for lack of data. The results indicator
       "increase private sector investment in the construction and/or maintenance of public schools" was
       revised for clarity – "increase private sector investment (commitments through signed contracts through
       works for taxes and PPPs) in the construction and/or maintenance of public schools." For Pillar 2, the
       Bank dropped the results indicator "increase in the average recovery rate of creditors on insolvencies," a
       Doing Business indicator that was subject to many factors exogenous to the reforms. And, for Pillar 3,
       the Bank chose to apply the Peruvian Customs Authorities' metric, tiempo total de liberación de
       mercancías (TTLM), for the results indicator, "time to import"; the government's metric measured the
       effective time from the arrival of an imported good at, to its release from, customs.
      The Bank also adjusted the targets for six indicators (RI1, RI4, RI5, RI6, RI7, and RI10).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With the quality of design/preparation and the quality of implementation both rated moderately satisfactory, the
overall performance of the Bank is rated moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR (page 24) did not discuss any unexpected social and poverty impacts that were additional to those that
were explicitly part of the program objectives.



b. Environmental

According to the ICR (page 24), the operation did not have any significant environmental impacts that were either
positive or negative. Very little actual construction of school infrastructure took place during the duration of the
program due to shortcomings in the PPP for school infrastructure implementation. The ICR adds that business exit
would have contributed to the "recycling of resources" for more viable economic activities. However, the ICR
offered no evidence for this statement.



c. Gender

The ICR did not provide gender-disaggregated data for student performance.



d. Other

SUNEDU unexpectedly benefitted from its knowledge of Bank procurement rules, which enabled it to retain high-
quality professional development services for university faculty.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR was prepared consistent with OPCS guidelines on DPF ICRs and
included sections on the relevance of prior actions, the relevance and measurability of results indicators, and
the appropriateness of results targets.




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



Conciseness. The account of the project's performance is well informed and concisely presented. The
discussions are to the point.

Results Orientation. The assessment of the project's efficacy was outcome-oriented and based on the degree
of achievement of the results targets. Some of the results indicators measured intermediate results, and the
ICR candidly identifies these.

Quality of Evidence. In some cases, the ICR supported the assessment of the achievement ratings of the
results targets with additional information available from separate analyses, including Competition and
Productivity: Evidence from Peruvian Municipalities (June 2021) for PA1 and RI1 and PA6 and RI6, Do More
School Resources Increase Learning Outcomes? Evidence from an Extended School-Day Reform for PA2 and
RI2.

Quality of Analysis. The quality of the analysis was substantial and candid. In assessing the quality at entry,
the ICR cited the analytic work underpinning the program reforms and linked the program reforms to those
supported by related Bank operations. The ICR also discussed the merits of adding the deferred drawdown
option to the development policy loan.

Lessons. The lessons were based on evidence and analysis and would be helpful for future operations,
particularly those aiming to draw the private sector in infrastructure construction and maintenance.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 27-28), with some adaptation. The fourth is offered by this ICR
Review, albeit in disagreement with another lesson cited by the ICR (paragraph 67).

Using objective criteria for the accreditation and licensing of schools can help counter political
challenges to reforms in education. In this project, the Superintendence of University Education and the
General Directorate of University Education set objective criteria for rating the quality of university programs and

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Boost. Hum. Cap. and Productivity DPL (P156858)



for issuing operating licenses to universities. This technical method for licensing universities was easily
understood and readily supported by the public, according to the ICR. Moreover, it is expected to serve as an
effective deterrent to future attempts to politicize the licensing process, a likely reaction from vested interests
that will be hurt by the strict implementation of the quality assurance program.

The private sector can make an important contribution to infrastructure investment, but it takes time to
mobilize private participation in infrastructure. In this operation, targets for private participation in school
infrastructure were set in terms of investment commitments rather than actual investment outlays, but even this
diminished target was not achieved. Problems with the framework for public-private partnerships (PPP) and a
past scandal with a PPP project derailed progress with the goal. It is vital that the legal, regulatory, and
operational frameworks for PPPs in infrastructure exist and are sound and that there are both firm political
commitments to and robust public support for the private provision of infrastructure.

The ability of government staff to publicly defend and communicate the merits of reform measures is
vital to the success of a structural reform program. In this operation, the ICR made a distinction between
the success reaped by measures to reform secondary and tertiary education versus the lack of progress with
actions to reform the VAT withholding system. According to the ICR, education reform was facilitated by
the MINEDU having a cohort of resolute and capable young staff who were able to project the strength of the
government's commitment to the reform measures to the rest of the bureaucracy and to the public. In contrast,
there was a "lack of conviction" about the necessity for, and benefits of VAT reform.

The deferred drawdown structure may offer the Bank leverage over additional reforms. In this operation,
the DDO not only incentivized educational policy and regulation of business and trade but provided a buffer
against unforeseen shocks. In the end, the Bank fully disbursed the DDO against two massive shocks – the
infrastructure damage caused by El Nino and the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, the
financing structure of the operation gave the Bank leverage in policy dialogue not only over the original program
development objective but over two additional, critical issues. In this case, it would seem that there was no
tradeoff between "sustaining already implemented reforms against policy reversals" versus "reducing the
options for new sets of reforms" – the Bank and its member country got it all.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
It would be valuable to study and understand how the Bank deployed its leverage in policy debates
surrounding both the original program development objective and the unforeseen shocks.




                                                                                                      Page 23 of 23
