     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Development Project (P151416)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0023005

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151416                                    Urban Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                            Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57620,IDA-D1010                        31-Dec-2020                                          11,752,954.89

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2016                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            12,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             11,327,678.82                                               0.00

 Actual                                         11,752,954.89                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Fernando Manibog             Kavita Mathur                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to improve the quality of municipal services and pilot energy
   efficiency and seismic resilience retrofits of urban infrastructure in Participating Towns.

   The PDO was not revised.

   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Development Project (P151416)



   PDO1: to improve the quality of municipal services in participating towns.

   PDO2: to pilot energy efficiency of urban infrastructure in participating towns.

   PDO3: to pilot seismic resilience retrofits of urban infrastructure in participating towns.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component A Urban Development (cost at appraisal: US$12.8 million; actual cost: US$12.00 million)
   financed activities aimed at improving service provision in participating towns.

   - Sub-component A1 Municipal Services (cost at appraisal: US$9.0 million; actual cost: US$7.8 million)
   financed activities for upgrading and/or expanding municipal water supply networks, solid waste services,
   and street lighting.

   - Sub-component A2 Safe and Energy-efficient Social Infrastructure Pilot (cost at appraisal: US$3.8 million;
   actual cost: US$4.2 million) financed activities aimed at improving energy performance, comfort levels, and
   seismic resistance of school buildings.

   Component B Institutional Strengthening (cost at appraisal: US$0.7 million; actual cost: US$0.42 million)
   supported the Government’s urban policy reform agenda at the national level and specific interventions
   aimed at strengthening service provision capacity in participating towns at the local level.

   Component C Implementation Support (cost at appraisal: US$0.9 million; actual cost: US$0.9 million)
   financed the administrative aspects of project implementation.

   2. Changes in components during implementation

   The project components remained unchanged during implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$13.6 million, compared to the appraisal estimate of US$14.4
   million.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Development Project (P151416)



   Project Financing: The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit
   (US$6.6 million at appraisal and US$6.2 million at closure) and IDA grant (US$5.4 million at appraisal and
   US$5.5 million at closure).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The actual Borrower contribution was U$1.6 million, below the appraisal
   commitment of US$2.4 million.

   Comment on borrower contribution and re-allocation of funds between sub-components. The
   borrower contribution was decreased due to the emergency needs related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The
   remaining co-financing of US$800,000 was cancelled. At the same time, the project funds were reallocated
   from Component A1 to Component A2 to fill the financing gap resulting from the decreased co-financing.

   Project Dates: The project was approved on March 18, 2016 and became effective on December 29, 2016.
   The mid-term review was on October 5, 2018. The original closing date was December 31, 2020. The
   project was extended once, on April 9, 2020, for nine months, to September 30, 2021 through a level two
   restructuring. The extension was due to the COVID-19 related lockdowns and travel restrictions that led to a
   temporary closure of the project worksites and delayed the completion of the on-going construction works
   under Component A.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Municipal services in the Kyrgyz Republic were inadequate due to
insufficient financial resources for capital investment and maintenance, the situation that persisted since the
1990s and was exacerbated by weak regulatory and institutional frameworks, limited municipal capacity,
and urban sprawl. The situation was worse in small towns: piped water outside of Bishkek was in short
supply and intermittent, and water quality was low; solid waste collection in small towns was regularly
provided only to 25-50 percent of the population. Most municipal buildings were lacking energy efficiency
features leading to high operating costs of district heating, insufficient heating in winter, and unaffordable
district heating prices. Overall, municipal infrastructure was outdated and deteriorating, and service gaps
affected lower-income households the most. Additionally, more than 80 percent of schools and
kindergartens had low seismic safety ratings. The situation was exacerbated by low operational efficiency of
municipalities.

Relevance to Government Strategies: The PDO was relevant to the country conditions and well-aligned
with national priorities. The Project responded to the need to support local governments in improving the
service delivery, identified as a critical area in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS) for
the Kyrgyz Republic (2013-2017) and in the State Program for Development of Water Supply and
Sanitation in Kyrgyz settlements for 2014-2024. Several government reforms were undertaken to support
NSDS, but municipal services in small towns were still inadequate, and no public buildings had undergone
comprehensive retrofits to improve energy efficiency and seismic resilience.

At closing, the PDO was also fully aligned with NSDS 2019-2040, which highlighted support to regional
needs in basic municipal services and effective management and financial sustainability at the local level,
and with the “Climate Investment Program of the Kyrgyz Republic and Green Economy Development

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Urban Development Project (P151416)



               Program in the Kyrgyz Republic for 2019-2023” which promoted measures to improve demand side energy
               efficiency and climate resilience.

               Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies: The project was included in the
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2014-2017 and linked to the third CPS engagement area
               (Natural Resources and Physical Infrastructure) and the country’s development goal to ‘ensure sustainable
               urban development and communal services.’ The project was in line with the WBG’s twin goals of poverty
               reduction and shared prosperity: it included urban poverty as a criterion for selecting participating towns
               and focused on improving service delivery gaps which were disproportionally affecting the poor.

               The PDO remained relevant to the Bank Strategy at closing. The project objectives were relevant to the
               WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2019-2025, to Focus Area 3 “Enhance economic
               opportunities and resilience”, which promoted the development of human capital, regional development,
               and climate change resilience and included investments in improved water services, energy efficiency, and
               disaster mitigation.

               Previous sector experience. The WBG has been engaged in municipal services, energy sector, and
               disaster preparedness in the Kyrgyz Republic for a long time. The Small Towns Infrastructure and Capacity
               Building Project (STICBP, P083377) and the Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project (BOUIP,
               P104994) focused on improving municipal services including water supply, street lighting, and roads. The
               Heating and Energy Efficiency Assessment for the Building Sector Project (P133058) assessed heating
               options and recommended energy efficiency measures in public buildings. The Bank’s Global Facility for
               Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) provided TA for improved seismic resilience.

               This project would continue to support the sector, and on a pilot basis, support improvement of both seismic
               resistance and energy efficiency of municipal infrastructure. The project would support towns that were
               experiencing important development pressures (e.g., population growth), and had large gaps in service
               provision and lack the financial means to bridge these gaps.

               The relevance of objective is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the quality of municipal services in participating towns.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Development Project (P151416)



The theory of change (ToC) for this objective showed a logical causal link from inputs to outputs and to
expected outcomes of this project. The inputs were: (i) improving water supply, solid waste management, and
street lighting and (ii) strengthening capacity for municipal service provision and urban planning. These
inputs, if successfully implemented, were expected to result in outputs such as rehabilitated water supply
infrastructure, provision of equipment for solid waste removal (trucks), installed street lighting, improved
capacity of water utility companies, and completion of the TA activities supporting urban policy reform. This, in
turn, would result in the following outcomes: (i) increased duration of water supply; (ii) restoration of regular
solid waste collection; (iii) increased safety of urban space due to adequate lighting; (iv) improved operational
and technical capacity of water utilities; and (v) informed urban policy reform. The ToC then links these five
outcomes to the PDO outcome “quality of municipal services improved”.

The ToC, which was created for the ICR, clearly indicates inputs and outputs, as well as the underlying
assumptions necessary for the ToC to work. The outcomes are also formulated well, with the emphasis on
the benefits to the population and on a verifiable capacity improvement of the water utility. The TOC could be
further improved if the last outcome under objective 1 - “urban policy reform at the national and local levels
informed”, – which sounds as an input, were re-formulated to sound as an outcome. The process of being
informed is generally an input, while the outcome could include behavioral change, policy adjustments, or
procedural modifications resulting from “being informed”.

The outputs and outcomes related to Objective 1 reflect restored water supply infrastructure, replaced solid
waste collection equipment (trucks), improved street lighting, and related capacity improvements. All five PDO
indicator targets were achieved or exceeded, and seven of the nine intermediate indicator targets were
achieved or exceeded.

Outputs

A. Water supply improvement in Kerben and Sulukta:

- Results framework (RF) targets were achieved or exceeded in relation to the following physical works
outputs: reconstruction of the water intake facilities; replacement of the water trunk mains; rehabilitation of the
water distribution networks; and construction of the ancillary infrastructure (pressure reduction chambers,
reservoirs, chlorination stations, and laboratories for water quality testing).

- RF targets were also achieved or exceeded with respect to capacity improvement outputs including: training
of the water utility staff on water treatment practices, in relation to new equipment, and on the intake
operations and troubleshooting; country-wide dissemination of the Water Supervision Manual prepared by the
project and aligned with the Kyrgyz legislation; and provision of special machinery for maintaining the
infrastructure built by the project and the laboratory equipment for water testing.

- RF targets were partially achieved in relation to the following two outputs: (i) Water Utility Performance
Improvement Plans (PIP) development and endorsement and (ii) introduction and adoption of a new e-billing
system in water utilities, allowing for the improved customer registry and accounting. These two outputs were
achieved or exceeded in Sulukta but not in Kerben, where the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) was planning to implement a water improvement project with overlapping activities,
covering some of the original World Bank project’s beneficiaries.

B. Solid waste collection in Kerben, Sulukta, Toktogul, and Baluckchy:


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Development Project (P151416)



- The outdated solid waste collection vehicle fleet was replaced with specialized solid waste collection trucks,
providing for regular trash collection at least twice a week.

- Training on operations and maintenance of the specialized trucks was provided.

C. Energy efficient street lighting in Toktogul and Baluckchy:

- Street lighting was improved on 15.1 kilometers of streets, exceeding the target of 14 kilometers.

D. Roadmap to improve urban planning:

- Roadmap to improve urban planning and spatial development was adopted by the State Agency for
Architecture Construction and Communal Services and endorsed by the urban policy technical working group,
achieving the target.

Outcomes:

A. Water supply improvement in Kerben and Sulukta:

- The duration of water supply in project areas increased from the baseline of two hours a day to eight hours a
day, achieving the target of eight hours a day.

- Capacity building measures aimed at improved water utility performance, recommended by the project,
helped to increase utility productivity and supported utility debt recovery in Sulukta. These measures are
assessed as sufficient to close the technical, operational, and administrative capacity gaps in the utilities and
thus are expected to support the sustainability of project outcomes.

- The project achieved increased access to improved (piped) water: as a result of the project’s significant
awareness raising efforts, 2,390 new household piped water connections were installed by the beneficiaries
at their own expense.

B. Solid waste collection in Kerben, Sulukta, Toktogul, and Baluckchy:

- Access to regular solid waste collection service was provided to 41,200 people, exceeding the target of
40,600 people.

C. Energy efficient street lighting in Toktogul and Baluckchy:

- Urban safety has improved due to adequate street lighting benefitting over 5,000 people.

Project’s outcomes under Objective 1 were evaluated by an independent Impact Assessment Study,
produced by the Rebicon LLC, Kyrgyz Republic. The study was based on an in-depth examination of project
outcomes and involved a survey of project beneficiaries (1,000 households), eight focus groups with the
beneficiaries, and key informant interviews with government stakeholders and beneficiaries. The study
confirmed that the following was achieved as a result of the project:

      Water supply system rehabilitation: water supply interruptions in project locations have been
       eliminated; water pressure improved (from 33 percent of customers reporting it as excellent or good

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Development Project (P151416)



       previously to 66 percent after the project in Sulukta and from 36 percent to 85 percent in Kerben);
       water quality increased (from 3.2-3.6 to 4.1 on a 5-point scale in Sulukta and from 3.2-3.5 to 4.3 in
       Kerben); and water meters installed. Ninety-eight percent of the households who were connected to
       piped water expressed satisfaction with the benefits received.
      Solid waste collection: the area covered by solid waste collection increased; a regular on-schedule
       collection has been established in three out of four project towns, and the fourth one experienced
       some schedule delays, but the service is regular. The level of beneficiary (household) satisfaction is
       100 percent in two participating towns and 98 percent and 87 percent in the other two towns.
      Improved energy efficiency in public buildings: electricity savings (amounting to 24 percent and 40
       percent of electricity consumption, depending on location) were achieved, cost of heating supply
       reduced, and comfortable temperature and lighting maintained in project’s buildings.
      Street lighting: the installed lights cover the project locations, and are bright, providing for increased
       safety; the cost of street lighting for the municipal budget decreased three times and their activation is
       automatic, simplifying controls.

The ICR did not include a discussion of the outcomes of the Impact Assessment Study. IEG requested the
Impact Assessment document and used it to provide the summary above. IEG also requested the team to
provide information reflecting to what extent project outcomes could be attributed to the project's activities,
given the concurrent involvement of the Swiss Development Corporation, the Asian Development Bank, the
German Development Agency, and others, in supporting municipal infrastructure services in the country. The
response of the team was as follows: Two of the four criteria for the selection of the participating towns were
the gaps in service provision and the lack of donor support in this area. Prior to the project completion, there
were no activities by other donors overlapping with the Project in the participating towns. Therefore, all project
outcomes are attributable to the project only. More so, the project’s experience paved a way for other donors,
including EBRD, to support municipal services, for example, the potable water services in Kerben outside of
the project areas. The financing agreement between the city of Kerben and the EBRD was ratified after the
project closure.

Under Objective 1, the project improved access to three critical municipal services in targeted towns: piped
water supply (a basic need reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)-6 indicator “Clean Water
and Sanitation”), solid waste collection, and street lighting. It financed related capacity building activities,
increasing the sustainability of its investments in physical assets. A comprehensive independent beneficiary
assessment conducted at project closure confirmed the achievement of the project objectives and reported
that the level of household satisfaction with the benefits the project provided was high. The project fully
reached all of its targets under Objective 1, except two intermediate indicator targets, which were achieved
partially - Water Utility Performance Improvement Plans development and endorsement and adoption of a
new e-billing system in water utilities. These two targets were achieved partially because of an unexpected
overlap with an EBRD project with similar activities, which covered some of the original World Bank project’s
beneficiaries. This is considered a minor shortcoming.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Development Project (P151416)




Objective
To pilot energy efficiency of urban infrastructure in participating towns.

Rationale
The ToC for this objective showed causal links from inputs to outputs to outcomes. The inputs were: (i)
piloting energy efficiency in public buildings; (ii) preparing Energy Savings Plan for municipalities. These
inputs were expected to lead to outputs such as: (i) public buildings retrofitted to improve energy
performance; (ii) Energy Savings Plan for municipalities prepared and adopted; and (iii) training provided on
implementation of energy efficiency approaches. This would result in the following outcomes: (i) energy
performance of selected buildings improved; (ii) municipal investment plans informed by energy savings
measures; and (iii) capacity to prepare and implement energy efficiency investments is built.

The ToC is logical and clearly describes the inputs, outputs, and most of outcomes. However, it could be
further improved if the second outcome under objective 2 - “municipal investment plans informed by energy
savings measures”, – which sounds as an input, were re-formulated as an outcome and reflect that these
plans were adopted and are being used by the municipal management for public investments decision
making. In addition, the level 2 outcome “energy efficiency retrofits in urban infrastructure piloted” presents a
lower-level outcome than those listed as outcomes level 1 in the ToC. Piloting by itself does not provide
sustainable benefits to the population; it is always the first stage of an intended result, which incentivizes a
scale-up. The expected scale-up is not reflected in the ToC.

The outputs and outcomes under Objective 2 reflect the following:

Outputs:

- Efficient street lighting in the towns of Togtogul and Balykchy was installed on 15.1 kilometers of streets,
exceeding the target of 14 kilometers (note that this output was also reflected under Objective 1, with the
benefit of improved living conditions, while here the emphasis is on the co-benefit of energy efficiency).

- Four schools and two kindergartens were retrofitted with energy efficient features (walls and floors were
insulated, doors and windows replaced, the heating and ventilation systems upgraded), plus two street
lighting investments were implemented, exceeding the target of six facilities.

- For three participating towns, Energy Saving Plans were developed, exceeding the target of two. These
plans were adopted, and municipal management is using them to inform public investments.

Outcomes:

- Efficient lighting installation led to over 2,000 MWh lifetime (15 years) energy savings.

- Energy efficiency improvements in four schools and two kindergartens lead to at least 16,000 MWh lifetime
(15 years) energy savings.

Under Objective 2, the project achieved lifetime (15 years) energy savings of 18,000 MWh, valued at annual
energy efficiency gains amounting to US$335,202. The development of Energy Efficiency Plans for three
cities created potential for significant additional energy savings. The project reached or exceeded all related
RF targets.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Urban Development Project (P151416)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To pilot seismic resilience retrofits of urban infrastructure in participating towns.

Rationale
The ToC for this objective showed links from inputs to outputs to outcomes. The inputs were: (i) piloting
seismic resilience retrofits in public buildings and (ii) providing related training. These inputs were expected to
lead to outputs such as: (i) public buildings retrofitted to improve seismic resilience and (ii) training provided
on implementation of seismic resilience public investment. This would result in the following outcome: (i)
seismic resilience of selected buildings improved and (ii) capacity to prepare and implement seismic
resilience investments is built.

The ToC is logical and clearly describes the inputs, outputs, and most of outcomes. However, the level 2
outcome “seismic resilience retrofits in urban infrastructure piloted” present a lower-level outcome than those
listed as outcomes level 1 in the ToC. Piloting by itself does not provide sustainable benefits to the
population; it is always the first stage of an intended result, which incentivizes a scale-up. The expected
scale-up is not reflected in the ToC, despite the acknowledgement in the ICR that the scale-up is being
supported by other Bank projects.

The outputs and outcomes under Objective 3 reflect the following:

Outputs:

- Four schools and two kindergartens were retrofitted with seismic resilience features (strengthening of the
foundations, reinforcement of walls, replacement of partitions, firming of staircases, and upgrading of roofs),
exceeding the target of three facilities.

- Seven learning events on seismic resilience were organized, and 100 public servants participated in training
programs, round tables, and exchange activities.

Outcomes:

- Resilience retrofits benefited over 4,000 people who use the retrofitted buildings, they are expected to
reduce the probability of loss of life in case of an earthquake. New Bank projects are now providing support to
the scale-up.

Under Objective 3, the project improved seismic resilience of selected buildings, benefitting 4,000 people who
use the buildings, and provided the basis for a scale-up of this activity across the country. The scale-up is
being supported by other Bank projects. The project exceeded the related RF target.

IEG requested the team to provide a summary of how the Impact Assessment informed the scaling up of the
project outcomes. The project team's response was as follows. The Impact Assessment helped the

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Urban Development Project (P151416)



                            Implementing Agency (Community Development and Investment Agency) and the PIU to replicate project
                            practices in other Bank operations and to expand them beyond school buildings, to other public facilities. For
                            example, the RED-2 project (P176798) is planning to apply the project experience with school rehabilitation
                            and seismic resilience works. Another ongoing project, Enhancing Resilience in Kyrgyzstan (ERIK, P162635),
                            is also scaling up this project's seismic resilience works, accompanied by functional improvements and the
                            overall climate-resilient design. ERIK finances the largest investment in school infrastructure resilience in
                            Central Asia; the outcomes will be further scaled up nationwide and across Central Asia.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For Objective 1, the efficacy is Substantial. The project achieved the key outcomes of improved access to
                            three critical municipal services in targeted towns - piped water supply (a basic need reflected in an SDG
                            indicator), solid waste collection, and street lighting, under the the RF, as well as additional evidence in the
                            Impact assessment, provide sufficient proof. There was a minor shortcoming: two intermediate indicator
                            targets were achieved partially. The ICR provided sufficient explanation: this occurred due to an unexpected
                            overlap with an EBRD project which covered some of the original World Bank project’s water sector
                            beneficiaries in one of the participating towns, Kerben.

                            For Objective 2, the efficacy is Substantial. The project achieved all outcome and output targets under this
                            objective. The activities led to significant energy savings and the adoption and implementation of the Energy
                            Efficiency Plans, thus creating a potential for additional energy savings.

                            For Objective 3, the efficacy is Substantial. The project achieved related outcome and output targets and
                            provided the basis for a scale-up of seismic resilience retrofits across the country.

                            The overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure, using a similar approach.




                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Urban Development Project (P151416)



1. Economic analysis at appraisal. The net present value (NPV) of project interventions was estimated at
appraisal at US$18.6 million and the economic rate of return at 16.1 percent.

The methodology used was cost-benefit analysis. The benefits included: time savings due to the eliminated
need to collect and treat (boil) water; savings due to the eliminated need for water storage tanks; and energy
savings linked to energy efficiency investments. The following benefits were not included due to the difficulty to
estimate them: health benefits due to improved water supply; benefits due to improved seismic resilience of
public buildings; improved safety due to better street lighting; health gains linked to improved quality of water;
benefits from improved solid waste collection; and institutional strengthening.

2. Economic analysis at closure shows a positive NPV equaling to US$23.5 million and an economic rate of
return (ERR) at 25.7 percent. The analysis used a 5 percent discount rate, 25 years asset life in the case of
water supply systems and social infrastructure, and 15 years of asset life for street lighting activities. The
benefits included: time savings due to the eliminated need to collect and treat (boil) water; savings due to the
eliminated need for water storage tanks; energy savings linked to energy efficiency investments; benefits from
avoided loss of lives in case of an earthquake; and benefits from Temporary Job generation during project
implementation.

While IEG concurred with the economic justification for the project, IEG inquired further if future scale-up plans
were being made within the framework of a longer-term least-cost strategy. The project team responded that
while the selection of the four participating towns did not include the least-cost approach and was based on
criteria that included municipal service access gaps, poverty incidence, and the lack of donor support with urban
services improvement, the project still utilized the least-cost approach in "the selection of interventions that took
place at each of the project sites and activities. For example, the school retrofitting designs were based on the
least-cost selection of the materials to be used during construction and interventions to be undertaken (for
example, to strengthen the foundation, or replace the roof, etc.)."

Administrative efficiency. Operationally, the project was able to implement its activities within the original funding
envelope and without any significant adjustment of its design. Project inefficiency was limited to the closing
extension of nine months due to the lockdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The extension enabled the
successful completion of all activities, as planned, and achievement of the project development objectives.

The project efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        88.90
 Appraisal                                                   16.10
                                                                                         Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Urban Development Project (P151416)



                                                                                       88.20
ICR Estimate                                                25.70
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on the high relevance of objectives, substantial efficacy, and substantial efficiency, the overall outcome
rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk. The main project risk was financial sustainability of municipal service providers to ensure
maintenance and operating of the assets constructed or provided by the project (water supply systems, solid
waste collection equipment, energy efficient lighting, and renovated buildings). Before the downturn related
to COVID-19, water utilities were on the path to debt recovery, and water tariffs were due to be revised.
However, these trends were reversed after 2019, and now subsidies will be required to maintain the
delivered assets. This risk is assessed substantial.

Technical Risk. Government capacity to maintain the delivered assets and equipment was insufficient at
project appraisal, creating the risk of asset dilapidation prior to the end of their estimated lifespan. The
project invested in developing such capacity: it provided training to technical staff and prepared training
materials, checklists and manuals to allow for new staff onboarding. This risk is assessed low.

Institutional Risk. The project invested in strengthening Government’s urban policy reform agenda at the
national level and service provision capacity in participating towns at the local level. This included training
provided to staff of the relevant government agencies. The risk is that the trained staff might leave the
agencies. This risk is assessed moderate.

Exposure to natural disasters. The country is vulnerable to natural disasters including high seismic activity,
and the project invested in piloting resilient feature in public buildings. However, the pilots financed by the
project need to be scaled up to provide benefits to wider population. The scale-up is being supported by
other Bank projects which are linked to the project under review, however, it is not clear at the moment if
those projects will cover significant parts of the country or if the government will have sufficient resources to
maintain those investments. This risk is assessed substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Development Project (P151416)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was aligned with the government’s strategy for supporting local governments in improving the
  service delivery, identified as a critical area in strategy documents. The project was well-informed by
  analytical studies and consultations with various stakeholders and donors operating in the Kyrgyz
  Republic. The project was designed based on a comprehensive approach: the institutional strengthening
  component was supportive of the long-term sustainability of the project-financed physical
  investments. The participating towns were strategically selected to cover most vulnerable population,
  locations with high service access gaps, and considered donor involvement in the sector in targeted
  locations, thus providing support where it was needed the most and increasing the likelihood that the
  pilots will be scaled up.

  While the project is small in comparison to the scale of the needs, it was designed to have a leveraging
  impact and was linked to the follow-up operations and to supporting interventions that were implemented
  in parallel and financed by the Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) and by the Energy
  Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP). It was coordinated at design with the Government
  and the development partners.

  Key risks the project would face were adequately assessed, including the poor technical capacity of local
  contractors and designers (international consultants were engaged and capacity building conducted to
  mitigate this risk); financial inefficiency of participating local governments (relevant TA was provided); and
  commercial losses related to water supply billing and collection (metered connections were initiated).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Project Implementing Entity (PIE) was supported by experienced international and local consultants
 specializing in energy efficiency, seismic resiliency, and water investments. The construction sites were
 regularly visited by the project team to ensure the technical quality of the construction works. The Bank
 team closely supported the PIE throughout the implementation period, and the support substantially
 intensified in the last two years of implementation. The support covered all areas of the PIE work,
 specifically, it addressed the technical skills, procurement, and environmental and social management. The
 Bank conducted missions at least twice a year and documented implementation issues candidly in the
 ISRs, Aide Memoires, and Management Letters. Management challenges, in particular those related to
 progress with construction activities in the last year of project implementation, were fully addressed: during
 that time, the Bank team had monthly coordination meetings with the PIE. As a result, the ISR ratings
 improved from Moderately Satisfactory during the period from March 2018 to October 2020, to Satisfactory
 throughout 2021. By project closure, all project activities were completed, and the assets were operational.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Development Project (P151416)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's RF was adequately linked to the project ToC, as well as to the PDO and to the logic of project
 interventions in the PAD. All indicators except one (Roadmap to improve urban planning and spatial
 development was adopted by the State Agency for Architecture Construction and Communal Services and
 endorsed by the urban policy technical working group) were quantitative, and all of them were time-bound
 and had baselines and targets. Sex-disaggregated indicators were applied adequately. The indicators
 sufficiently reflected project outputs and outcomes, importantly, project outcomes were fully reflected in the
 RF. The PDO indicators reflected higher level outcomes - improvements in the living standards of the
 beneficiaries.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports that the M&E data were adequately collected and analyzed. Both the baseline data and
  the data necessary to collect at project closure were gathered by the same PIE’s consultant. Progress in
  achieving the set targets was monitored and reported to the Bank by the M&E specialist, hired by the
  PIE. Updated results framework was always included in the ISR reports. By project closing, surveys and
  focus group discussions were conducted with the beneficiaries and administration of the participating
  towns, and an impact assessment survey, as well as a project evaluation report, were produced.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was well utilized during the project’s lifetime to inform the progress made towards
  achieving the set targets.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was assigned a Category B and Environmental Assessment (OP
   4.01) was triggered and complied with. The environmental rating was downgraded from satisfactory to
   moderately satisfactory in October 2019 due to the inconsistency with the Bank health and safety (H&S)
   requirements at the project sites and upgraded back to satisfactory in April 2020 as soon as the Bank
   recommendations were satisfied. A World Bank environmental specialist and consultant regularly visited all
   project sites during field missions and provided comments on environmental documents and management

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Urban Development Project (P151416)



  tools developed and applied by the implementation agency. The semi-annual and annual plans and relevant
  reports were prepared on time and submitted to the Bank. All outstanding issues related to Environmental
  were successfully resolved before project closing.

  Social Safeguards. The level of required resettlement was not clear during project preparation, and the
  Recipient prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in accordance with the Bank Operational
  Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). During project implementation, no significant resettlement
  occurred. The implementation agency conducted an impact assessment for water supply rehabilitation
  systems under Component A.1, and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared based on the project’s
  RPF. The RAP was implemented, and compensation was paid to one affected person. In addition, two
  Social Impact Management Plans (SIMPs) were prepared to temporarily relocate students to alternative
  buildings. SIMPs were fully implemented. Affected people, the municipalities, and beneficiaries were
  involved in the Impact Assessment, RAP, SIMPs preparation and implementation processes. All
  outstanding issues related to Social Safeguards were successfully resolved before project closing. No
  accidents or incidents took place at the project sites.

  Grievance Redress Mechanism. The implementation agency established the Beneficiary Feedback
  Mechanism. During project implementation, 10 complaints and a positive feedback was received. The
  complaints were mainly related to repair of social facilities (schools, kindergartens), quality of works, and the
  delays. All complaints and appeals have been fully addressed and resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM) rating was mainly Satisfactory throughout project implementation. A World
  Bank financial management specialist regularly carried out the FM missions to review project accounting
  and reporting arrangements, organization and staffing, internal control procedures, planning and
  budgeting, counterpart funding, funds flow and disbursement and external audits. The quarterly Interim
  Unaudited Financial Reports were submitted to the Bank for review in the agreed time frame, and there
  were no inconsistencies for follow up. The accounts were audited by a certified auditor, who found no
  irregularities.

  Procurement. All project procurement activities were carried out by the implementation agency, which
  included a full-time procurement specialist and was later enhanced with a procurement assistant. The
  procurement risk was assessed as “Substantial” during preparation, considering: (i) potential delays due to
  the complexity of procurement and to decision-making that involves local governments; (ii) insufficient
  contract management skills; and (iii) the size of the civil works contracts to be procured. This risk was
  downgraded and remained moderate for the last two years of project’s life. While procurement was within
  the moderately satisfactory range, some issues occurred including a delay with the civil works contracts for
  both water supply and school rehabilitations, which were caused by the lack of counterpart funding and the
  need to make related adjustments, as well as due to capacity constraints in the consultants' teams. The
  Bank assisted the implementation agency by providing intensive procurement support and guidance from
  the Bank’s procurement specialist in the Bishkek Country Office.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Urban Development Project (P151416)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were mostly derived from the ICR with some modifications by IEG (ICR,
paragraphs 94-98):

      Institutional capacity building, knowledge sharing, and development of local
         expertise are critical for the sustainability of investments in physical infrastructure.
         The reviewed project involved “soft” activities – comprehensive training for government staff,
         development of manuals and guidance materials, and study tours – aimed at developing
         capacity to operate the newly delivered assets in a sustainable manner. Local technical
         specialists and experts were part of these activities, thus local expertise was supported, and
         the connection between local consultants and government agencies established or
         strengthened. This was especially useful for energy efficiency and seismic resilience
         activities in the project, which were new for the country. In addition, involvement of local
         experts was critical during COVID-19, when travel was restricted, and international experts
         could not be present.

      Clarity and simplicity of the project implementation plan, as well as clarity regarding
         project risks, are key for successful project implementation. A clear and comprehensive
         work program, highlighting the interlinkages between activities, resources to be mobilized,
         and risks and constraints to be addressed would help proactively address implementation
         issues early on and thereby reduce implementation risks, including those related to project
         delays. The project experienced some delays in the first half of its implementation due to
         insufficient attention to these matters but was able to make improvements once they were
         addressed.

      When retrofitting or rehabilitating schools or kindergartens, where temporarily
         relocation of students is needed, having a flexible relocation plan is critical. The
         project benefited from having such a plan when the works started slower than expected due

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Urban Development Project (P151416)



         to the contractors’ limited knowledge of retrofitting practices and when the counterpart
         funding became an issue due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the
         students needed temporary arrangements for an extended period of time, which was made
         possible.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is of a good quality and delivers relevant and valid information, substantial evidence, and a thorough
analysis. The ratings are fully supported by the narrative. ICR’s minor shortcoming is that, considering the
involvement of multiple development partners in supporting municipal services' improvement in the country, it
did not address the attribution of the achieved outcomes to the project. Also, the ICR did not include a
discussion of the outcomes of the Impact Assessment Study.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
