     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023049

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147402                                    Kosovo Health Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kosovo                                     Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54420                                  30-Oct-2019                                           14,113,350.38

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-May-2014                                31-Oct-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            25,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             16,363,397.69                                                0.00

 Actual                                         14,113,350.38                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to contribute to improving financial protection from health spending for the
   poor and quality of care for priority maternal and child health and non-communicable disease services
   (Financing Agreement, January 15, 2015, p. 5).

   The objectives were revised in June 2018 as follows: “contribute to (i) developing the building blocks to
   introduce Social Health Insurance, and (ii) strengthening Primary Health Care in selected municipalities”.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



   In May 2020, the objectives were further revised: “contribute to (i) developing the building blocks to introduce
   Social Health Insurance; (ii) strengthening Primary Health Care in selected regions; and (iii) supporting the
   government’s response to the threat posed by COVID-19” (Amendment to the Financing Agreement, June 1,
   2020, p. 1).

   In view of the above revisions, this ICR Review applied a split rating methodology.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  12-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Component 1: Improving financial protection and quality of care (Appraisal: US$11.2
   million; the component was revised in 2018, please see below).

          Sub-component 1: Improving financial protection against health care costs with a focus on the
            following: (a) finalizing the preparation of policy documents, by-laws and operational system design
            for health sector reforms; (b) building capacity of staff at the Ministry of Health (MOH) and other
            health sector institutions to implement health sector reforms; (c) providing support for investments in
            information systems; (d) developing and implementing an outpatient drug benefit scheme to
            reimburse insured individuals for the costs of drugs; and (e) designing and implementing
            communication activities to inform the public and health sector stakeholders about their rights and
            responsibilities and gather feedback on health sector reforms.

          Sub-component 2: Improving the quality of care and service delivery in three areas:

         i. Financing priority maternal and child health (MCH) equipment for primary health care (PHC) facilities
             and hospitals; developing a maintenance system for existing equipment; supporting training to
             implement the National Quality of Care Strategy with a specific focus on training for Quality
             Coordinators; and training Directors of Health and Social Welfare at the municipal level in managing
             performance agreements.
         ii. Strategic purchasing of PHC services. Activities would seek to improve access and quality of priority
             services at the PHC level, including MCH and non-communicable diseases (NCDs) services by
             building the capacity of the Health Financing Agency and its successor, the Health Insurance Fund
             (HIF) to enter into performance agreements with municipalities to purchase improvements in PHC
             services.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



     iii. Supporting investments in information systems, including the E-health Development Framework,
         National Institute of Public Health Information System, and the E-prescription system.

  Revised component 1: Support capacity building and establishment of building blocks for the
  introduction of Social Health Insurance (2018 Revision: US$5.8 million; Actual US$4.3 million). The
  original Component 1 was revised in 2018 by dropping or downsizing some activities and shifting primary
  health care strengthening activities to Component 2, and developing simple information system modules
  (ICR, p. 10), and Capitation-based Performance Payments Information Module as a web-based application.

  Component 2: Strengthening primary health care (US$12.5 million equivalent; Revised: US$9.1
  million; Actual US$4.5 million). The component aimed at improving access to quality PHC services in
  participating municipalities through financing of Capitation-based Performance Payments.

  Component 3: Project management (Appraisal: US$1.8 million; Revised: US$0.8 million; Actual:
  US$0.6 million). The component aimed at strengthening the capacity of MOH to carry out the technical and
  administrative management of the project, including purchasing of equipment, conducting audits, and
  financing operating costs.

  Component 4: Emergency response to COVID-19 (Appraised in 2020: US$4 million; Actual: US$4.7
  million). This new component was added in 2020 to provide support to the Government of Kosovo to
  respond to the public health emergency and to prevent further local transmission of COVID-19. The ICR
  explained that the component aimed at supporting the objective to prevent, detect and respond to the threat
  posed by COVID-19.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing: The original cost at appraisal was estimated at US$25.5 million equivalent financed by
  an IDA Credit that was processed as an Investment Project Financing (PAD, p. 10). No direct financial
  contributions from the government were planned or provided. An amount of US$8.33 million was cancelled
  in June 2018 during the first restructuring because of low absorptive capacity and delays in implementation
  (ICR, p. 11). The project cost was revised to US$16.4 million and the actual cost was US$14.1 million.

  Dates: The project was planned for a 5-year implementation period. It was approved on May 13, 2014 and
  became effective on May 20, 2015. A Mid-Term Review was carried out on October 30, 2019. The project
  closed on October 31, 2021 following extensions of the closing date aggregating at two years.

  Restructurings:

      1. June 12, 2018: The PDOs were revised under a level 1 restructuring as noted in section 2a above
         with changes in the results framework, components and costs; reallocation between disbursement
         categories, and partial cancellation of US$8.33 million as noted above under cost and financing.
         This ICR Review notes that the revision introduced a more realistic, but less ambitious and output-
         oriented objective for developing the building blocks of health insurance; and the revision also
         replaced the objective to improve the quality of care for MCH and NCD services with an objective for
         strengthening primary health care.
      2. July 24, 2019: 8-month extension of the closing date.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



                                          3. May 29, 2020: PDO revision with the addition of support to deal with COVID-19, changes in the
                                             results framework, components and costs, safeguard policies, and a 12-month extension of the
                                             closing date.
                                          4. September 28, 2020: Change in components and costs.

                                      May 13, 2021: 4-month extension of the closing date.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               At appraisal, the project was responsive to health priorities in Kosovo that had some of the worst health
               outcomes in Europe, notably in maternal and child health, respiratory diseases, and circulatory diseases
               (PAD, p.1). Partly as a result of limited public spending on health, out-of-pocket spending was high,
               accounting for 40 percent of total spending on health in 2011, and was a contributor to impoverishment
               (PAD, p. 2). As the incentive structure did not sufficiently favor primary outpatient services and
               preventive spending, capitation payments supporting a sub-set of primary health care services would be
               expected to strengthen incentives to improve access and quality of priority primary care services (PAD, p.
               8).

               Although the Country Partnership Strategy of 2012-2015 was focused on economic growth and
               environmental management, it recognized health as a priority, but had no proposed Bank engagement in
               the health sector due to constraints in the lending envelope. IDA resources became available in FY14 to
               support this project that was aligned with the government health sector reform strategy, including the Health
               Insurance Law passed in 2014 that was expected to improve financial protection of the poor.

               At project closing, the revised PDOs were consistent with the Bank Country Partnership Framework for the
               period FY17–FY21: under Focus Area 2 for “Strengthening Public Service Delivery and Macro-fiscal
               Management” and CPF Objective 5: “Broaden the coverage and improve equity of health services”, the
               CPF noted that the World Bank will support the introduction of performance-based financing for primary
               health care in municipalities and the expansion of health insurance coverage for the poor in the context of
               the government’s introduction of mandatory health insurance. As for the objective related to COVID-19,
               supporting the country to cope with the pandemic reflects the Bank’s global commitment to strengthen
               pandemic preparedness and to support related national plans to confront it. Nevertheless, in several
               instances under both original and revised objectives, PDOs were vaguely worded and output-oriented.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kosovo Health Project (P147402)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Contribute to improving financial protection from health spending for the poor
(Objective dropped in 2018)

Rationale
The Theory of change held that policy support and regulations, capacity building for mandatory health
insurance, design of an Outpatient Drug Benefit Scheme (ODBS), support to a health insurance information
system, and support for public communication for increasing public awareness on health reforms would
plausibly result in a mandatory health insurance law adopted. Achievement of the PDO was to be measured
by the percentage of the poor who were enrolled in mandatory health insurance. Improved financial protection
from health spending was presented as a long-term outcome.

Outputs are discussed with those of Objective 3.

Outcomes

The ICR stated that the mandatory health insurance did not take off (ICR, p. 15). Hence, enrollment of the
poor in health insurance could not be measured. The ICR explained that the lack of progress was due to an
overly ambitious objective in a country context of fragility, conflict and violence (FCV), with political
uncertainty and frequent government changes and inconsistent commitment.

The ICR noted that out-of-pocket expenditures showed declining trends, largely not attributable to the project.
Prior to the project, out-of-pocket spending was estimated at 40 percent in 2011. By 2015, when the project
became effective, out-of-pocket spending had already declined to 34.8 percent. Between 2015 and 2020, the
share of out-of-pocket spending within the total health expenditure declined further from 34.8 percent to 29.0
percent. The ICR concluded that the decline was only partly attributable to the project, as project activities did
not have a direct and immediate impact on out-of-pocket expenditures (ICR, p. 16).



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Contribute to improving the quality of care for priority maternal and child health and non-communicable
disease services
(Objective dropped in 2018)

Rationale
The theory of change was diffuse and not specific to the stated objective. It held that investments in PHC
facilities, hospitals, information systems, training, annual independent audits, and performance agreements
with municipalities with implementation of Capitation-based Performance Payments would lead to the
following outcomes: improved health system infrastructure, improved capacity of health workforce, more


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



accountable health system, improved data quality and timely analysis of health sector data. Improved quality
of care for priority MCH and NCD services was presented as a long-term outcome.

It was not clear what quality of care achievements for MCH and NCD would be considered and how they
would be measured (ICR, p. 28). There was no reference to MCH and NCDs in the intermediate results
indicators. The intended outcome was to be measured by the percentage of participating municipalities where
at least 75 percent of the agreed quality targets were achieved in the preceding one year. However,
performance agreements with municipalities did not include any quality benchmarks to assess performance
(ICR, p. 25).

Outputs

      The ICR (p. 16) reported on project support to physical resources in Kosovo Hospital and University
       Clinical Services. These included procurement of two anesthesia machines, four mobile X-ray digital
       units, ten obstetrics and gynecology tables and one colposcopy device. The project also equipped the
       Neonatology Clinic, Pediatric Clinic, and Gynecological and Obstetrics Clinic.
      The project provided training on reproductive health and NCDs among other training activities, but no
       specific information was provided and the training was not evaluated.

Outcomes

No data were collected on the quality of care (ICR, p. 26).

The ICR (p. 16) noted that in view of the lack of data directly measuring quality outcomes, it relied on three
indirect aspects to assess improvement in the quality of care: (i) support to physical resources; (ii) training;
and (iii) PHC utilization as a proxy indicator for quality. But in this area also, UNICEF data on MCH were not
favorable, as was reflected by UNICEF Multiple Indictor Cluster Surveys between 2013/14 and 2019/20 (ICR,
p. 18). As for NCDs services, there was inadequate information to assess project contributions to improving
their quality (ICR, p. 18).



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Contribute to developing the building blocks to introduce Social Health Insurance
(New Objective added in June 2018)

Rationale
Notes on health insurance definitions and building blocks:

      Mandatory Health Insurance and Social Health Insurance are the same. According to the ICR (p. 9),
       the project changed the wording to align more closely with the government wording in Albanian
       language.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kosovo Health Project (P147402)




      Building blocks to introduce Social Health Insurance were defined as follows, according to the ICR (p.
       9): (a) definition and implementation of Social Health Insurance benefits package; (b) design,
       development and utilization of the HIF Information System; (c) building capacity of HIF as purchaser of
       health care services; and (d) building capacity of health facilities to respond to the establishment of the
       Social Health Insurance.

Theory of change

The theory of change held that the provision of technical assistance, equipment, and training to HIF staff;
strengthening health care facilities; support to ODBS, and HIF Information System would result in the
following outputs: The scope of ODBS would be identified with a costed list of drugs developed; legal and
operational framework in place, staff at HIF and health care facilities trained, medical equipment in selected
health facilities upgraded, HIF Information System and e-prescription modules and ODBS software
developed. These outputs would plausibly lead to an operational HIF Information System, ODBS, and
legislative documents ready for government approval.

Outcomes were output-oriented and sought to reflect the stated objective on developing building
blocks for the Social Health Insurance:

HIF Information System was developed with the following capabilities in place (ICR, p. 19): the e-Prescription
and Patient Service Interface were installed and the registry was established with data loaded from members,
providers, insurers, and institutional sources such as the Civil Registration Agency and the Tax Administration
of Kosovo. Hardware infrastructure was installed. Connection of HIF Information System with the Tax
Administration of Kosovo and the Central Bank of Kosovo was tested and established, and an online service
to identify member eligibility status was functional. HIF signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the
Central Bank of Kosovo to finalize Standard Operating Procedures. Memorandums of Understanding were
signed with Kosovo Metrology Agency, Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare, and Kosovo Business
Registration Agency to facilitate exchange of data and online connections among these agencies. A Financial
Management and Accounting Module was functional.

ODBS was developed: the list of drugs and price lists for the beneficiaries were adopted by HIF and approved
by the Minister of Health in 2020. As the Social Health Insurance was delayed, pilot implementation of OBDS
could only be carried out with dummy data—without being rolled out in the field with real data (ICR, p. 19).
However, the amendments of the Health Insurance Law that would enable HIF to contract private pharmacies
and reimburse outpatient drug benefits package was not passed.

The ICR reported that institutional capacity was strengthened through technical assistance and training on
HIF Information System and ODBS. The Project supported HIF staff in preparing annual work plans, annual
financial statements, Planning and Development Strategy for 2020-2022, technical reports, improving finance
management and accounting, reconciliation of accounts and information with all hospitals, and hospital
management. Staff were also trained in performance-based financing, ODBS, use of the HIF Information
System platform, and the e-prescription system. Additional modules were developed for HIF Information
System on reconciliation of accounts, finance, budget allocation, reporting, assets, annual statement, and
accounting (ICR, p. 19).

According to Task Team clarifications on May 24, 2022, MOH is planning to make the Health Information
System and the Health Insurance Fund Information System inter-operable in the future.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kosovo Health Project (P147402)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Contribute to strengthening primary health care in selected regions
(New Objective added in June 2018)

Rationale
The theory of change held that the provision of clinical training to PHC staff to improve the quality of care,
equipping health facilities, capacity building and financing of Capitation-based Performance Payment in 20
municipalities (out of 38 municipalities in the country), community outreach, and public communication
campaigns would plausibly contribute to strengthening PHC, although the objective was not fully clear.

Note: The implementation of Capitation-based Performance Payments under performance agreements with
participating municipalities were dependent on another donor-executed project (LuxDev) for the development
of a new health information system for MOH (ICR, p. 12).

Outputs and intermediate results

      The number of health facilities constructed, renovated, and/or equipped reached 58 facilities in 2021,
       exceeding the target of 11 facilities.

      The number of patients registered in MOH health information system reached 528,625 in 2021,
       slightly exceeding the target of 511,074 registered patients.

      The percentage of participating municipalities with a performance improvement action plan reached
       100 percent in 2021.

      The percentage of Capitation-based Performance Payment budget spent at the municipality level
       reached 90 percent in 2021, slightly short of the target of 95 percent.

      The project trained 16,811 health personnel. Training activities covered a wide scope of topics,
       including medical emergencies, Health Information System-Patient Registration Application, health
       insurance, quality of care, health financing, mental health, reproductive health, and NCDs (ICR, p. 18).
       Disaggregated numbers were not provided. Training was not evaluated.

Outcomes

The number of municipalities participating in Capitation-based Performance Payment scheme reached 18
municipalities slightly short of the target of 20 municipalities.

The percentage of patients using PHC facilities who were satisfied with the services remained at the baseline
level of 65.8 percent in 2021, short of the target of 70 percent.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kosovo Health Project (P147402)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
Support the Government’s response to the threat posed by COVID-19
(New Objective added in 2020)

Rationale
The ICR (p. 1, 9, and 10) and the Project Restructuring Paper of May 29, 2020 (Report No. RES43481) used
a different PDO statement (that may better explain the support to the government response): to prevent,
detect and respond to the threat posed by COVID-19.

The theory of change held that training of front-line workers, development of evidence-based containment
strategies, provision and distribution of medical equipment and supplies (kits, personal protective equipment,
infusion pumps, reagents and syringes, recruitment of additional staff, and rehabilitation of quarantine area
would contribute to preventing, detecting and responding to the threat posed by COVID-19 reflected by a
strengthened government response to COVID-19 for containment, detection and treatment (ICR, p. 13).

Outputs

      The project provided medical and laboratory equipment and supplies.
      The number of health staff trained in infection prevention and control per MOH approved protocols
       reached 1,006 in 2021, exceeding the target of 400 trained staff.
      The number of volunteer healthcare staff covered with salaries was 338 in 2021 short of the target of
       400 volunteers.

Outcomes

The outcome reported by the ICR as a reflection of objective achievement was the upgradation of the
quarantine area within the University Clinical Center of Kosovo. Such an output on the upgradation of an
existing isolation area does not constitute sufficient evidence of the intended outcome. This ICR Review
recognizes the short implementation period from May 2020 to October 2021 that may limit the availability of
evidence, but there was no information even on early progress that would have been expected to be
observed during the implementation period such as for preliminary increases in detection capacity and
detection performance, and on the nature and timeliness of responses to confront COVID-19. The largest
proportion of the project’s support was for medical equipment and personal protective equipment (73
percent). No information was offered on the distribution and utilization of project-provided inputs, and their
adequacy. Linking project-provided support with the overall context of national efforts was not explained, and
there was no information on the size of the gap in government capacity that was met by the project, and for
how long. Therefore, this ICR Review considers that the project partly achieved its intended outcome.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kosovo Health Project (P147402)




                              Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objectives to contribute to improving financial protection from health spending for the poor and to
                            contribute to improving the quality of care for priority maternal and child health and non-communicable
                            disease services were barely achieved, consistent with a negligible efficacy under the original objectives.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The objectives to contribute to developing the building blocks to introduce Social Health Insurance and to
                            contribute to strengthening PHC in selected regions were almost fully achieved as noted above under
                            Efficacy Revision 2; and the objective to support the government’s response to the threat posed by COVID-19
                            was partly achieved. The aggregated achievement of the three objectives is consistent with a substantial
                            rating for efficacy after the second revision.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD’s economic analysis carried out a cost-benefit analysis focusing on benefits resulting from improved
   PHC, including MCH and NCDs, estimated by the reduction in Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY’s). Costs
   that were considered pertained to subcomponent 1.2 (US$6.4 million) and component 2 (US$12.5 million).
   Costs and benefits were calculated over the period 2014-2030. The analysis assumed that the whole population
   would be covered by phases. The monetary value of the future stream of health benefits (i.e., annual DALYs
   saved) was discounted at 3 percent. A higher discount rate of 6 percent was used for sensitivity analysis. An
   IRR was estimated at 24.2 percent under a baseline GDP growth scenario, and at 20.1 percent under a low
   GDP Growth (PAD, p. 63)

   The ICR undertook an ex-post cost-benefit analysis and estimated total benefits at US$90.6 million that would
   accrue in four areas (ICR, p. 49):




                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



      Benefits accrued from constructed, renovated and/or equipped health facilities were estimated at US$0.8
       million, derived from an equipment cost of US$0.53 million, a benefit-cost ratio of 6.1 and an
       effectiveness rate of 25 percent.
      Benefits accrued from training health personnel were estimated at US$47.8 million, derived from an
       assumption of increased productivity of 10 percent, using monthly average salary of 16,811 health
       personnel of US$676.6 as a proxy measure for productivity; and 35 working years till the retirement age
       of 65 years.
      Benefits accrued from strengthening PHC were estimated at US$9.5 million as saved money for the
       population that equaled 20 percent of the US$71.5 in out-of-pocket expenditure per capita with 528,625
       registered patients and an effectiveness rate of 25 percent.
      Benefits accrued from the emergency response to Covid-19 were estimated at US$32.5 million based on
       a cost of US$1.8 million spent for purchasing personal protective Equipment (PPE), that are known to be
       cost-effective, for health care workers, a return on investment of 7,932 percent, and 90 percent
       effectiveness of PPEs according to the ICR.

Using a discount rate of 3 percent and a project cost of US$13.9 million, the ICR economic analysis estimated a
Net Present Value of US$60 million, an IRR of 293 percent, and a benefit-cost ratio of 6.1.

The assumptions and extrapolations of the economic analysis raise questions about the validity of its
calculations. For example, the analysis assumed that there would be a 10% increase in productivity of project
trained staff over 35 years yielding US$47.8 million. Improved workers skills were not assessed, but even if
training was effective, it constitutes a small part of a broader spectrum of productivity determinants, such as
structural capacity gaps in equipment, drugs and supplies, budgetary aspects, incentives, and behavioral
aspects of the workforce. Another example concerns the saved money from out-of- pocket expenditures: the
ICR (p. 15) reported that there was limited progress attributable to the project in reducing out-of-pocket
expenditures, and that project activities did not have a direct and immediate impact on out-of-pocket
expenditures (ICR, p. 16).

At the same time, adverse aspects of design and implementation reduced project efficiency. Shortcomings were
significant. Project achievements were contingent on legislation to adopt the Social Health Insurance, but
legislation did not come into force over the course of the project (ICR, p. 27). In terms of overall implementation,
there was minimal progress made during the first four years of implementation (2014-2018). By June 2018, the
project had disbursed only US$2.4 million (9%) of the total Credit amount of US$25.5 million equivalent.
According to the Restructuring Paper dated June 11, 2018, the main contributing factors were the overly
complex project design in an unstable political environment, limited capacities at the Ministry of Finance and
HIF, lack of staff, training, and an appropriate working environment. The ICR (p. 27) stated that the lack of
institutional capacity and qualified teams constituted problems from the beginning of the project. Having a limited
number of staff in the Project Implementation Unit with unattractive salaries and conditions, high turnover, and
weak capacity in government institutions adversely affected project implementation and management. The
Implementation Unit had only one technical specialist who also served as coordinator, but who left before the
closing date. Frequent changes in institutional staff meant that capacity building activities had to be repeated.

Implementation was negatively affected by political instability and frequent changes in leadership and
counterparts. Administrative barriers, including budgetary allocation issues, slowed down implementation (ICR,
p. 26). The lack of effective coordination between MOH and the Ministry of Finance adversely affected
disbursements and slowed down project activities. The Project Steering Committee and the Senior Management
Committee could not function effectively due to frequent government changes. Government commitment was
inconsistent. Priorities and ownership of health financing reforms and the introduction of an information system

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



and ODBS kept changing. Between 2014 and 2021, there were four parliamentary elections and the Minister of
Health changed seven times (ICR, p. 27).

The economic analysis also questioned spending on rehabilitation of restrooms in the pulmonology clinic and
the installation of elevators in the Infectious Disease Clinic within the University Clinical Center of Kosovo, and
whether this was the efficient way to spend funds, given the ongoing pandemic (ICR, p. 48). The ICR’s
economic analysis also stated that a limitation to being able to fully analyze the efficiency of spending under the
project was the limited availability of updated data and indicators for the health system and its outcomes in
Kosovo.

An amount of US$8.33 million was cancelled from the Credit because of low absorptive capacity of project funds
and delayed implementation (ICR, p. 11). Out of an original cost of US$25.5 million and a revised amount of
US$16.4 million, the project disbursed US$14.1 million.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       49.00
 Appraisal                                                  24.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       65.00
 ICR Estimate                                               293.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives across the entire project is rated substantial, as there was almost full alignment
between objectives and government strategies and Country Partnership Framework.

Efficiency, also rated across the entire project, is rated modest because of weaknesses in the economic
analysis and significant implementation shortcomings that reduced efficiency.

Under the original objectives, efficacy is rated negligible, as the project barely achieved its objectives. Efficacy
after the first revision of objectives is rated substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its objectives.
Efficacy after the second revision is also rated substantial as the project almost fully achieved its objectives.

According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, when a project’s objectives are revised, the final outcome is determined by
the weight of Bank disbursements under each set of objectives (17% under the original objectives, 30.4% under
the revised objectives after the first revision, and 52.6% under the revised objectives after the second revision.


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



• Under the original objectives, the outcome is rated unsatisfactory (rating value: 2) with a weight value of
0.34 (2 x 17%).

• Under the revised objectives after the first revision, the outcome is rated moderately satisfactory (rating value:
4) with a weight value of 1.22 (4 x 30.4%).

• Under the revised objectives after the second revision, the outcome is also rated moderately satisfactory
(rating value: 4) with a weight value of 2.10 (4 x 52.6%).

These add up to 3.66 (rounded to 4), which corresponds to an overall outcome rating of moderately satisfactory.
The following table illustrates the split rating calculations with two PDO revisions in 2018 and 2020 (the ICR
considered only the first revision of 2018):

Overall Outcome Ratings:

                                                                  Objectives after first   Objectives after
Rating Dimension                            Original Objectives
                                                                  revision                 second revision
Relevance of Objectives                                              Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1: Improve financial protection    Negligible                   --                      --
Objective 2: Improve the quality of care
                                             Negligible                   --                      --
for MCH and NCD services
Objective 3: Develop building blocks for
                                                    --               Substantial             Substantial
Social Health Insurance
Objective 4: Strengthen primary health
                                                    --               Substantial             Substantial
care
Objective 5: Support government
                                                    --                    --                 Modest
response to COVID-19
Overall Efficacy                                Negligible           Substantial           Substantial
Efficiency                                                            Modest
                                                                  Moderately            Moderately
Outcome rating                              Unsatisfactory
                                                                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                2                      4                    4
Amount disbursed (US$ million)                    2.40                    4.28                7.42
Disbursement %                                     17%                  30.4%                52.6%
Weight Value                                 2 x 17% = 0.34        4 x 30.4% = 1.22      4 x 52.6% = 2.10
Total weights                                                     3.66 (rounded to 4)
Overall Outcome Rating                                             Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



The risk that development outcome may not be maintained is associated with two main factors. It is uncertain
that government commitment would be maintained to introduce an amended Health Insurance Law and the
administrative instruction for identifying exemption categories for insurance contribution to provide the legal
basis for the roll out of the Social Health Insurance. The ICR (p. 31) stated that it remains to be seen how
quickly the government can successfully accomplish this task in a volatile political context and under
economic pressures that emerged from the COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, key informant interviews
revealed that the project helped build capacity and a strong basis to pursue the reforms.

The second challenge relates to financial sustainability for staffing HIF if the guideline for premium collection
and staff roles are not approved by the new government. Discontinuity of HIF staff would jeopardize
institutional memory and the capacity that has already been built.

While adequate steps have been taken in developing building blocks, the Social Health Insurance and ODBS
have not yet been adopted, pending government approval (ICR, p. 25).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 11), the project incorporated lessons from previous health system reforms in the
  region and from ECA Regional Health Report Getting Better: Improving Health System Outcomes in
  Europe and Central Asia, namely for strengthening public health and PHC interventions and improving
  financial protection. The project was also informed by lessons from the health sector component of the
  Economic Policy and Public Expenditure Management Technical Assistance Project (P078674) for
  shifting spending toward PHC and improving mechanisms to allocate health care resources.

  Institutional and implementation arrangements stipulated that MOH would be the main implementing
  agency assisted by its departments and units. MOH would discharge its fiduciary responsibility through
  the Project Implementation Unit, whose establishment was a condition of project effectiveness. The
  Health Financing Agency (HFA), an MOH unit, would be responsible for implementing activities related to
  the Mandatory Health Insurance and purchasing reforms. Its functions would be taken by HIF, once HIF
  was fully established and functional (PAD, p. 11). MOH’s National Institute of Public Health would be a
  key counterpart for health sector planning, monitoring and evaluation. Municipalities would play a key role
  in implementing Component 2. Policy oversight would be the responsibility of a Project Steering
  Committee chaired by the Minister of Health.

  Bank performance in ensuring quality at entry had significant shortcomings, as discussed below. Also, it
  did not take sufficient account of the sectoral and country context in weighing project design aspects with
  low absorptive capacity. Overly ambitious objectives were the main driver for subsequent restructuring
  (ICR, p. 25). The design was complex for a country with a fragile environment, political uncertainty, and a
  limited Client capacity (ICR, p. 30). The design introduced new concepts such as strategic purchasing,
  performance agreements, and Capitation-based Performance Payments that were difficult for
  counterparts to understand and implement (ICR, p. 25). The theory of change was not clearly
  established. According to the ICR, there was insufficient time for project preparation and for ensuring that



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



  all stakeholders, notably the Ministry of Finance, were adequately involved in shaping project design and
  health reforms, thus contributing to a poor design.

  Project design generated important risks. Achievements relied heavily on legislation to adopt the
  amended Social Health Insurance and introduction of ODBS, and legislation did not come through over
  the course of the project (ICR, p. 27), and remained pending at the time of the ICR. There was no
  mitigation or alternative plan to this identified risk, i.e., that health insurance may be delayed or not
  introduced (ICR, p. 26). The implementation of Capitation-based Performance Payments was contingent
  upon the development of an information system financed by another donor (ICR, p. 25), and that was
  also delayed. Other risks were identified, but mitigation measures were weak and, understandably, could
  not effectively address political risks, frequent government changes and FCV risks, unless the design
  was simpler and based on realistic objectives. Examples of inadequate mitigation included the expansion
  of participation of key technical officials in project governance to reduce turnover risks, but this
  overlooked the fact that these officials were also vulnerable to government changes (ICR, p. 26).
  Delivering ‘quick wins’ in phasing reform implementation was not explained both in substance and time
  frame.

  The Project Implementation Unit that was expected to deal with a wide range of activities, including an
  elaborate health reform agenda and the introduction of a Social Health Insurance, had only one technical
  specialist who also served as coordinator (ICR, p. 27). By, 2018, the Unit did not yet have a monitoring
  and evaluation expert (Restructuring Paper dated June 11, 2018, para, 4).

  There were significant M&E shortcomings at entry (see sections 9 and 4), and the theory of change for
  improving the quality of MCH and NCD services was not established. The Results Framework only
  partially reflected the results expected to be achieved (ICR, p. 25). Improvement in the quality of care
  were to be measured by the percentage of agreed quality targets achieved, but performance agreements
  with municipalities did not include any quality benchmarks that would allow the measurement of quality
  improvements (ICR, p. 25).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, supervision and implementation support mission were regular and complemented
 with virtual support. The Bank Team was reportedly responsive and demonstrated flexibility in addressing
 various challenges to facilitate the achievement of the revised objectives. The ICR stated that aide-
 memoires and ISRs had a high level of candor and clear course of action. The Bank Team was pro-active
 in facilitating project restructurings that rectified the shortcomings observed at entry and contributed to
 accelerating implementation progress in pursuit of achieving the revised objectives, but with a lapse in
 planning the assessment of project support to COVID-19 response.

 Note: As the two elements of Bank Performance (Entry and Supervision) were in opposite directions,
 overall Bank Performance is rated moderately satisfactory in line with the project’s overall Outcome rating.



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo Health Project (P147402)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The financial protection objective was clearly stated, but the objective to improving the quality of MCH and
 NCD services was broadly stated, had no concrete theory of change, and was not reflected by the selected
 indicators. Baselines were available (ICR, p. 29). M&E was embedded in existing systems and derived for
 routine data, administrative records and progress reports from MOH, the Ministry of Labor and Social
 Welfare, and the Ministry of Public Administration (PAD, p. 12). The Project Implementation Unit would be
 responsible for data collection from the ministries and sharing the findings with the Bank Team.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E shortcomings at entry were rectified during implementation through restructurings, as noted in
  section 2. Project M&E was integrated into the regular monitoring functions of MOH and HIF. The results
  framework was adequately revised in 2018 and 2020, although the 2020 revision had a gap in setting
  meaningful PDO indicators to assess project support to the government in COVID-19 response. The ICR
  (p. 29) reported that data collection and reporting were improved during implementation through
  hardware and software investments at the facility level.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular project monitoring purposes and were used as a management tool
  to help the government and the Bank in assessing progress and taking corrective actions, including
  project restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At entry, the project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category C. The project classification
   was revised to Category B during the restructuring of May 29, 2020, upon the introduction of COVID-19


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



   activities (ICR, p. 29). The ICR stated that an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
   was prepared and aimed to avoid, reduce, or mitigate adverse social or environmental impacts.
   Environmental risk areas were identified as small-scale civil works in the quarantine area, waste
   management and disposal, and virus spread among health care workers and the population. Additionally,
   the ESMF had a Stakeholder Engagement Plan and a Grievance Redress Mechanism. No further
   information was provided by the ICR on implementation and compliance, although the overall safeguards
   rating reported in the Operations Portal was satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: According to the ICR (p. 30), the project had adequate procurement, financing,
   budgeting, and financial management mechanisms. Procurement and fiduciary risks were assessed as
   high during the first three years of implementation in view of the Capitation-based Performance Payment
   Scheme that required complex budget releases and flow of funds. During implementation, the Task Team
   introduced several measures to address the fiduciary risks, including physical inspections, training, and
   close supervision of procurement processes. The ICR characterized the quality of financial audits as ‘very
   good’ throughout the implementation period.

   Procurement: MOH and the Project Implementation Unit complied with Bank procurement guidelines.
   Prior to 2018, post-review reports highlighted delays in the implementation of some contracts. The Task
   Team put in place specific procedures, including physical inspections, training, and close supervision of
   procurement processes. During 2021, there were delays in the delivery of goods caused by transport
   disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



 Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 31-33) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
that were slightly adjusted by IEG Review:

Highly ambitious project design creates high risks to PDO achievement and success.
Progress can be made by focusing on a few key priorities with a simpler design. Although analytical
work preceding the project was substantial, Kosovo was a new FCV Client for the World Bank, and
the introduction of a Social Health Insurance and new and complex concepts such as Capitation-
based Performance Payment in a low-capacity setting constituted an important challenge.

High dependency of the project on external pre-requisite developments creates high risk for
PDO achievement. Under a regular investment project financing, very closely inter-linked elements
can concurrently proceed forward when they are supported by a single financing source rather than
being dependent on multiple sources. Under this project, the adoption of Social Health Insurance
and the Outpatient Drug Benefit Scheme was under the control of the government, but the
establishment of the Health Information System was dependent on a separate operation financed by
another donor, and related delays that affected overall implementation were beyond the control of
the project. Alternatively, a robust contingency plan could have been devised.

Weak local capacity limits PDO achievement. Addressing staff capacity at the earliest and
recruiting the right mix of skills for the Project Implementation Unit allow can facilitate timely
implementation.

Insufficient time for project preparation can result in poor project design. Providing enough
time for meticulous project preparation can ensure that all stakeholders are involved in contributing
to the design process. Participatory approaches were weak at entry, but were well undertaken in
subsequent restructurings. The progress made after restructurings reflected the merits of such
participation and thorough consultations, and their contributing role to appropriate design and
implementation. The Bank can use its convening power to facilitate broad consultative processes,
including at higher management levels, and with the Ministry of Finance, to guide the strategic
directions of important health reforms.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-organized and had a reasonably concise narrative. It had an intermediate level of results-
orientation overall. It aptly identified the shortcomings of the original project design and M&E issues at entry.
The evidence had weaknesses in some areas, but was generally sufficient for this ICR Review to reach

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo Health Project (P147402)



conclusions. The ICR provided a candid critique of the project and offered useful lessons directly derived from
project experience. The ICR followed guidelines, but with minor internal inconsistencies. It excluded the original
costs in its reporting on cost by component. It considered only one revision of objectives (2018) in its split rating
rather than two revisions (2018 and 2020).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 19
