     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022621

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P168446                                    2019 Incentive Program DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D4860                                  31-May-2020                                         99,738,523.44

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jun-2019                                31-May-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        99,738,523.44                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 William F. Steel          Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Document (PD, p.3) continues the program development objectives (PDOs) from the first (2018)
Incentive Program Development Policy Operation (IP-DPO) as:“(i) strengthening the policy framework to
support state effectiveness, private investment, and social inclusion; and (ii) improving the policy and
institutional framework for public financial management.”


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



For the purpose of this ICRR, as for the 2018 IP-DPO, the PDOs are disaggregated into the following distinct
objectives:

1. Strengthen the policy framework to support state effectiveness
2. Strengthen the policy framework to support private investment
3. Strengthen the policy framework to support social inclusion
4. Improve the policy and institutional framework for public financial management.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
As for the 2018 IP-DPO, the operation was structured around two pillars: (1) strengthening the policy
framework to support state effectiveness, private investment, and social inclusion; and (2) improving the
policy and institutional framework for public financial management.



Under Pillar 1, “strengthening the policy framework to support state effectiveness, private investment, and
social inclusion,” the prior actions (PAs) for the initial IDA Grant and the tranche triggers (TRs) for the
complementary grant from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) supported the three policy
areas of objectives 1, 2 and 3 (Table 1). Some PAs [henceforth taken to refer also to TRs] (#s 2, 5, 7 and 8)
supported more than one policy area (sub-actions supporting objective 3 for social inclusion are underlined).



Pillar 2, “improving the policy and institutional framework for public financial management,” addressed PDO 4
in the areas of public investment (PA 7), tax administration (PAs 8-10), budgeting (PA 11), and transparency
and accountability in revenue and cash management (PAs 12-13).



Table 1: Policy Actions and Tranche Triggers

Objective (Disaggregated) and Policy Action/Trigger
Pillar 1: Strengthening the policy framework to support state effectiveness, private investment, and
social inclusion
Objective 1: Strengthen the policy framework to support state effectiveness
1.To develop a regulatory framework for e-money and digital payments: i) Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB)
issues a circular to operating banks and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) issues a circular to tax and customs
directorates and provincial offices allowing for electronic payment of customs and tax dues; and ii) DAB
issues a circular requiring participation of all mobile money providers, payment card issuers, and acquiring
banks in Afghanistan Payment System to enable interoperability. TR, ARTF
2. To support implementation of its Civil Servants Law, the Recipient’s: (i) Cabinet has approved (A) the
Civil Service Pay Management Policy, (B) the Policy for Increasing Women’s Participation in Civil Service,
as well as (C) the Customs Cadre Regulation and the Procurement Cadre Regulation; and (ii) Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission has approved the Procedure on Civil Servants'
Recruitment through Mass Competitive Exam. PA, IDA


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



3. To improve management of water resources, Cabinet has approved and submitted to the National
Assembly a revised water law which includes: i) clarification of Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) and
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) mandates; ii) recognition of traditional water use rights;
and iii) provisions governing dam safety, pollution, and groundwater. PA, IDA
4. To improve land administration the Supreme Court and Ministry of Urban Development and Land (MUDL)
sign a protocol transferring responsibility for deed registration to MUDL in Herat city. TR, ARTF
Objective 2: Strengthen the policy framework to support private investment

See also PA 4 above.
5. To support private sector development through improved access to credit, DAB has: (i) issued a circular
altering collateral requirements to allow inclusion of risk guarantees from Afghan Credit Guarantee
Foundation; and (ii) entered into a memorandum of understanding with the National Electricity Utility of
Afghanistan (DABS) to allow data sharing to provide operating banks with additional information in
evaluating creditworthiness of potential borrowers through the Recipient’s public credit registry. PA, IDA
6. To reduce the costs and time requirements of accessing electricity, DABS’ Senior Management
Group: i) approves simplified subscription procedures for commercial and industrial customers; ii) establishes
a fast-track center for large customers in Kabul; and iii) approves a formal written procedure to regularly
review and manage domestic and international power purchase agreements (PPA) including through the
establishment of a multi-disciplinary team with the mandate of managing such contracts. TR, ARTF
See also PA 9 below.
Objective 3: Strengthen the policy framework to support social inclusion
See PAs 2 & 5 above and 7 below.
Pillar 2: Improving the policy and institutional framework for public financial management
Objective 4: Improve the policy and institutional framework for public financial management
7. To improve public investment management, the circular for the 2020 budget: i) includes detailed guidelines
on financial, economic, and gender analysis; and ii) specifies that no new project proposal of greater than
USD 7.5 million will be approved for further appraisal through the discretionary budget for 2020 without
strategic fit analysis, and no new project of greater than USD 7.5 million will be approved for implementation
without project appraisal including financial, economic, and gender analysis. TR, ARTF
8. To improve tax administration, MOF issues a circular to make fast-track tax filing mandatory for banking
and telecommunication sectors in the large taxpayer office (LTO) and available for optional use in the
medium taxpayer office (MTO). TR, ARTF
9. To improve tax administration, a Tax Dispute Resolution Board is equipped with five board members and
a secretariat. TR, ARTF
10. To strengthen tax policy Cabinet approves value-added tax (VAT) regulations, including proposed
exemptions by Harmonized System code and refund procedures. TR, ARTF
11. To underpin implementation of the new operations and maintenance (O&M) policy, a MOF circular
mandates the use of revised norms for civilian vehicles and buildings in at least four pilot ministries in
preparing the 2020 budget. TR, ARTF
12. To improve transparency, MOF publishes fortnightly revenue reports on its website that: i) provide full
disaggregated tax and customs performance data at the level of collection points; and ii) track progress
against government revenue targets. TR, ARTF
13. To improve accountability and quality of cash-management, the cash management committee meets at
least every 21 days and publishes minutes of decisions taken at those meetings on its website within 7
days of the meeting. TR, ARTF


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 29
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program cost was estimated at USD 400 million, of which USD 100 million was to be financed from an IDA grant
and USD 300 million from the ARTF, a multi-donor funding mechanism for reconstruction support, which the
government and the World Bank wished to convert into a standard Development Policy Financing operation.

.

The initial IDA grant amounting to USD 99,738,523 was released on 18 July 2019. As an innovative approach to
motivating continued progress in reforms and minimizing budget disruption if some policy actions were delayed,
the ARTF grant was programmed in ten tranches of USD 30 million each, totaling USD 300 million, each with a
specific tranche release trigger, and a 10 percent per month penalty for each month of delay beyond the target
trigger completion date. All triggers were completed on time, and the ten tranches were released over a six-
month period from 18 July to 18 December 2019.



The operation was approved on 20 June 2018; became effective 8 July 2018; and closed as expected on 31 May
2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

    Although designed as a stand-alone operation, the 2019 IP-DPO was “the second of three planned stand-
    alone operations aligned with the Government’s three-year program of policy reforms” (ICR, para. 1). This
    approach of designing each operation successively was a reasonable strategy to build momentum for reforms
    in a coordinated way in the face of high uncertainty and risk due to the fragility of the Afghan state, a “dire”
    security situation, severe drought, and “strong economic headwinds” (ICR, paras. 3-5), among other
    challenges that made it difficult to plan the specifics of a three-operation series in advance. Complementary
    support through other World Bank projects and technical assistance (e.g., Land Administration, Farm Water
    Management, Fiscal Performance Improvement) and the United States Agency for International
    Development (USAID, Investment Climate Program) was set forth in PD Table 4.

    The PDOs were directly aligned with the government’s strategies as stated in the Afghanistan National Peace
    and Development Policy Framework (ANPDF) and Fiscal Performance Improvement Plan (FPIP). These
    strategies were intended to continue and deepen the reforms undertaken under reconstruction since the fall of
    the Taliban in 2001. Despite substantial progress, the economy, society, and political stability remained fragile
    and conflict-affected. However, the objectives were set at a very high level, making it difficult to measure and
    achieve them within the time frame of a single operation. More modest or focused objectives would have been
    better aligned with the scope of the prior actions. This was particularly the case with the “state effectiveness”
    objective, given that “Afghanistan remained a poor fragile state” with “major constraints in the capacity of its
    civil service” (ICR, paras. 3 and 7).

    The first pillar addressed several of the priorities and development objectives identified in the ANPDF, i.e. (PD,
    para. 24): “i) improving governance and state effectiveness through public sector reform, rooting out corruption
    and strengthening subnational governance; ii) building social capital and nation building through reforming the

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



justice sector and building national identity; iii) economic growth and job creation through agriculture
development, private sector growth, and mineral and resource development; and iv) poverty reduction and
social inclusion through improving the quality of health and education programs.” The second pillar and PDO4
addressed the three key areas of the five-year rolling program for public sector financial management (PFM)
reform in the FPIP, namely: (i) improving investment performance through strengthened macro‐fiscal planning
and policy coordination; (ii) ensuring a more accurate, transparent, and accountable budget through improving
budget preparation and reporting, treasury and procurement functions, and revenue and customs
management; and (iii) building capacity to manage reforms in the areas of human resources, administration,
finance, information technology, and communications” (PD para. 24).

The objectives were well aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY17-20, para.
31). The CPF, which remained in force at closing, is organized under three pillars: (i) building strong and
accountable institutions; (ii) supporting inclusive growth; and (iii) expanding and deepening social inclusion.
The first pillar is intended to lay the foundation for the subsequent pillars by strengthening the institutions
needed to implement activities, in particular to build a professionalized civil service.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The 13 policy actions included three prior actions for the initial IDA grant and ten triggers for release of ten
tranches of ARTF grants, of which six supported pillar 1 and seven supported pillar 2. The reforms were
“aligned with the ANPDF, which was developed through extensive consultations with civil society and the
private sector” (PD, para. 84). The ICR for the 2018 IP-DPO (pp. 14-15) noted that it was recognized that some
PAs would provide only initial steps toward achievement of the objectives, not directly generate the desired
outcomes within a limited time frame, and that continuing support was being provided through other projects to
achieve desired outcomes. PAs 1, 2, 6 and 11 specifically carried forward initiatives taken under the 2018 IP-
DPO. Seven of the PAs had two or more parts or actions.



Relevance of PAs for Pillar 1: Strengthening the policy framework to support state effectiveness,
private investment, and social inclusion



PA 1 “to develop a regulatory framework for e-money and digital payments” was intended to address the
consequences of reliance on cash for customs and tax payments and to redress Afghanistan’s extremely low
level of financial inclusion. The PD (para. 32) clearly stated the expected results chains: “allowing for digital
payment of taxes and customs duties will lead directly to increased efficiency and transparency in government
finances, reducing opportunities for corruption and leakage;” and “interoperability of banks and mobile network
operators will also support expansion in financial inclusion, higher levels of consumer protection, and
strengthened DAB’s powers of oversight.” The specific actions (issuing circulars) were not in themselves
sufficient to realize those results, but were necessary and appropriate steps in that direction. Rating:
Satisfactory.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



PA 2 to move toward implementation of the Civil Servants Law built on Amendment of the Law under the
2018 IP-DPO to move toward implementation, including policies for pay management and increasing women’s
participation, as well as recruitment through mass competitive exam. The PD (para. 34) argued that improving
the pay management policy would improve the “ability to adjust salary levels to special circumstances or to
reflect the scarcity of skills” and help address the proliferation of special allowances, etc., to offset the erosion of
base pay. Competitive recruitment was expected to improve the quality of the civil service over time by reducing
political interference, as would more proactive recruitment of women (which also promoted the social inclusion
objective). These were reasonable and appropriate steps toward the broad objective of “strengthening the
policy framework to support state effectiveness.” Rating: Satisfactory.

PA 3, revision of the Water Law, was intended to redress “major deficiencies” in the 2009 Water Law,
including water rights and the lack of a regulatory framework (PD para. 53). With 80 percent of the population
dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods, and 80 percent of agricultural production dependent on irrigation,
the measures supported by PA 3 were identified in the PD as making major contributions toward the objective
of improving the effectiveness of the state in managing irrigation and water supply, which in turn underpin
achievement of economic objectives. Rating: Satisfactory.

PA 4 for land management addressed Afghanistan’s deed-based land registration system (adjudicated by the
courts), which was identified in the PD (paras. 10-11) as “imposing high social costs…[and] widespread
problems of land-grabbing and land-related contestation and conflict.” The 2017 Land Management Law
enabled moving “away from a deed registration to a title registration system based on a Land Information
System.” PA 4 represented a small step in that direction through a “protocol for transferring responsibility for
deed registration to the MUDL in Herat City.” Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 5. Access to finance was identified by the PD (paras. 38-40) as “a major constraint on business activity,”
especially for the small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that accounted for “around 80 percent of private sector
employment.” Collateral requirements and the limited informational base were cited as major constraints in the
results chain leading to improved access to credit. As a means of addressing this problem, PA 5 enabled risk
guarantees (offered by the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation) to count toward collateral requirements for
loans and made data from the National Electricity Utility available to the publc credit registry to aid in assessing
creditworthiness. Although not sufficient in themselves to solve the credit problem, these represented
necessary and appropriate steps in that direction. Rating: Satisfactory.

PA 6. Regarding access to electricity, the PD (paras. 43-45) identified the time-consuming procedures and
“high cost of accessing electricity as a key constraint to economic growth and investment in Afghanistan,” and
noted that unfavorable “international supply contracts… have not been subject to thorough economic
assessment or regular review.” PA 6 included measures intended to achieve the result of reduced time and cost
of accessing electricity by simplifying subscription procedures for commercial and industrial customers,
including a fast-track center in Kabul, and establishing procedures for reviewing both domestic and international
PPAs. These represent appropriate and manageable steps in the right direction. Rating: Satisfactory.



Pillar 1 rating: Satisfactory [4.8]




                                                                                                        Page 6 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



Relevance of PAs for Pillar 2: Improving the policy and institutional framework for public financial
management



PD 7. Public investment management: The PD (para. 56) noted that “existing budget systems relating to
project selection are inadequate to meet the challenges” of a “shrinking resource envelope” as grant support
diminishes, and that “political considerations historically dominated project selection, undermining both project
quality and policy alignment, while lack of thorough project appraisals has led to major problems with budget
execution.” PD 7 attempted to address some of these issues by requiring that any new project proposal
exceeding USD 7.5 million be subjected to strategic fit analysis and project appraisal, including financial,
economic, and gender analysis (for which guidelines were provided as part of the 2020 budget circular). The
PD (para. 59) expected that these measures would result in enhanced “alignment of development projects with
the ANPDF and national priority programs and improve[d] efficiency and effectiveness of development
expenditure,” with a target of half of new large projects having undergone economic and gender analysis. While
these measures were appropriate as an initial step, it was not clear how they would subsequently be followed
up to address the underlying political and resource envelope problems. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PAs 8-10. Tax administration: The operation included three PAs (8-10) that sought to address the seemingly
conflicting objectives of raising additional domestic revenues and improving the business climate by “Improving
the ease of filing and payment of taxes” (PD para. 60).

PA 8 aimed to reduce time and costs of compliance by making fast-track electronic filing available for all large
and medium taxpayer office filers (and mandatory for large banking and telecommunications filers). This was
expected to immediately result in reduced compliance costs, and facilitate increased revenue from the new VAT
to “ ‘leapfrog’ the use of paper‐based processes and forms.” Rating: Highly Satisfactory.

PA 9. The PD (paras. 64-67) articulated a clear results chain as to how private investment is inhibited by the
lack of “mechanisms for resolving disputes [which] constrains confidence and investment,” and lack of
confidence in the tax system deters informal firms (which constitute the overwhelming majority) from registering
and hence paying taxes. PA 9 operationalized the newly-created Tax Dispute Resolution Board as a means of
bypassing the delays and corruption that often attend cases before the Objections Department of the
Afghanistan Revenue Department. This appears to be an appropriate step to improve the institutional
framework, though not necessarily sufficient to achieve the hoped-for increase in “voluntary compliance and
potentially marginal increases in investment.” Rating: Satisfactory.

PA 10. The PD (paras. 68-72) noted the importance of the new VAT in replacing the “highly distortionary”
Business Receipts Tax (“which is considered a significant constraint to private sector development”) and
diminishing customs revenues due to accession to the World Trade Organization. Approval of VAT regulations
under PA 10, in particular regarding exemptions and refunds, was considered important to minimize negative
effects on low-income households and facilitate implementation of the VAT. This was an appropriate, though
not highly consequential step with respect to the objectives of improved public financial management and tax
revenues. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 11. Public expenditure management: The PD (para. 73) noted the challenge of providing adequate
budget for operating and maintaining the substantially expanded infrastructure base since 2001. The MOF had
developed new norms to address the problems of an “incremental budgeting approach, a highly centralized
budget system, and absence of effective monitoring.” PA 11 supported a pilot in four line ministries with respect


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



 to vehicles and buildings. This was “expected to lead to improved quality and efficiency of O&M expenditure
 through an evidence‐based and consistent approach.” Such a pilot was an appropriate first step, but without a
 pre-defined sequence of operations supporting continued rollout, it was not clear how the objective of improved
 public expenditure management would be fully achieved. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

 PAs 12-13. Revenue transparency and cash management: Given Afghanistan’s heavy dependence on
 international aid and the frequency with which “fiscal crises emerged before the international community knew
 the situation” (ICR para. 19), the PD (paras. 78-82) emphasized the importance of ensuring full transparency in
 revenue performance and regular reporting on the cash situation. Besides improving accountability to the
 public, it was expected that improvements in transparency, reporting, and cash management would result in the
 international community providing “an appropriate response in the context of an unexpected revenue decline.”

 PA 12 supported fortnightly reporting of disaggregated tax and customs data and progress against government
 revenue targets. This provided a clear link in the chain from actual performance to adjustments in international
 assistance. Rating: Satisfactory.

 PA 13 called for regular meetings of the cash management committee and timely publication of decisions taken.
 This was expected to contribute to the desired results of better accountability and quality of cash management.
 Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



 Pillar 2 rating: Satisfactory [4.6]



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Eighteen indicators were used to measure results, with four of the PAs under Pillar 1 having two or more
indicators (Table 2). Three were purely qualitative (no/yes), and one was already at 100 percent at the
time of design. “The indicators were measurable, though there were some questions about the accuracy
of baselines and sometimes actual values” (ICR para. 44). The overly broad PDOs made it difficult for
indicators to reflect achievement of ultimate objectives; rather, given the short one-year time horizon,
indicators were focused more on “presenting proof of impact of the underlying policy actions” (ICR para.
45), which themselves were oriented toward manageable small steps to lay conditions for the longer-term
objectives to be realized. The results framework in the PD (Annex 1) did not state the sources of data for
the indicators.



Table 2: Results indicators by Pillar and PAs; baseline and target values, and status
Results indicator (RI)                      Associate Baseline     Target     Status as of

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



                                               d PA    (2018)       (end 2020) target date
Pillar 1: Strengthening the policy framework to support state effectiveness, private
investment, and social inclusion
RI 1 Proportion of customs duties transferred
to DAB via electronic payment from             PA 1    2 percent    60 percent 84.3 percent
commercial banks
RI 2 Average monthly number of transactions
                                               PA 1    3,534        100,000     35,610
through the Afghanistan Payment System
RI 3 Proportion of total civil servant
appointments (2018- 2020) made in
                                               PA 2    0 percent    80 percent 100 percent
compliance with the new competitive
recruitment processes.
                                                       22 percent/ 26 percent/ 29 percent/
RI 4 Proportion of female civil servants in
                                               PA 2
total and at Senior Management Group level
                                                       6 percent    9 percent 9 percent
RI 5 Credit registry coverage as a proportion
                                               PA 5    1.3 percent 2.0 percent 2.35 percent
of adult population
RI 6 Proportion of women included on the
                                               PA 5    2.3 percent 4.0 percent 1.3 percent
credit register
RI 7 Time taken to acquire an electricity
                                               PA 6    114 days     80 days     60 days
connection for commercial customers
                                                       2448         1500        301 percent
RI 8 Cost of acquiring an electricity
                                               PA 6    percent of percent of (USD
connection for commercial customers
                                                       income       income      1700/565)
RI 9 Number of international PPAs reviewed
by dedicated multi-disciplinary team within    PA 6    0            3           10
DABS
RI 10 Number of municipal districts in which
an administrative land system is operating,
                                               PA 4    0            1           0
and land transactions are recorded within the
Land Information System.
RI 11 Responsibility for the design,
construction, and management of irrigation
                                               PA 3    No           Yes         No
canals for agriculture from the source to the
farm is allocated to MAIL.
Pillar 2: Improving the policy and institutional framework for public financial
management
RI 12 Proportion of new projects of over
US$7.5 million approved for implementation             0 percent    50 percent
in the discretionary development budget that PA 7      (2019        (2020        60 percent
have undergone economic and gender                     budget)      budget)
analysis.
RI 13 Proportion of active LTO firms utilizing
                                               PA 8    9,7 percent 60 percent 93 percent
fast-track filing.
RI 14 Number of cases submitted for ruling                                           1.
                                               PA 9    0            10
by the Tax Dispute Resolution Board
RI 15 VAT business processes approved,         PA 10   No           Yes          No
and communications material released based

                                                                                              Page 9 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



on regulations, including procedures for
exemptions
RI 16 The budget is developed through
application of the new O&M norms for four                No (2019   Yes (2020
                                                 PA 11                            Yes
pilot ministries (as reflected in budget working         budget)    budget)
papers)
RI 17 Number of downloads of new revenue
                                                 PA 12   0          500           >9000
performance reports
Ri 18 Proportion of Treasury salary payments
made within 10 days of submission of monthlyPA 13        100 percent 100 percent 100 percent
claims by line ministries




                                                                                               Page 10 of 29
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




                                                                    Page 11 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




Relevance of RIs for Pillar 1: Strengthening the policy framework to support state effectiveness,
private investment, and social inclusion



RI 1 (proportion of customs duties transferred via electronic payment from commercial banks) was a
clearly defined and measurable indicator of progress in implementing the new regulatory framework for
digital payments (PA 1), with a well-defined results chain leading to improvement of state effectiveness.
The baseline was credible and the target was clear with data available on a regular basis. Rating: Highly
Satisfactory.

RI 2 (average monthly number of transactions through the Afghanistan Payment System) was clearly
defined, measurable, and directly related to the intermediate objective of expanding the use of e-money
(though less directly to the ultimate objectives of state effectiveness, private investment, and social
inclusion). The baseline was credible and the target was clear with data available on a regular basis.
Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 3 (proportion of civil servant appointments in compliance with new competitive recruitment processes)
was related to one of three measures under PA 2, and part of a results chain leading to improved civil
service capacity and hence state effectiveness. It was problematic in that (i) it was “overly broad because
the underlying action applied only to grades 5 and 6;” (ii) “by definition if workers were not recruited
according to civil service rules, then they were not considered a part of the civil service;” and (iii) the
baseline of zero competitive recruitment is questionable (ICR paras. 43-44). Besides breaking down
recruitment by grade, it would have been important to have a complementary indicator of the share of all
new hires (including consultants and temporary workers) who were competitively recruited as “civil
servants.” Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 4 (proportion of female civil servants in total and in Senior Management) was clearly related to specific
actions (under PA 2) targeting recruitment of women, thereby enhancing social inclusion, though a results
chain to improved effectiveness of the civil service was not fully articulated. The baseline was credible, the
target clearly defined, and data available on a regular basis. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 5 (credit registry coverage of the adult population) was a suitable indicator of progress toward financial
inclusion, but only indirectly related through a hypothetical results chain to the intended result of increased
credit to private businesses (particularly SMEs, which are not necessarily included in credit registries). It
was more suited to the distant (given the baseline of 1.3 percent) goal of financial inclusion of individuals;
the more immediate goal of private investment would have been better served by a measure of what
proportion of businesses had accessed credit. Nevertheless, data for such an indicator may have been
available only through surveys, whereas the credit registry indicator had a credible baseline figure, clear
target, and regularly available data. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



RI 6 (proportion of women included on the credit register) was directly related to the social inclusion
objective, though not fully adequate to ensure actual access to finance. The baseline was credible, target
clear, and data regularly available. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 7 and RI 8 (time and cost to acquire an electricity connection for commercial customers) directly
measured an identified barrier to the objective of increasing private investment. Nevertheless, it would
have been preferable to have a direct indicator of private investment to measure the actual result of
reducing that constraint. Although the PD did not make it clear, the ICR indicated that the baseline and
subsequent data were obtained from Doing Business. These indicators were suitable as a direct measure
of the result expected from the specific actions undertaken to simplify subscription procedures and fast-
track large customers. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 9 (number of international PPAs reviewed within DABS) represented only an input into a results chain
that would lead eventually to the desired result of reduced electricity costs through better negotiation of
international PPAs. The average cost of electricity purchased through such agreements would have been
a better indicator of long-term results, albeit unsuited to the short time frame of this operation. Since this
was a new procedure, the baseline of nil was credible and the target clear, reasonable, and easy to
measure. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 10 (number of municipal districts in which an administrative land system is operating and transactions
recorded within the land information system) was problematic in that it depended on creation of a land
information system, which was not supported by the policy action, and in targeting only one district –
presumably as a pilot toward eventual rolling out of the system. Given the complexity and long term of
land administration reform, it might better have been left to a sequence of actions and more robust
indicators in a dedicated project, rather than a one-year DPO. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 11 (responsibility for the design, construction, and management of irrigation canals for agriculture from
the source to the farm is allocated to MAIL) was suitable as an indicator of progress in implementing
needed revisions to the Water Law and attendant regulations, though not directly a measure of the
intended ultimate result of more effective water management and usage. It was purely qualitative, with a
target of “Yes” in place of the baseline “No.” Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



Pillar 1 rating: Moderately Satisfactory



Relevance of RIs for Pillar 2: Improving the policy and institutional framework for public financial
management



RI 12 (proportion of new projects over USD7.5 million approved for implementation that have undergone
economic and gender analysis) was intended to track a first step toward improving the alignment of
projects with policy priorities and countering political determination of project selection. It would have been
better supplemented with an indicator as to whether such analysis in fact led to the desired results. The
baseline of nil was credible, and the target reasonable and measurable. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 29
                    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                    2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



               RI 13 (proportion of active LTO firms utilizing fast-track filing) was broader than the actions under PA 8
               (which covered only telecommunications and banking firms, only 12 percent of all active LTO firms [ICR
               para. 43]), and should have been supplemented by a direct indicator of the desired result of increased tax
               revenues through easier filing. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

               RI 14 (number of cases submitted for ruling by the Tax Dispute Resolution Board, TDRB) was directly
               related to PA 9 for operationalization of the TDRB, which serves the objective of improving the institutional
               framework, though it did not measure the desired result of “potentially marginal increases in investment”
               stemming from easier settlement of disputes. The target increase over a baseline of nil was clear and
               measurable. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

               RI 15 (VAT business processes approved, and communications material released based on regulations,
               including procedures for exemptions) was a direct indicator of whether or not PA 10 had been
               implemented, but provided no information on the impact of the VAT on revenues and the poor. Rating:
               Moderately Unsatisfactory.

               RI 16 (budget developed through application of the new O&M norms for four pilot ministries) directly
               indicated whether PA 15 had been implemented (with a baseline of “No”), but there was no clear results
               chain to fully achieving the objective of improved public expenditure management. A complementary
               indicator for the expected results of increased O&M budgets or better asset management would have
               been desirable (however, “a database for assets was lacking;” ICR para. 65). Rating: Moderately
               Satisfactory.

               RI 17 (number of downloads of new revenue performance reports) “was important to demonstrate that the
               reports were out in the open and readily available” (ICR para. 66), though it did not necessarily reflect the
               expected result of more responsive international assistance. From a baseline of nil, the target was clear
               and continuously measurable. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

               RI 18 (proportion of Treasury salary payments made within 10 days of submission of monthly claims by
               line ministries) was intended to monitor the risk of disruption in public service delivery due to late salary
               payments, but was not clearly related to the expected result of improved cash management through
               regular meetings of the cash management committee and publication of decisions, and it appeared
               somewhat disingenuous as a results indicator inasmuch as the baseline (as well as target) was 100
               percent. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.



               Pillar 2 rating: Moderately Satisfactory



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                                                                                                                     Page 14 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




Objective
Pillar 1: Strengthening the policy framework to support state effectiveness, private investment, and social
inclusion

Objective 1. Strengthen the policy framework to support state effectiveness
(PAs 1-4; RIs 1-4, 10, 11)

Rationale
Rationale: Three of six RIs were fully met; one partially; and two negligible.



PA 1 to develop a regulatory framework for e-money and digital payments made substantial progress in
shifting from cash to electronic payment of customs duties and taxes, thereby reducing opportunities for
corruption and leakage and improving state effectiveness. The target of 60 percent of customs duties being
paid electronically through commercial banks (RI1) was exceeded, reaching 84.3 percent. The success of the
electronic payment option introduced through PA 1 laid the groundwork for the central bank to require e-
payment for all transactions above AFN 50,000, and for the subsequent 2020 IP-DPO operation to move
toward full automation of the payment process.

However, progress toward interoperability was slower than expected, as the average number of monthly
transactions through the Afghanistan Payment System (APS) rose only modestly, from 3,534 at baseline to
35,610 at closing, well below the RI 2 target of 100,000. Enforcement of the regulation issued by the central
bank under PA 1 was slow, and all financial institutions were not connected to the APS by 2019 as expected,
although the pace picked up in 2020, with all twelve banks and three payment institutions as members of APS
(the four mobile money providers were to be connected in 2021).



Important progress was made under PA 2 to implement reforms of the Civil Servants Law with respect to
reducing political interference through competitive selection of the higher (G5 and G6) levels. The target of 80
percent competitive recruitment of new civil servants under RI 3 was exceeded, reaching 100 percent. This
indicator applied to all newly recruited civil servants, not just the targeted R5-R6 grades (which include
teachers), but implied achievement of competitive recruitment at all levels. However, the extent of success in
reducing political interference is not clear, because only those employees recruited in accordance with civil
service rules are counted as “civil servants” (ICR, footnote 11). Therefore, by definition, 100 percent of those
counted as “civil servants” were competitively recruited. Unfortunately, data are not available on the number
of additional employees hired through presidential or ministerial orders as consultants or temporary staff to fill
vacant positions, so it is not clear how far the achievement of 100 percent competitive recruitment of new civil
servants has gone toward reducing the influence of politically-hired workers.

Measures undertaken under PA 2 to increase female representation in the civil service (targeted outreach,
women-only positions, enforcement of the anti-harassment policy) were effective in raising the proportion of
women in the civil service from the baseline of 22 percent (RI 4) to 29 percent (above the target of 26
percent), and from 6 percent to 9 percent (as targeted) at the Senior Management Group level. (Although
these gains have been substantially reversed under Taliban rule, they appear to have helped to make



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



inclusion of women a norm that puts pressure on the new leaders to be more open to women’s participation in
the civil service, which includes teachers as well as other professions.)

The ICR (para. 48) noted that other efforts to reform the civil service were less successful. Though not
captured in the PAs and RIs, efforts were made to rationalize pay scales and align them with verified
competencies, and to improve “the retention of specialized staff through the introduction of cadres, including
career development.” Although Cabinet approved both the rationalized pay structure and Cadre Regulations,
they were at best partially implemented (in part due to reluctance to abandon the incentive payment system).



Some progress was made toward improving state effectiveness in the areas of water resource management
(PA 3) and land administration (PA 4), although the targets (RI 10 and RI 11) were not achieved. The revised
Water Law allowed for recognition of traditional water use rights and allocations, and established a legal
framework to govern dam safety, pollution, and groundwater. However, the reorganization of the MEW, as
well as confusion regarding application of the revised Water Law, ended up giving it responsibility for the
design, construction, and rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, rather than the MAIL, as intended (RI 11).

RI 10 to begin operating the new administrative land system in one district, Herat (PA 4), was not achieved
because it depended on a new Land Information System (LIS) to record transactions, which had not yet been
established. Nevertheless, an interim registration system was set up while awaiting the procurement
processes to set up and implement the full LIS, and it was being used to collect the necessary information to
convey deed and record land transactions in Herat, Kabul, and Mazar. Further progress in the LIS and title
registration was expected under the Afghanistan Land Administration Project (P164762).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2. Strengthen the policy framework to support private investment
(PAs 5-6; RIs 5-10, 14)


Rationale
Rationale: Five of seven RIs were fully met; two negligible.



Progress toward improving the underlying conditions for access to credit was made in connection with PA 5 to
expand coverage of the adult population in the credit registry by counting guarantees by the Afghan Credit
Guarantee Fund (ACGF) toward collateral requirements of banks (often 200 percent of loan amounts, well
above the minimum required 120 percent). The share of the adult population in the credit registry (RI 5) rose
to 2.35 percent, above the target of 2.0 percent. However, this broad coverage was not necessarily relevant
to the primary objective of increasing credit to SMEs, and political uncertainty plus the Covid-19 pandemic

                                                                                                Page 16 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



actually led to “dampened demand for funding by SMEs and higher risk aversion by banks” (ICR para. 51). It
is therefore unlikely that the ultimate objective of increased credit for private investment was achieved.
Nevertheless, there was some improvement in the prospects for future increases in guarantees to support
credit in that ACGF expanded its partners from two to five and USAID also set up a credit guarantee fund.
These measures were to be supported going forward by the World Bank operation for Strengthening
Afghanistan Financial Intermediation (P171886).

However, despite the overall expansion in credit registry coverage, the proportion of women (RI 6) actually fell
from the baseline of 2.3 percent to 1.3 percent, far below the target of 4.0 percent.



The Program made exceptional progress in reducing the time and cost of accessing electricity (PA 6) for
commercial customers, an important step toward easing this major constraint on private investment (as
indicated in the 2018 Doing Business report). The time for commercial customers to obtain an electricity
connection fell markedly from the baseline of 114 days (2019) to 60 days (end 2020), well below the RI 7
target of 80 days. Similarly, the connection cost relative to income per capita was reduced dramatically from a
ratio of over 24 to just 3, which was a fifth of the RI 8 target of 15. Furthermore, with support also being
provided by USAID and the Asian Development Bank, DABS agreed to bear half of the connection cost to
further lower costs to businesses.

PA 6 also supported electricity cost reduction over the longer term by getting DABS to approve a formal
written procedure for review and management of PPAs by a multi-disciplinary team. DABS had established a
multi-disciplinary Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats team that reviewed 10 international
PPAs during the project period, substantially exceeding the RI 9 target of 3 (from zero at baseline). This
improved review process was expected to lead to lower imported energy prices through renegotiation and
revision of existing contracts, as well as prior review of new ones.



The objective of improving the environment for private investment was also enhanced by success in
implementing the Tax Dispute Resolution Board (PA 9 and RI 14, discussed below under pillar 2). However,
as noted above under objective 1, PA 4, negligible progress was made toward the RI 10 indicator for
implementing a land information system that would replace the deed system with land titling, making it easier
to acquire land for investment.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3. Strengthen the policy framework to support social inclusion
(PAs 2, 5 and 7; RIs 4, 6, 12)



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




Rationale
Rationale: Two of three RIs were fully met; one negligible.



Social inclusion (including gender) measures were entirely subactions of PAs related to other objectives,
rather than specific PAs targeted only to the social inclusion objectives, but had specific indicators.



As noted above under objective 1, PA 2 for civil service reform achieved the targeted increases in the
proportion of women in the civil service to 29 percent overall (above the RI 4 target of 26 percent) and at the
Senior Management level to 9 percent (as targeted).



However, as discussed above under objective 2, the support for expansion of credit under PA 5 was
accompanied by an actual decrease in the proportion of women in the credit registry (RI 6) to just 1.3 percent,
rather than the targeted increase to 4.0 percent. No explanation was offered, although it may be attributable
in part to the clear dominance of men at baseline together with uncertainty engendered by the pandemic and
rising insecurity. In any case, as discussed in section 4 under RIs 5 and 6, inclusion in the credit registry is at
best only an indirect indicator of achievement of the objectives of private investment and social inclusion.



PA 7 was designed to include gender analysis along with economic analysis in feasibility studies for new
large projects (over USD 7.5 million). The RI 12 target of moving from zero to half of new projects (in the 2020
budget) undergoing such analysis was exceeded, with 60 percent of the five new projects recommended for
implementation having undergone such analysis (one of them was purely to address import duties in a donor-
funded infrastructure project, so did not need a separate feasibility analysis).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Pillar 2: Improving the policy and institutional framework for public financial management

Objective 4. Improve the policy and institutional framework for public financial management.
(PAs 7-13; RIs 12-18


Rationale
Rationale: Six of seven RIs were fully met; one negligible.


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




As noted above under objective 3, PA 7 supported financial, economic, and gender analysis of new large
projects, and the RI 12 target was exceeded. The policy reforms went significantly beyond the budget circular
to establish a legal framework for public investment management, thereby improving the institutional
framework for project selection driven by economic, social, and development criteria (as distinct from political
motivations). The analysis was also expected to better align development projects with the ANDPDF and
national priorities, thereby improving the effectiveness of development expenditures and enhancing
Afghanistan’s ability to obtain critical international financial assistance. In addition, significant capacity
building (through job training and workshops supported by the FPIP Support Program) was undertaken to
improve selection of public-private partnerships, with MOF playing a key role in assessing fiscal risks. The
expectation was that subjecting larger projects to stronger criteria and analysis would yield better projects and
utilization of resources.



PA 8 to make fast-track tax filing mandatory for banking and telecommunications firms under the LTO was
extremely successful, as measured by the (somewhat broader) indicator (RI 13) of the proportion of all active
LTO firms utilizing fast-track electronic filing, which rose dramatically from under 10 percent to 93 percent,
exceeding the target of 60 percent by more than half. This increased use of electronic systems makes it
easier for taxpayers to comply and reduces administrative costs for the Afghanistan Revenue Department. In
addition, substantial progress was made in e-filing under the MTO (33 percent of registered MTOs,
accounting for 86 percent of all those e-filing). Under the third (2020) IP-DPO, e-filing was made mandatory
for all large taxpayers, as well as selected sectors in the medium and small taxpayer offices (for which RI 13
was directly relevant).



PA 9 was highly effective in promoting implementation of the TDRB, which was established as part of tax
administration reforms to ensure accurate and professional case adjudication by a five-member team with a
range of expertise (economic, legal, accounting, tax, and private sector). This provided an alternative to the
Afghanistan Revenue Department’s (ARD) Objections Department, which was considered to be biased and
subject to corruption, as well as to the unwieldy and costly process of legal challenges. The RI 14 of 10 cases
submitted to TDRB for ruling was greatly exceeded, with 97 cases reviewed during 2020, of which 90 were
resolved (81 percent in favor of the taxpayers). TDRB held three public awareness programs in Kabul and
four in different provinces. These improvements in handling tax disputes are expected to improve confidence
in the tax system (a major impediment to formal registration of businesses) and improve the environment for
private investment.



Implementation of PA 10 regarding VAT regulations, including exemptions and refund procedures, was
delayed by the Covid-10 pandemic, and RI 15 regarding approval of business processes and communications
to the public on the exemptions of certain products (such as cooking oil and school textbooks) was not
achieved. It was hoped that these measures could be undertaken by the end of 2021 to operationalize the
VAT in order to broaden the tax base and improve public financial management, but this now appears
unlikely.


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 29
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




                      The revised norms for O&M budgets for civilian vehicles and buildings, as supported by PA 11, were piloted
                      in four ministries (Finance, Public Health, Public Works, and Higher Education) in the 2020 budget, as
                      targeted (RI 16). The government met the required budget from contingency reserves for O&M. “Increased
                      confidence in the quality of O&M expenditures is expected to lead, over time, to increased O&M allocations,
                      progressing toward levels required to the existing asset base [which had been] built up from years of high aid
                      inflow” (ICR para. 65). The absence of a database for assets was being addressed through a consultancy, to
                      help inform continued application of the O&M norms and budgeting. However, it remains to be seen how well
                      the government will continue to budget for O&M expenditures, given the tendency to prioritize expenditures
                      on new vehicles and buildings.



                      Transparency in public financial management was promoted under PA 12 by fortnightly revenue reports on
                      the MOF website providing full disaggregated tax and customs performance data at the level of collection
                      points, as well as progress against government revenue targets. Response was exceptional, with downloads
                      of the report surpassing 9000, far exceeding the target (RI 17) of 500. The information provided was
                      considered essential so that the international community is well informed in a timely manner to be able to
                      adjust financial support to fluctuations in revenue flows. (This has been a particular issue during election
                      cycles.) The ICR (para. 66) confirmed that the MOF has not only continued reporting but increased the
                      frequency to weekly (rather than fortnightly as required by PA 12).



                      PA 13 supported improvements in the accountability and quality of cash management through meetings of
                      the cash management committee at least every 21 days and publication on its website of decisions taken
                      within 7 days of the meeting. The ICR did not indicate whether this result was actually achieved; rather, it
                      stated that the baseline and target (RI 18) of 100 percent payment of salaries within 10 days of submission of
                      monthly claims by line ministries was satisfactorily maintained.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Table 3: Relevance and Efficacy Ratings of RIs by Pillar

                                                                                    Pillar Efficacy
 Results                           Relevance Efficacy rating (from RI or                                    Overall Efficacy
 Indicator                         rating    complementary evidence)                                        Rating
                                                                                    Rating


                                                                                                                      Page 20 of 29
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



Pillar 1: Strengthening the policy framework to support
state effectiveness, private investment, and social inclusion
RI 1            HS           High
RI 2            S            Modest
RI 3            MU           High
RI 4            S            High
RI 5            MS           High
RI 6            S            Negligible
RI 7            S            High
RI 8            S            High                             Moderately
RI 9            MS           High                             Satisfactory
RI 10           MU           Negligible
                                                              (“at least half of pillar
                                                              RI targets rated Modest
                                                              of better”; note: most
RI 11           MS           Negligible                       are rated High, but
                                                              three are Negligible)


Pillar 2: Improving the policy and institutional framework for
public financial management
RI 12             MS            High
RI 13             MS            High                                                      Moderately
                                                                  Moderately
RI 14             MS            High                                                      Satisfactory
                                                                  Satisfactory
RI 15             MU            Negligible
RI 16             MS            High                                                        (average of MS
                                                                  (“at least half of pillar
                                                                                            = 4 and MS = 4)
RI 17             MS            High                              RI targets rated Modest
                                                                  of better”; note: all but
                                                                  one are rated High, but
                                                                  one is Negligible,
                                                                  thereby precluding a S
RI 18            MU            High                               rating)




Efficacy is assessed on the basis of information available at the time of the ICR, which was issued on June 1,
2021. Nevertheless, the fall of Afghanistan to the Taliban in August 2021 means that few of the results as
measured are likely to be sustained. The overall lesson is that the risks of operating in a fragile environment will
sometimes result in failure. Since the consequences of conflict in Afghanistan were beyond what could be
anticipated and managed through a World Bank operation, this assessment of efficacy is based on the situation at


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 29
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



the time of the ICR (data as of the end of 2020), in order to draw more specific lessons relevant to the design and
implementation of operations under the conditions prevailing at the time.

Pillar 1: Of the 11 RIs under pillar 1, achievement was High for 7, Modest for one, and Negligible for 3.

   Pillar 1 efficacy rating: Moderately Satisfactory

Pillar 2: Of the 7 results indicators under pillar 2, achievement was High for 6 but Negligible for 1.

  Pillar 2 efficacy rating: Moderately Satisfactory

Efficacy of both pillars (and all four objectives) is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With relevance of prior actions rated as Satisfactory and efficacy as Moderately Satisfactory, the overall
outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political and security risk: The high risks inherent in Aghanistan’s fragile state and the United
States withdrawal in August 2021 have been swiftly realized in the form of a takeover of government by the
Taliban. This puts many of the achievements of the IP-DPO at high risk of being reversed, especially those
regarding social inclusion and participation of women.

Even in the absence of the change in government, there was modest risk that political commitment to some
of the reforms might wane, particularly with respect to funding O&M expenditures out of the budget, though
extension of the new norms to a fifth ministry (Public Works) was a positive sign.

Covid-19 pandemic risk: The pandemic delayed implementation of VAT reforms and implementation of
land reform, making them now subject to the political risk of change of government.



                                                                                                         Page 22 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



Low risk: Absent the political changeover, the prospects for sustained implementation of reforms seemed
highest with respect to the progress made in electronic payment of customs duties, fast-track tax filing, time
and cost of electricity connections, and publication of tax and customs revenue reports. Sustainability
prospects were high due to positive incentives from cost reductions to users and to strong interest (especially
by development partners) in transparency regarding key data.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Prior experience and lessons learned: As the second in a series of stand-alone but linked development
policy operations, this IP-DPO explicitly built on the experience of the first (2018) IP-DPO. Lessons applied
from the preceding operation included use of an innovative design that linked a series of ten tranches (after
the initial disbursement) to specific triggers (with diminishing value in the event of delays), and designation
of a single implementing partner lead in the government with direct reporting to the relevant Deputy
Minister, to maintain government ownership.

The design was well informed by prior experience and analytical work. In particular: reform of e-money and
digital payments drew on the 2018 WB report on “Developing Afghanistan’s Mobile Money and Financial
Technology"; implementation of civil service reform was based on several analytical studies and functional
reviews; electricity reforms implemented recommendations from the 2017 “Financial Evaluation of Da
Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat-DABS"; the 2013 “Land Governance Assessment Framework Afghanistan”
informed reforms of land administration; and PFM reforms were based on “Afghanistan: Development and
Efficient PIM System,” “ARD Tax Administration: Re-Organization and Modernization Proposal 2016-
2021,” and several other studies.



Selection of prior actions and results indicators: The actions selected for this IP-DPO series were
satisfactory and appropriately “aligned with the ANPDF, which was developed through extensive
consultations with civil society and the private sector” (PD, para. 84). The ICR for the 2018 IP-DPO (pp.
14-15) noted that it was recognized that some PAs would only provide initial steps toward objectives, not
directly generate the desired outcomes within a limited time frame, and that continuing support was being
provided through other projects to achieve desired outcomes.

Selection of results indicators was constrained by the short one-year time horizon and the need to focus on
proof of impact of policy actions that often represented small steps in a longer-term sequence. This made it
difficult for the indicators to reflect actual achievement of the overly broad objectives. In some cases, the
coverage of the indicator was broader than the specific policy action that it was intended to measure.




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



Identification and mitigation of risks: Risks were thoroughly assessed and known to be high, especially
based on prior experience. Political risk was considered especially high due to the 2019 Presidential
election, given that past elections had resulted in contestation and disruption. Prior actions were chosen in
non-politicized areas, although the risk of changing priorities was recognized. Weak institutional capacity
was another area of high risk, and several policy areas attempted to redress institutional weaknesses
(especially in the civil service and PFM, particularly revenue collection; also in water and land
management). High security risks were accepted on the basis that “previous experience has shown that
the Bank can successfully monitor and support implementation of reform programs even in a difficult
security environment” (PD para. 118). High macroeconomic risks were mitigated through the provision of
“flexible and dependable budget support assistance” and technical assistance to the financial sector.
Environmental and social risks were to be mitigated through measures (largely unsuccessful) to reform
irrigation management and land administration. Risks associated with vested interests were to be
addressed through “consultations with the affected social groups, the private sector and civil society” (PD
para. 123).

The operation used an innovative financing mechanism that linked tranches to specific policy actions to
reduce the risk of implementation of the entire operation being held up due to delays on individual agreed
reforms. This was especially appropriate in a high fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) context such as
Afghanistan, as well as the high number of policy actions (3 up front and 10 tranche triggers). Additional
implementation incentive was provided by reducing the value of tranches by 10 percent per month of delay
(all actions were undertaken on time).

Risks were also mitigated through parallel support programs, including the Payments Automation and
Integration of Salaries in Afghanistan Project (P168266), Afghan Land Administration System Project
(P164762), TA On Farm Water Management Project (P152870), Fiscal Performance Improvement Plan
Support Project (TA), and the USAID-funded Trust Fund Investment Climate Program Afghanistan.



Consultation with development partners and major stakeholders: The bulk of the funding came
through the multi-donor trust fund, ARTF, which provided a strong basis for coordination with the other
donors involved, on-going since its establishment in 2002. Within the ARTF’s three-tiered governance
structure, the Incentive Program Working Group provided a “forum for policy dialogue on key revenue,
public financial management, and structural reforms, between the government, the World Bank, and ARTF
donors,” which include 34 partners (https://www.artf.af/who-we-are/about-us#governance).

The actions proposed for this IP-DPO series were “aligned with the ANPDF, which was developed through
extensive consultations with civil society and the private sector” (PD, para. 84).



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 24 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)




Monitoring: The methodology of disbursing in small successive tranches provided a framework for regular
monitoring of progress in meeting the tranche release requirements. The World Bank team maintained daily
contact via email and WhatsApp regarding implementation (in particular regarding PFM measures; ICR para.
83). All ten tranche triggers were met on time over a six-month period.

Adaptation: Designing the series as stand-alone operations rather than trying to predetermine the policy
actions over a three-year period was intended to allow for annual adaptation to circumstances as they evolved
in the high-FCV environment. Some of the policy actions in this second operation (e.g., digital payment, civil
service reform, electricity connections, O&M policy) carried forward initial steps that were successfully
undertaken in the first (2018) IP-DPO. Others introduced new reforms when the ground had been adequately
prepared (e.g., collateral requirements, economic and gender analysis of large projects, tax administration).

Mitigation: Implementation risks were mitigated largely through technical assistance and support provided
through other World Bank operations.

Consultation: The ARTF (discussed above) provided a strong basis for ongoing coordination with the other
donors involved. The PD (para. 123) stated the intention to continue “consultations with the affected social
groups, the private sector and civil society.”



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The design was satisfactorily based upon extensive prior consultations for the ANPDF, prior analytical work,
and experience of the prior IP-DPO. Implementation through the innovative multi-tranche approach was
satisfactory, bolstered by extensive support through complementary operations and technical assistance.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Facilitation of e-money and digital payments under the project was expected to lead to social benefits through
greater financial inclusion, resulting in increased opportunities to save and borrow, given that most people
(especially the poor) are unbanked but do have access to a mobile phone. Enhanced creditworthiness through
expansion of the credit registry and inclusion of guarantees in collateral requirements was intended to facilitate

                                                                                                     Page 25 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



access to credit by private enterprises (though it is not clear that the impact would be significantly felt by the
informal enterprises and own-account workers that dominate employment of the poor).

Targeted improvements in land administration to provide greater security of tenure, especially in agriculture, as
well as recognition of traditional water rights, were particularly relevant to the rural poor (but have seen
negligible progress).

Introduction of economic and gender analysis of proposed large projects was intended to improve alignment
with the government’s pro-poor priorities.

VAT reforms were intended to shelter the poor from taxation on key food and other items in their budgets, and
move away from import taxes on staples such as wheat and rice. (However, these reforms were delayed by the
Covid pandemic.)



b. Environmental

Apart from measures intended to improve water use in agriculture, the operation did not have direct environmental
implications.



c. Gender

The operation included reforms specifically to increase the role of women in the civil service, with positive results.
Greater inclusion of women in the credit registry was also promoted (unsuccessfully).

Greater financial inclusion through expansion of e-money and digital payments was expected to benefit women in
particular, as they were largely excluded from the banking system. Electronic payment of taxes was likewise
considered particularly beneficial to women business operators.

Introduction of economic and gender analysis of proposed large projects was intended to ensure that implications
for and inclusion of women were considered in the design, approval and implementation of projects.

The shift to a title-based land administration system supported by the project (unsuccessfully, so far) was expected
to be more effective in securing women’s land rights than the current court-based system.



d. Other

Greater financial inclusion was promoted through the measures to expand e-money, digital payments, and the
credit registry.




                                                                                                       Page 26 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a satisfactory record of the project context, design, and achievements. It provides a summary
table of the prior actions and triggers with their associated results indicators, showing baseline, target, and
achieved values (also shown in Annex 1 with dates). However, the sources of data are not shown, making it
difficult to assess the quality of the evidence (most appear to be from the agencies involved). Analytical
underpinnings are detailed in Appendix Table A.3.

The quality of the analysis is high, with lessons based on the evidence and questions raised in some instances.
It provides a thorough explanation of achievements and setbacks, with some discussion of additional measures
that might be needed. It provides a logical progression from explanation of the context (by pillar and policy
area), to program development objectives, policy actions, and achievement of results, consistent with the
guidelines for ICRs. The presentation is clear, with adequate but not excessive explanation and documentation.

Although the political risk surrounding the Presidential election was highlighted in the PD, it is not clear from the
ICR to what extent political risks did or did not affect implementation, although the impact of the Covid-19
pandemic is mentioned.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                  Moderately
 Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                  ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons relating to experience in implementing the operation are drawn from the ICR (paras. 83-
87):

      Greater positive impact of a reform measure can be realized by close supervision leading up to
       and during implementation of the reform. In the case of improving transparency of revenue and cash
       management, for example, the WBG team had engaged in continuous formal (official emails) and

                                                                                                       Page 27 of 29
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



  informal (WhatsApp) contacts on a day to day basis. When the reform was implemented and there was
  an initial slippage of publishing revenue reports, there was a quick follow up from the WBG to help
  trouble shoot. As a result, today the measure has been sustained and achieved even greater frequency
  than was originally planned (every week vs. every two weeks).



 In data scarce country contexts, additional effort is needed to ensure a relevant and feasible
  results framework, which can be furthered by including potential results indicators as part of
  targeted sector analytic work. While the results framework was useful for the 2019 IP-DPG program
  evaluation, a number of indicators were only weakly attributable to the underlying actions. One possible
  remedy is to ensure that options for results indicators are part of the analytical underpinning for a
  particular reform area. This solution will help WBG teams in developing results frameworks because they
  will have an array of potential indicators available during program preparation.



 The development and use of the monitoring matrix can play an important role in helping to
  allocate accountability for reforms. This matrix as applied under the IP-DPG program also helped
  ensure a common understanding of progress and mobilize attention to resolve issues as they arose. The
  monitoring matrix is highly useful in general, but particularly in a low capacity, FCV context where
  implementation slippages are common.



 Pilots are useful in revealing the degree of readiness in moving ahead with a significant reform
  and what to do if not fully ready. The conduct of a pilot of the new O&M policy in four ministries
  revealed a major constraint to the reform. In trying to establish BNGs, necessary for accurate budgeting
  for O&M, it became clear that there was not a data base for government assets on which to base the
  budgeting. As a temporary measure, the government provided for a contingency reserve in the interim
  while TA support helped develop the necessary data on existing assets. By having an active pilot that
  was being held up by the lack of data, the government was able to force action to deal with this
  constraint, demonstrating that a major purpose of a pilot is the learning aspect.



 Reforms to establish a deed system for land management and budgeting for O&M may realize
  progress, but technical issues may not allow for full implementation within the timeframe of a
  single DPG, particularly in an FCV context. In both cases under the 2019 IP-DPG, substantial
  progress was made but technical challenges to set up the LIS and the BNGs based on asset data were
  not possible within the one-year timeframe. While it was worthwhile to pursue the reform, the target was
  too ambitious for a stand-alone operation.



 Flexibility in designing DPFs is important in the FCV context where there are capacity issues as
  well as high turnover in leadership and staff. This flexibility helps cope with implementation of policy


                                                                                            Page 28 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      2019 Incentive Program DPO (P168446)



       reforms. This support also applies in situations to support some implementation measures for the policy
       reforms which were already approved.



      Parallel support can go a long way in easing a country’s implementation constraint, which is
       especially important in an FCV country. The program achieved progress in a wide range of policy
       areas. The additional support in each reform area proved necessary and, in most areas, sufficient, to
       complete the reforms as envisioned despite weak capacity. This complement is particularly important
       because it is not always feasible to make actions sufficiently strong to fully achieve PDOs by
       themselves. Moreover, DPF instrument is meant to support ‘reforms’ and not include implementation
       measures. Thus, parallel support is key, such as was the case in reforms in tax administration, PFM,
       land management and digital payments, among other areas.



Regarding the latter point, although it may have been helpful to the Afghanistan Land Administration System
Project to include a relevant policy action (PA 4) under the IP-DPO, as a way of putting additional pressure on
the government for implementation, because a critical element for implementation (the Land Information
System) lay outside the purview of the DPO, its non-availability meant that achievement of the relevant indicator
(RI 10) in the DPO was negligible. It would have been better to leave implementation of this somewhat
complicated process to the project dedicated to that issue, rather than try to promote one stage in the DPO
without control over the necessary conditions.



While the high political and security risks were recognized, the fall of Afghanistan to the Taliban in August 2021
was not anticipated, nor could the World Bank have done anything to mitigate it. The overall lesson is that the
risks of operating in a fragile environment will sometimes result in failure.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 29 of 29
