     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022627

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Tuvalu                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 2                                           2

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P155066                                     Third Development Policy Operation




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D1520                                 30-Jun-2018                                           3,448,847.32

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Dec-2016                               30-Jun-2018
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                                3,300,000.00                                          0.00

 Revised Commitment                                 3,300,000.00                                          0.00

 Actual                                             3,448,847.32                                          0.00




P161867_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Tuvalu                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P161867                                    Fourth Development Policy Operation ( P161867 )




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D1520,IDA-D3250                         30-Jun-2019                                               7206409.93

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  30-Aug-2018                                 30-Jun-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                                7,500,000.00                                               0.00

  Revised Commitment                                 7,500,000.00                                               0.00

  Actual                                             7,206,409.93                                               0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Soren Kirk Jensen            Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

This ICRR covers both the Third Development Policy Operation as well as the Fourth Development Policy
Operation in a programmatic series of two DPOs. No Program Development Objective (PDO) is clearly stated in
the Financial Agreement letter of either operation, and neither Program Documents (PDs) articulated a clear
PDO. While the PDs of the DPO did not articulate a PDO, the ICR stated the PDO as follows (it is unclear what
the source is for this):

The proposed development policy operation will support the Government of Tuvalu's medium term reform agenda
in the areas of public finance management, service delivery and public enterprise reforms.

The PDO stated by the ICR complicates the review of the DPO by stating the three key focus areas as: service
delivery (which adequately reflects the support within the education sector but not the health sector, where
support was focused on changing health policy to reduce risk of non-communicable disease (mainly focused on
regulating access to tobacco)), and public sector enterprise reform, where the focus was actually on
strengthening financial sector stability through reform of the banking sector.

The following describes the pillars in each of the operations in the series (note a “pillar” is not the same as a
PDO. Program documents should clearly articulate PDOs).

Third DPO:




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



      The first pillar of the program focuses on improving social service delivery through (a) enhancing
       inclusiveness and equity of secondary education and (b) reducing risk factors for noncommunicable
       diseases (NCDs).
      The second pillar of the program focuses on improving macroeconomic sustainability through (a)
       strengthening investment management of reserve assets; (b) improving effectiveness of payroll.

Fourth DPO:

      First pillar: Improving the delivery of education and health services through: i) enhancing inclusiveness
       and equity of secondary education; and ii) reducing risk factors for non‐communicable diseases.
      Second pillar: Improving macroeconomic sustainability through: i) strengthening the management of
       reserve assets; ii) improving the effectiveness of payroll controls and linkages to the budget; and iii)
       enhancing banking sector oversight and sustainability.

In light of the above, and for the purposes of this ICRR, the PDOs are restated as follows:

    1. Improve service delivery in education and health
    2. Improve macroeconomic sustainability


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
As noted in Section 2a, the pillars and PDOs were not well articulated or separated. The DPO series had two
pillars that ran through the two operations with changes from the third to the fourth DPO. In the third DPO, pillar
1 was on social services with the wording adjusted to education and health services delivery in the fourth DPO.
Pillar 2 was on macroeconomic sustainability, which in the fourth DPO was expanded to include banking sector
reform.

The ICR describes the following two pillars for the series:

      Pillar 1: Improving the delivery of education and health services
      Pillar 2: Improving Macroeconomic Sustainability


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The Third DPO (first in this series) was approved on December 9, 2016 and closed on June 30, 2018. An IDA
grant provided financing of US$ 3.3m with US$ 3.45m disbursed.

The Fourth DPO (second in this series) was approved on August 30, 2018 and closed on June 30, 2019. An
IDA grant provided financing of US$7.5m; US$7.21 was disbursed.

Discrepancies were due to exchange rate fluctuations between the US and Australian dollar.


3. Relevance of Design


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



a. Relevance of Objectives

With less than 12,000 people, Tuvalu is the fourth-smallest country in the world in terms of population. Its
low-lying landmass is a mere 26 km2 in the South Pacific Ocean and as such its existence is under threat
from climate change. Due to these contextual features it is characterized by high institutional and social
fragility although it is not affected by violent conflict. Tuvalu has no country partnership framework with the
Bank Group, but a Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) (FY2017-21) covers nine Pacific Island countries.
The National Strategy for Sustainable Development or Te Kakeega III articulates the government’s strategy.

The relevance of the restated PDO (as opposed to the PDO stated in the ICR) is as follows:

     1. Improve service delivery in education and health: Building human capital is an important priority
         for Tuvalu. On education, quality is as much an issue as access across the nine Pacific Island
         countries, including Tuvalu , but the region also faces a demographic situation characterized by a
         large and growing number of young people and high levels of youth unemployment. Building human
         capital was a vital pillar of the Te Kakeega III strategy, with reforms focused on enhancing
         inclusiveness and equity of secondary education. On health, the Pacific Islands face urgent
         challenges in the form of NCDs. Regionally, the main NCD-related challenge is obesity (40 percent of
         adults are obese, and 80 percent are overweight). In addition, Tuvalu is in the top ten countries
         globally for the prevalence of diabetes in the 20‐79 age range).

Improve macroeconomic sustainability: This PDO (which had to be inferred from program documentation)
is very general and encompasses a wide range of possible reform areas, making an assessment of its
relevance difficult. A more focused PDO, perhaps stated at a lower level would have been preferable and
would have been more supportive of operational transparency and accountability.




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 Pillar 1: Improve the delivery of education and health services
 DPO 3                                         DPO 4
                                               PA2: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
 PA1: The Recipient’s Cabinet has endorsed
                                               approved a proposal to amend the Education
 the removal of secondary education school
                                               Act to formally recognize ECC and education as
 fees to enhance inclusiveness and equity of
                                               a government competency, overseen by the
 secondary education.
                                               Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sports.
 PA3: The Recipient’s Cabinet has approved     PA4: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
 the Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill and      approved increases to selected excise and
 directed that the amendments be introduced to import duties on specific tobacco, alcohol, and
 Parliament to reduce risk factors for non-    sugary beverage products, to reduce non-
 communicable diseases.                        communicable disease risk factors.
 Pillar 2: Improve Macroeconomic Sustainability

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



                                            PA6: The Recipient has: (a) appointed a
PA5: The Recipient commissioned a review of representative of the Recipient’s Government to
the Tuvalu Trust Fund, which provided       the TTF Investment Committee; and (b) through
recommendations to strengthen reserve asset its participation in TTF Board decision‐making:
management by focusing on improving         (i) increased TTF secretariat staffing and, (ii)
governance and investment policy. The       decided to commission an investment strategy
Recipient has submitted this review to the  review to align investment management better
Tuvalu Trust Fund Board for endorsement of with strategic objectives.
the recommendations.

                                              PA8: The Recipient, through its Ministry of
                                              Finance and Economic Development, has
PA7: The Recipient has introduced an          approved and circulated a revision to the
automated payroll system to improve the       financial instructions mandating the
effectiveness of payroll controls.            documentation of the annual and medium-term
                                              budgetary impact of civil service pay policy
                                              changes.
                                              PA10: The Recipient, through its Ministry of
                                              Finance and Economic Development, has taken
PA9: The Recipient’s Parliament has enacted steps to make the Banking Commission fully
the Banking Commission Amendment Act and operational by approving
a framework for monitoring the Banking sector
to improve oversight and sustainability.      a supervision plan, and budgeting and
                                              advertising for an international supervision
                                              expert.



Pillar 1

PA1 and PA2 aim to contribute to reforming service delivery. PA1 does so by facilitating the removal of the
constraint in terms of a fee structure, which inhibited low-income families from pursuing secondary education.
However, it is unclear how PA2 contributes to the objective. Specifically, how significant was the lack of
formal recognition of ECC and education as a government competency overseen by the Ministry of
Education, Youth, and Sports a constraint to improving education and service delivery? There is little
articulation for how this will translate into progress toward achievement of the PDO. The PD lacks clarity on
the results chain.

Rating PA1: moderately satisfactory

Rating PA2: unsatisfactory

PA3 and PA4 address health policy rather than service delivery. PA3 targeted tobacco use through a
requirement for Parliament to enact an amended law on tobacco control. While appropriate health policy, the
ICR does not how this will translate into an improvement in the delivery of health services. The Program
Document for the third DPO states that the government had reviewed the 2008 Tobacco Control Act in 2016,
identifying several weaknesses. The amended law addressed these through broadened definitions, restricted
access to minors, disallowed the sale of single cigarettes, and introduced licensing requirements for

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



importers. It also paved the way for introducing price and tax measures. This is the focus of PA4 as it
required increasing excise and import duties not only on tobacco but also on specific alcohol and sugary
beverage products. While consumer behavior and price elasticity can differ from place to place, there is
overwhelming evidence of the impact of price changes on reducing tobacco consumption. The inclusion of
excises on alcohol and sugary beverage products increases the relevance by broadening the scope to
address NCDs, diabetes, and alcoholism (and potentially gender-relevant associated domestic violence)
which are major health issues in Tuvalu. The two PAs supported relevant health policy in Tuvalu, but have
little to do with service delivery and hence the results chain is unclear. While a reduction in NCDs would
presumably reduce demands on the heath system, and increased revenue would arise from increased taxes
on tobacco and alcohol, there is little in the PD to justify an expectation that these resources would be
allocated to improving health services.

.

Rating PA3: unsatisfactory

Rating PA4: unsatisfactory

Pillar 2

PA5 and PA6 are related to the objective of strengthening public financial management (PFM). From a
revenue and fiscal perspective, one cannot underestimate the importance of good management of the TTF.
PA5 was based on an evidence-based approach (based on findings of two reviews) to encourage reform
within a highly sensitive policy area to address a costly investment and management structure. The Bank’s
review had identified several weaknesses, including: “the (a) relatively weak return compared to the risk
profile; (b) relatively high cost of management fee compared to return; and (c) weaknesses in the investment
management governance structure.” (PD1). Reforms were critical to ensure the long-term sustainability of the
TTF. The team estimated that a reduction of management fees would save more than half a million US$ per
year, equivalent to 1.8 percent of Tuvalu’s GDP. Endorsement of the recommendations of the review by the
TTF Board represented a starting point followed by PA6 that required several significant reforms, including
ensuring government representation in the investment committee, increasing TTF secretariat staffing, and
commissioning an investment strategy review. As noted, the PAs were grounded in credible analytical work,
and the results chain between PA5, PA6, and the unpacked PDO was convincing and as explicit as feasible
in a sensitive policy area. The PAs, if implemented, would make a major contribution towards the PDO of
strengthened public financial management given the sheer size of the savings involved in a renegotiated
management fee compared to the modest size of the GDP of Tuvalu.

Rating PA5: satisfactory

Rating PA6: satisfactory

PA7 and PA8 represented an expenditure dimension of the PFM PDO through improved payroll control, but
the results chain underpinning this area of intervention was not convincing. PA7 sought to extend the existing
financial management information system (ACCPAC) by introducing an automated system to reduce the
administrative burden, increase controls’ effectiveness, and allow public servants to focus on more critical
areas. However, introducing overly complex automated or digital solutions in low-capacity environments
(such as Tuvalu) is problematic. Analytically, the design drew from a PEFA self-assessment and World Bank
TA that raised concerns about the implications of “uncontrolled wage bill growth.” PA7 was followed up by
PA8 in the fourth DPO focused on documentation of the budgetary impact of civil service pay policy changes

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



on an annual and medium-term basis. However, while PA7 could reasonably have been expectedto
strengthen control over civil service pay, PA8 does not itself result in any reduction in fiscal pressures or any
binding change in the parameters for setting wage increases. Still, given the recognition within the Bank of
severe capacity constraints PA7 was too ambitious for the context.

Rating PA7: moderately satisfactory

Rating PA8: moderately unsatisfactory

PA9 and PA10 are associated with the objective to improve macroeconomic stability. The amendment act to
the Banking Commission notably included a provision for the minister of Finance and Economy to have the
interim powers to perform the functions and powers of the banking commission in recognition of the capacity
constraints until an independent Commission commences operations. Given the critical challenges
concerning capacity, this amendment made sense. PA10 in the Fourth DPO took this forward to make the
banking commission fully operational through support from an international supervision expert, adequately
resourced, with an approved supervision plan put in place. This prior action aimed to enable the Interim
Commissioner to carry out their functions within existing capacity constraints These PAs could reasonably be
expected to improve awareness of vulnerabilities in the banking system which is an important first step to
strengthening system stability. A Satisfactory ratings would require additional certainty that the strengthened
framework would result in actions to address underlying weaknesses. Therefore these PAs are rated
Moderately Satisfactory.

Rating PA9: moderately satisfactory

Rating PA10 moderately satisfactory




Overall

While the PAs were broadly relevant to the development challenges faced by Tuvalu. The drawbacks were
mainly related to a lack of clarity with respect to the results chain and the number and variety of objectives
under different policy areas. This was further obfuscated by the way the DPO was formulated in the ICR
which had limited connection to the actual focus of the program. Prior actions under objective 1 (PA1-4)
broadly aimed to support policy reforms, not service delivery, and objective 3 was sought to support reforms
in the financial sector, not public enterprises.




Rating


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale



Rationale



RI 1: In line with the weakness of the results chain for the PDO (as stated in the ICR) the RI only marginally
measures the impact of PA1, and it is not relevant to PA2. Indeed, there are no RIs to capture the impact of
PA2. Baseline data and target are precise and well-sourced to the Ministry of Education, which produced credible
data to measure the achievement of the target at the time of the ICR.

Rating R1: Moderately unsatisfactory

RI 2: While the indicator is mostly adequate to measure the impact of PA4 it only peripherally measures the
impact on PA3, which targeted a revision of the legal framework. However, the relevance of PA3 and PA4 is weak
since the link between increased retail prices and improved service delivery is unclear. The intent of P3 and PA4
is to reduce risk of non-communicable disease by increasing prices of harmful products.

Rating R2: Unsatisfactory

RI 3: The RI has two parts, with one part targeting competitive appointment of investment managers (RI 3a) and
the other a reduction of the annual management fee (RI 3b). They only peripherally measure the impact of PA6
and PA7 which had a different focus but the combined RIs were relevant to the achievement of the reworded
PDO of improved PFM (given the importance of the TFF to fiscal sustainability and the sheer size of potential
savings). The PD clearly lays out the underlying rationale for the indicator but the way it is defined and used
within the results chain is less clear. While the baseline data both for RI 3a and 3b is clear, the data sources are
not. It is unclear (in the ICR) if the data to measure achievement of the target was available for the targeted year
of 2019 or only for 2021, what would be the source for the fees charged by the two Fund managers and how the
basis point reduction was calculated.

Rating R3: Moderately satisfactory.

RI 4: This results indicator measures progress towards strengthening PFM. It adequately measures the impact of
PA8 but not the earlier PA7 and was revised under DPO 4 from a quantitative indicator measuring the variance
between budget and actual wage spending. The simplification of the indicator to target the introduction of a
budget reporting measure made its connection to the prior action and results chain clearer, more credible, and
narrower, but with a less clear impact on the PDO. The PD clearly explains the reasoning behind the indicator
although extending it to a requirement for reporting on spending in in-year and annual reports and actual
expenditure would have strengthened its ability to measure impact. The source is clear and credible and was
available at the time of the preparation of the ICD.

Rating R4: Satisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



RI 5: This results indicator was intended to measure progress towards the PDO of improving macroeconomic
sustainability. The indicator is very broadly formulated. It does capture improvement in the supervision of the
banking sector, but as with the associated PA, it does not result in actions that will improve underlying conditions.
The ICR reports that the target was changed from annual to regular monitoring reports, but this is not evident in
the PD where the Policy and Results Matrix refer to annual reports and the Summary of Proposed Grant and
Program table use the phrasing “… at least annually”. .

Rating R5: Moderately satisfactory

Table on Results Indicators
                                                                                      Actual
RI description                      Baseline             Target
                                                                         Actual value change in RI
(assigning a   Associated RI        (including           (including
                                                                         as of target RI relative achievement
number to      PA(s)      relevance units and            units and
                                                                         date         to targeted rating
each RI)                            date)                date)
                                                                                      change
Objective 1: Improve delivery of education and health services
                                                                                         Total: 168%
                                         Gross
                                                                                         (8.4pp/5pp)
                                         secondary                      Actual (2019)
                                         enrolment rate Gross
                                                                                         Male: 90%
                                                        secondary       Total:75.1%
                                                                                         (4.5pp/5pp)
RI 1: Increased                          Total: 66.7% enrollment rate
                PA1
enrolment in                                            is at least 5   Male: 62.0%
                              MU                                                         Female:      Modest
secondary                                Male: 57.5% percent higher
                PA2                                                                      262%
education                                               for total, male Female:
                                                                                         (13.1pp/5pp)
                                         Female:        and female      89.9%
                                         76.8%          (2019)

                                         (2015)
                                                         Increase in the
                                                         average price
                                                         of these
                                                                         Alcohol and
                                                         products from
RI 2: Increase in                                                        Tobacco         Price
                                                         2017 to 2019
retail price of                                                          Group           increase
                  PA3                    0               exceeds
unmanufactured                                                           increase:       (11.48%)
                              U                          overall CPI                                  Negligible
tobacco, wine,                                                           11.48% with     was 140% of
                  PA4                    (2017)          inflation rate
spirits and                                                              overall CPI     the targeted
                                                         over the same
cordial                                                                  increasing by   increase
                                                         period by 2
                                                                         6.16%           (CPI
                                                         percent
                                                                                         +2%=8.16%)
                                                  (2019)
Objective 2: Improve macroeconomic sustainability
RI 3            PA5       MS      Investment      Investment             Competitive     100%           Substantial
International                     managers not managers                  selection of
best practice   PA6               selected on     selected on            managers
applied to TTF                    competitive     competitive
investment

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



    management                                       basis.        basis.

                                                     Annual         Annual         4 basis points 20%
                                                     management management reduction
                                                     fee average 63 fee reduced by (2021)
                                                     basis points 20 basis
                                                     (2015)         points.

                                                                      (2019)
                                                     Budget           Budget
    RI 4 Adopting a                                  documentation documentation
                                                                                     2019 budget
    medium‐term                                      does not         reports
                                                                                     documentation
    perspective to                                   clearly identify estimated
                     PA7                                                             reports
    salary and                                       three‐year       costs of such
                                          S                                          estimated                 Substantial
    staffing changes                                 ahead costs of policy
                     PA8                                                             costs of wage 100%
    in annual                                        changes in       changes, if
                                                                                     policy changes
    budget                                           civil service    any.
                                                                                     (2019)
    documentation                                    pay policy.
                                                     (2017)           (2019)
                                                                      Monitoring
                                                                      reports are
                                                                      produced       Monitoring
                                                                      annually,      reports
                                                     No regular       including      produced
    RI 5 Increased PA9                               monitoring       information on regularly by
    oversight of the                      MS         reports          nonperforming PERMU           50%        Modest
    banking sector PA10                                               loans, and     though with
                                                     (2015)           tabled to the some delays.
                                                                      Cabinet for
                                                                      information.   (NA)

                                                                   (2019)




  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Reform service delivery (in education and health)

                                                                                                             Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)




Rationale
RI 1 met the target for the gross enrolment rate by a significant margin, except for male students where the
target of a five-percentage points increase was missed by 0.5 percentage points. Total enrolment increased
by 8.4 percentage points, and female enrolment by 13.1 percentage points by 2019. Given the lack of
continuity of the results chain caused principally by a lack of connection between PA1 and PA2 (the shift in
focus from secondary education to early childhood care discussed in detail under relevance of PA) and the
inability of RI1 to measure PA2, the result is downgraded from high to modest.

RI 2 exceeded the targeted price increase of a two percent increase in the price of targeted products by end-
2019. However, in line with the discussion of the problematic results chain associated with this PDO, the
indicator did not measure improved service delivery in health. The result is therefore negligible.

The combined rating of objective 1 is moderately unsatisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve macroeconomic stability

Rationale
RI 3 broadly met the dual targets of ensuring competitive selection of investment managers and reducing the
annual management fee by four-basis points, against a target of 20. Given the fully achieved target on
competitive selection and the partially achieved target on the management fee reduction, achievement of the
RI is rated substantial.

RI 4 met the target (revised and improved during the Fourth DPO) to ensure adequate reporting of the public
payroll’s short- and medium-term implications. The increased clarity improved the results chain significantly.
The fully achieved RI targets leads to a substantial rating.

The ICR reports that the RI5 target of moving from no monitoring reports to producing them
regularly. However, “regularly is not defined” and there is no clear date associated with the achievement
date. Moreover, the ICR indicates reports were produced with “some delays”. The achievement rating is
modest.



The overall efficacy rating of objective 2 is satisfactory




                                                                                                Page 11 of 17
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)




                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall the efficacy rating is moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of the prior actions is moderately satisfactory.

The overall efficacy rating is moderately satisfactory.

The overall outcome rating is thus moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Development outcomes achieved are at risk due to the severe capacity constraints and limited human resources
in the microstate.

The achievement of increased enrolment in secondary education could be reversed unless authorities improve
the quality of secondary education, and if suitable jobs are available for graduates.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)




a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The program documents spelled out clearly how design had drawn on lessons learned from implementing other
operations in Tuvalu, especially in recognizing capacity constraints, selectivity, and continuous engagement.

The Program Documents lacked a clearly articulated PDO. When taking the pillars as PDOs, the second pillar
(macroeconomic sustainability) was defined at too high a level making its achievement as a result of the PAs
difficult to assess..( The PDO articulated in the ICR was incorrect).

The Third DPO pointed out the value of a broad reform program with a few critical actions with a significant
potential impact without overloading the government's implementation capacity. Yet, while the number of PAs
was not excessive, they were fragmented and spread widely across distinct, non-complementary policy areas,
further straining limited capacity. The objective and associated prior actions introducing an automated payroll
system turned out too complex.

The use of analytical underpinnings varied. An example of excellent use was the efforts to reform investment
management in the TTF. The Bank relied on its own knowledge work as well as an external review by the New
Zealand Institute for Pacific Research. Both studies were used to inform design of the interventions in a sensitive
policy area. On the other hand, while the PEFA underpinning the DPO series pointed out shortcomings in
payment controls, the series proposed a payroll system that was ultimately too complex, requiring revision for
the Fourth DPO.

Both DPOs identified broad macro external shocks common to the region as risks to achieving development
outcomes, including extreme weather events and slower domestic policy reform. The systematic operating risk
rating was substantial in both PDs, and the risk profile increased in the Fourth DPO where risk associated with
institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability was rated high. Risk mitigation measures included
dialogue with the government about each policy action, dedicated technical assistance and support to strategic,
selective and gradual reforms.

The design of the operation was based on dialogue with the government, especially the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development, and a broader stakeholder consultation process involving NGOs, churches, and
community groups, including women's groups. The Bank has had close cooperation and coordination with the
small group of development partners in Tuvalu (ADB, IMF, Governments of Australia and New Zealand, and the
EU).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



The ICR does not present concrete evidence of monitoring progress toward targets for results indicators before
series completion. However, the team adjusted many RIs from the Third to the Fourth DPO based partly on
progress and data availability. Specific examples include targeted increases in secondary enrolment rates,
which the team made more granular, smoking prevalence as the initially proposed indicator wouldn’t be updated
on time to capture the results of the operation, and the shift from a quantitative indicator to a process-oriented
indicator on civil service pay policy.

There were few changes to the circumstances in the implementation period which fell into a relatively calm
period between the two extreme events of Tropical Cyclone Pam in March 2015, general elections in September
2019, and the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. Annual high-level consultations and quarterly meetings
took place between development partners based in Suva, Fiji.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

---

Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Social and poverty impacts were expected under objective 1. These impacts are discussed as “expected to have
a positive impact on poor people and vulnerable groups.” (ICR p. 22). However, there is no data to back this
assertion as the most recent data on the poverty incidence dates back to 2010. This is noted in the ICR and can
reconfirmed through the World Bank open data site
(https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.NAHC?locations=TV). Hence all impacts identified on social and
poverty related issues that were planned in the program are presumed and not confirmed by more recent date.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not identify any negative or positive impacts of the DPO on the environment or natural resources.



c. Gender
                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)




The ICR identifies a positive gender impact of reduced consumption of alcohol that could lead to a reduction in
domestic violence against women. Evidence dating back to 2007 on higher levels of obesity among women than
men is used to argue that women will benefit disproportionately from a reduction in the consumption of
unhealthy foods. However, evidence of these impacts is absent from the ICR.



d. Other

The ICR identified Institutional Change/Strengthening as an area of impact. It concluded that the activities in the
macroeconomic policy area had led to organizational and institutional improvements. However, evidence is
lacking.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presents a coherent narrative of the program that flows logically. With regard to the quality of evidence,
the ICR is relatively well referenced to credible sources and presents robust evidence to support the
achievements reported but includes limited annexes and appendices. For example, given the little progress on
financial sector reform and the absence of a banking commission, it references the Public Enterprises and
Monitoring Unit (PERMU), responsible for monitoring the two banks alongside other public enterprises. The
section on other impacts lacks evidence and relies on expectations.

With regard to the quality of analysis, the ICR presents a DPO although the PDs or financial agreement did not
contain any without further explanation. Moreover, the objectives articulated did not adequately capture the
actual focus of the PAs and further obfuscated the results framework. The ICR addressed the absence of a
Theory of Change in the program documents by adding five ToCs to the ICR, but their quality is limited.

With regard to lessons learned, the ICR points to the potential value of undertaking a binding constraints
analysis. However, lessons are generic, for example, concerning capacity constraints and do not detail how this
impacted specific PDOs and their results chains. The ICR embeds some interesting lessons in the narrative but
doesn’t mention them in the lessons section. The clearest example of this is addressing banking supervision
through a regional rather than a national approach.

The ICR states that indicator targets would be better if set as the immediate, anticipated impact of the selected
action. The example provided on raising taxes that may lead to an increase in price but not necessarily a
reduction in consumption correctly identifies a key weakness of the results framework (as discussed in the
relevance of RI section). On the other hand, the ICR didn’t mention the weakness of the results chain
concerning education and particularly the shift to a focus on ECC that is only related to improved education in
the long term. In addition, the ICR doesn’t analyze how elements that didn’t work could be improved on, for
example, in terms of financial sector reform.

The ICR is well balanced regarding the level of information and evidence presented. However, in some cases,
the ICR could have drawn on additional examples of analytical underpinning or lessons from experience from


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



the PDs. For example, the ICR didn’t mention that the government had reviewed the 2008 Tobacco Control Act
in 2016, identifying several weaknesses, which added to the logic of the results chain


a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

In microstates characterized by high institutional and social fragility, limited capacity and resources in the public
sector, and given the volatility in the Pacific Islands both economically and climatically, DPO series would benefit
from narrowing in on only the most critical issues. In the case of Tuvalu, this included, for example, ensuring that
future fiscal needs will be safeguarded by revenue flows from the TTF and implementing a more realistic
solution to the imminent problems and long-term issues in the financial sector. Social sector policies could be
pursued through more targeted and tailored IPFs.

Rethinking the approach to reforming some of the highly specialized state institutions in microstates is another
important lesson. A financial sector consisting of two banks and no central bank does not sustain, for example,
the setting up of a fully-fledged banking commission and regional or subregional bodies looking into banking
regulation and supervision would be more realistic. As noted in the ICR, other Pacific Island Countries such as
Kiribati and Nauru have a comparable need to strengthen banking supervision. Regional strategies have also
supported supreme audit institutions in the Pacific

Excises on products associated with NCDs can produce a double dividend in that they can contribute towards
positive health outcomes and increased domestic revenue mobilization at the same time. The flip side is that
they can have negative equity impacts as the tax is regressive. Poverty-related mitigation in the short term could
focus on building incentives and financing support programs for affected groups. This could also be combined
with effective information campaigns about the link between the higher price of the products and associated
opportunities for support and a healthier lifestyle.

In severely capacity constrained contexts like Tuvalu, the Bank could undertake its own research on the impact
on sales of targeted harmful products and initiate monitoring of the prevalence of smoking, obesity, and
associated NDCs. Similarly, the Bank could collect statistics for sugary beverages and other food products with


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Development Policy Operation (P155066)



a high sugar content when these are absent and limiting the ability to measure the extent to which indicators
were met.

The most recent data on poverty incidence dates back to 2010. More recent data will be needed to guide
policies and monitor progress.

There is an unusual gender gap in the much higher enrolment of girls than boys in secondary education in
Tuvalu, which suggests that boys may be at a gender disadvantage. However, the ICR articulates gender issues
as only related to women. For example, it argues that removing secondary education school fees is likely to
benefit women as there are more girls than boys enrolled in secondary education and does not address the
underlying reasons for the underrepresentation of boys in secondary education.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
