     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023040

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P148599                                     Hebei Clean Heating Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85660                                  30-Jun-2021                                        94,589,268.33

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jan-2016                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             94,589,268.33                                              0.00

 Actual                                         94,589,268.33                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Mark D. Bardini             Fernando Manibog              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Loan Agreement (p. 5) dated March 24, 2016 and the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p. 4) dated December 17, 2015, the project objective was “to improve the efficiency and environmental
   performance of heating systems in selected areas within participating municipalities/counties of Hebei
   Province.”




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



   This review will assess the project objective as defined in the loan agreement. The objective will be parsed
   into two:

   Objective 1: To improve the efficiency of heating systems in selected areas within participating
   municipalities/counties of Hebei Province.

   Objective 2: To improve the environmental performance of heating systems in selected areas within
   participating municipalities/counties of Hebei Province.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of two components with multiple sub-components:

   Component 1: District Heating Subcomponents (estimated cost at appraisal: US$217.06 million, of
   which US$89.67 million IBRD financing; actual cost: US$191.07 million, of which US$92.48 million IBRD
   financing). This component was intended to finance the construction and rehabilitation of DH facilities in the
   four project cities/counties (four Subcomponents) with a total heating area of 38.7 million m2, including 13.5
   million m2 of new buildings. Component 1 had four Subcomponents:

   Subcomponent 1.1: Chengde District Heating and Energy Efficiency Subcomponent: This
   Subcomponent was designed to (a) rehabilitate DH facilities that serve the existing DH area of about 12.3
   million m2 in Shuangqiao (old town) District of Chengde and (b) expand DH to an additional 2.5 million m2.
   The specific investments comprised (a) extension of a DH primary network by about 5 km, (b) renovation of
   about 3 km of the primary network and 57 km of the secondary network, and (c) construction of 20 group
   substations and 114 BLS. The implementing entity was the Chengde Heating Group Company Ltd.
   (Chengde DH company), a state-owned enterprise and the largest DH company in Chengde.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Zhangjiakou District Heating Subcomponent: This Subcomponent aimed to (a)
   rehabilitate DH facilities that serve the existing DH area of about 3.5 million m2 in Qiaodong District of
   Zhangjiakou and (b) expand DH to an additional 5 million m2. The specific investments included (a)
   extension of a DH primary network by about 20 km, (b) construction of 58 group substations and 17 BLS,
   (c) conversion of two coal-fired boilers (2 × 64 MW) to natural gas (2 × 70 MW) for peak load supply and
   backup capacity, (d) construction of a pressure isolation stations, and (e) installation of heat meters and a
   SCADA system. The implementing entity was the Zhangjiakou Dongyuan Heating Company (Zhangjiakou
   DH company), a state-owned enterprise and a subsidiary of the Qiaodong Urban Construction and
   Investment Company.

   Subcomponent 1.3: Pingshan (County) District Heating and Energy Efficiency Subcomponents: This
   Subcomponent was designed to (a) rehabilitate DH facilities that serve the existing DH area of about 4.5
   million m2 in the urban area of Pingshan County and (b) expand DH to an additional 3 million m2 of new
   buildings. The specific investments comprised (a) extension of a DH primary network by about 6 km, (b)

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



  renovation of about 4 km of the primary network, (c) installation of 27 group substations and 9 BLS and
  rehabilitation/expansion of 5 group substations to 8 group substations, (d) installation of heat meters for 1.9
  million m2 of the residential heating area and about 0.27 million m2 of public buildings, (e) automatic control
  systems for 46 existing substations, (f) rehabilitation of two water treatment stations, and (g) installation of a
  SCADA and central monitoring and control system for the DH system. The implementing entity is the
  Pingshan County Urban and Township Heating Co. Ltd. (Pingshan DH company), a state-owned enterprise
  under the Pingshan County Heating Supply Office.

  Subcomponent 1.4: Xingtai Industrial Waste Heat District Heating Subcomponents: This
  Subcomponent was designed to construct DH facilities in the northwest urban area of Xingtai Municipality
  (one of the most polluted cities in the province) to serve about 8 million m2, including about 2.3 million m2 of
  existing and approximately 5.7 million m2 of new buildings. Industrial waste heat from nearby industrial
  (coking) facilities will be used as heating source. The project investments were split in two phases. Phase I
  (2015–2016), funded by counterpart funds, was already under implementation and comprised construction
  of a waste heat water network of about 12 km within the coking plant area, approximately 24 km of the
  primary DH network outside the plan, a primary station, and 27 group substations to provide DH to an
  existing heating area. Phase II (2016–2019), to be financed under this Subcomponent, included
  construction of additional 5 km of network within the plant, 28 km of the primary DH network outside the
  plan, 103 group substations, 14 BLS, and installation of a SCADA system. The implementing entity is the
  RISUN Anneng Heating Company Ltd. (Xingtai DH company), a new joint venture established for this
  Subcomponent.

  Component 2: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management Support (estimated cost at
  appraisal: US$2.5 million, of which US$2.5 million IBRD financing; actual cost: US$2.11 million, of which
  US$2.11 million IBRD financing). This component was designed to hire a management consulting company
  to provide (a) project management support to the Hebei Provincial Management Office (HPMO) and the four
  heating companies; (b) capacity-building support to the heating companies in DH management, operation
  and maintenance (O&M), and World Bank project implementation procedures; (c) training, workshops, and
  study tours to exchange and learn good practices in the DH sector; and (d) technical assistance tailored to
  the needs of project companies.

  Revised Components

  Although no project restructuring was required, there were minor changes (according to the Implementation
  Missions Aide Memoire and MTR report dated June 2019) to Component 1: (i) accommodating new DH
  related activities using funds from loan savings in various cities and (ii) Zhangjiakou dropping the activity to
  replace a coal-fired peak boiler with a gas-fired boiler. Additionally, based on updated plans, Component 1
  financing for construction and rehabilitation of DH facilities in four project areas decreased to a total of 16.52
  million m2 from 18.52 million m2 as designated in the PAD (p. 21).

  Additionally, for intermediate results indicator 4 (building-level substation installed), the original target value
  at closing was 154 while that target was revised down to 99 at MTR.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project was originally estimated at US$248.33 million (according to Financing table
  on p. 2 of the ICR and the PAD p. 7, although p. 44 of the ICR states that the total was US$248.28). In June

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



   2021, the project closed with a total cost of US $200.66 million. The decrease in the projects costs was
   primarily due to a slowdown in real estate development and also one study tour being canceled due to
   COVID-19, but only a few details on the decreased costs were provided in the ICR (see Revised
   Components above).

   Financing: At appraisal, World Bank financing was estimated at US$100 million. At project closing in June
   2021, the project had disbursed US$94.59 million.

   Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$148.33 million. At
   project closing, the borrower’s actual contribution was US$106.07 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on January 19. 2016. A midterm review was conducted in June 2019. The
   project closes on June 30, 2021, the original closing date. There were no extensions or project
   restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
China has been experiencing rapid urbanization for more than three decades aligning with its rapid growth,
which has also led to increased pollution and environmental issues. At appraisal in 2015, China’s
urbanization rate was 48.1% and was expected to reach 58% by 2020. At appraisal, China continued to
face major challenges to address negative environmental impact and regional income disparities that were
associated with its rapid economic growth. As an example, the Hebei Province has been a center for
energy-intensive industries and is in the cooler climate of northern China in a major airshed surrounding
Beijing and Tianjin municipalities, together known as the Jing-Jin-Ji region. Hebei was the sixth most
populous province (population 73 million) but only eighteenth in average per capita GDP (¥39,984). In the
Hebei Province, chronic, severe air pollution, including greenhouse gas emissions, came predominantly
from coal combustion for energy. Air pollution was particularly severe during winter where heating sources
included inefficient coal-fired boilers. Rapid urbanization accompanied by sustained economic growth
added demand for new heating sources as real estate developed in the Province.

At the time of appraisal, PDOs were highly relevant and aligned to China’s priorities of greener growth and
promoting more inclusive development as identified in the FY2013-FY2016 Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS) (pp. 13,18, 35). Specifically, the PDOs were consistent with China’s priorities supported in the CPS
pillar “Supporting greener growth by helping China shift to a more sustainable energy path; enhancing
urban environmental services and demonstrating pollution management.” The project also supported the
World Bank’s corporate objective of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity with
sustainability. The project also aligned with China’s 12th Five-Year Plan (FYP) (2011–2015) which called
for alleviating environmental pollution and promoting efficient use of resources through investments in smart
infrastructures.

Project development objectives (PDOs) were highly relevant to the country context at project closing in
June 2021. At completion in June 2021, project objectives remained highly relevant to and consistent with
the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for China (Report 117875-CN) (FY2020–
2025) engagement area 2: “Promoting greener growth by facilitating the transition to a lower-carbon energy

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



               path and by reducing air pollution.” The project is also in line with a key pillar in the 2018 China Systematic
               Country Diagnostic (Report 113092-CN), which was “to make fuller use of market mechanisms to promote
               green growth and more efficient, sustainable use of natural resources.”

               At project completion, the PDOs also remained aligned with Hebei’s 13th FYP (2016–2020), which was to
               reduce ambient PM2.5 concentrations by 40 percent relative to 2013 levels and called for scale-up of clean
               district heating (DH). In 2020, the Jing-Jin-Ji region emitted a total of 1.6 million tons of primary PM2.5 with
               1.3 million tons from Hebei Province alone, as Hebei relied on coal to meet more than 90 percent of its
               energy needs. Additionally, the PDOs at completion are in line with China’s 14th FYP outline (2021–2025)
               which sets an 18 percent reduction target for CO2 intensity.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives at the time of project closure and appraisal was high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the efficiency of heating systems in selected areas within participating municipalities/counties of
                             Hebei Province.

                             Rationale
                             The first project objective was to improve the efficiency of heating systems in selected areas within four
                             participating municipalities/counties of Hebei Province (three municipalities: Chengde, Zhangjiakou, and
                             Xingtai) and the county of Pingshan). The key outcome indicator that was used to assess this outcome was
                             projected lifetime energy savings (MWh). The ICR noted that the baseline case without the project was how
                             much energy (i.e., coal) would need to be used to achieve the same level of heating services for the same
                             amount of floor area in the same region. This was a valid counterfactual that was used in measuring the
                             project outcomes as well as in devising the theory of change. Additionally, the ICR noted that the baseline
                             energy consumption was to be a function of a number of factors including population and economic growth—
                             two key features aligned with China’s current status.

                             According to the ICR and PAD, the achievement of Objective 1 (efficiency) would come through two sources:
                             (a) switching to more energy-efficient heating sources and (b) reducing heat loss in DH networks and the net
                             result of efficiency gain would be less energy consumption per floor area heated (both measured in MWh).

                             At closing, the cumulative lifetime energy savings due to improved efficiency of DH systems aggregated
                             across four Subcomponents reached 5,665,401 MWh, exceeding the target of 4,974,014 MWh at appraisal by
                             14 percent. It should be noted, however, that the actual figure stated in Table 1 (p. 12 of the ICR) is 5,227,039


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



and not 5,665,401. The attribution of outcomes (both first and second outcomes in para. 24 in this section) to
project results is demonstrated by several output indicators and other efficiency metrics.

Achievement on key intermediate results indicators as of June 30, 2021 can be found in Annex 1B-1 of the
ICR. As these indicators show, the achievement of outcome indicators can be attributed to the area
connected, all of which benefited from efficiency gains. As a result, DH efficiency has been improved from
2018 to 2021 in the four selected municipalities/county, as shown in table 2. It is interesting to note that
Xingtai municipality has by far the lowest unit area energy consumption compared to other three cities at end
of the Project (during 2020-2021 heating season) and the fastest improvement. This is in part because in
Xingtai, the heating access areas are all newly connected (mainly new commercial housing communities),
and the thermal insulation coefficient of buildings is much better than that of the other three cities.

The ICR states that other contributing factors to achievement of the outcomes included i) the SCADA system
that was operationalized in later stage of the Project; and ii) the operation and management capacity of
Xingtai DH company has been significantly improved through capacity-building provided by the Project.
However, no evidence was provided in the ICR to support these statements or how they were measured and
what specific capacity building was provided.

Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved
could be attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs (from ICR Annex 1B-1 Key Outputs by Component pp. 38-39)

      Area connected to DH (million m2). The targets at appraisal were as follows: Zhngjikaou (5), Chengde
       (2.46), Pingshan (2.84) and Xingtai (8.02), for a cumulative target of 18.32. Overall, the final results
       were 18.18 million m2 of areas were connected to DH, which nearly achieved the target. It was noted
       that the change in targets (Updated at the MTR) were due to real estate development slowdown.
      Length of pipeline installed (KM). According to the PAD (p. 21) the cumulative target was 164.4 KM.
       The project achieved 198.47 km of pipelines installed, which exceeded the target.
      Group substations (non-BLS) constructed or rehabilitated (#). Cumulatively, 330 group substations
       were constructed or rehabilitated, which exceed the target of 243 in the PAD (p. 21).
      BLS installed. Cumulatively, 116 BLS were installed, while the actual target from the PAD (p. 21) was
       154 (however, p. 39 of the ICR states that the original target at appraisal was 191), which was revised
       in the MTR to 99. The total of 116 BS installed exceeded the revised target of 99. [Besides the
       revision of measurement of indicator, the target was also reduced from 154 (in PAD) to 99 (MTR) to
       reflect slowdown in real estate development in the Hebei province. However, the final value at closing
       is 116, up by 117% relative to the target set at MTR.]

Outcomes

      Projected lifetime energy savings (MWh). The Year 5 target for Objective 1 (projected lifetime energy
       savings) was 4,974,014 MWh, and the actual lifetime energy savings at Year 5 was 5,227,039—a
       14% increase above the target goals, according to Table 1 (p. 12) of the ICR; however, p. 40 of the
       ICR states that there was 5,665,401 MWh of projected lifetime energy savings.
      Number of people (beneficiaries) provided with improved urban living conditions. The original target
       was 714,896 beneficiaries and the actual achieved at completion was 781,876. For the % of


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



         beneficiaries that are female, the target in the PAS (Annex 1, p. 20) was 49% and this was also the
         actual % achieved at completion.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the environmental performance of heating systems in selected areas within participating
municipalities/counties of Hebei Province.

Rationale
Theory of Change.

Given the close relationship between the project activities related to efficiency and environmental
improvements, and the synergies between Objectives 1 and 2, the Theory of Change for Objective 2 is
similar to Objective 1.

The Theory of Change in Figure 1 of the ICR (p. 7) has clear and relevant activities, outputs, outcomes, and
impacts related to the key project objectives. Overall, the causal relationships asserted in the results chain
are well laid out and relevant to and representative of the project’s objectives. It should be noted, however,
that assumption “(b) promotion of the system efficiency by adopting new technology, such as BLS and
advanced billing system of CBB based on municipal development plans and the projected urbanization rate at
appraisal” as described on p. 6 of the ICR, was not included in the Theory of Change in Figure 1.

        Beneficiaries who feel project investments reflected their needs (%). The ICR reported that 99 percent
         of beneficiaries who feel project investments reflected their needs.
        Grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits that are actually addressed (%). The ICR
         reported that 100% of grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits that are addressed.
         [It should be noted that this indicator is unclear. The ICR refers to “delivery of project benefits”, but it is
         assumed that there should not be grievances related to the project’s benefits, but perhaps these
         would be related to the project’s shortcomings instead.]
        Heating connection and service subsidy policies assisted low-income households. A survey conducted
         by the consulting firm hired by the PMO stated that approximately 781,876 of residents in Hebei
         Province benefitted from improved urban living conditions at project completion, which exceed the
         target of 714,896 at appraisal. The percentage of females benefitting from the project at completion
         (383,119) exceed the target set at appraisal (361,591).

It should be noted, however, that there was not adequate information on how the survey was designed and
implemented (and by whom) for the responses to these two output indicators. Having this additional
information would help to validate the responses.



                                                                                                         Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



                            Outcomes

                                    Project-level aggregated avoided CO2 emissions (tons). At project completion, total avoided CO2
                                     emissions aggregated across the four Subcomponents amounted to 1,913,986 tons, surpassing the
                                     target of 1,722,632 tons at appraisal by 11 percent.
                                    Project-level aggregated avoided total suspended particles (TSP) emissions (tons). The four
                                     Subcomponents also resulted in approximately 12,805 tons of avoided TSP emissions, exceeding the
                                     target of 11,243 tons at appraisal by 14 percent.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved its two objectives. As detailed in the ICR Table 1 and the results framework in Annex 1,
                            all key PDO indicator targets were exceeded. The PDO-level indicators were relevant to the PDO and
                            sufficiently captured the project’s scope of improving efficiency and environmental performance of heating
                            systems in the project areas. Although the ICR states that the achievement of the PDOs is highly attributable
                            to the project, it is not clear that other similar donor projects were not being implemented during the same
                            timeframe as this project.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis (see Annex 4)

   The assumptions of the ICR and the PAD are comparable and valid. Economic and financial analyses were
   completed at both appraisal and completion. This was a very a good effort by the ICR team.

   Cost-benefit analysis was used at appraisal to determine the economic viability of the project. This analysis
   estimated the EIRR of the project compared to the without project alternative. Additionally, the economic
   analysis included environment externalities (associated with SO2, NOx, RSP, and CO2). At appraisal, the
   overall EIRR was estimated at 29.3% in real terms (using environmental externalities). This rate exceeded the
   10% benchmark discount rates used in Chinese feasibility study guidelines for public infrastructure projects. At
   ICR, the EIRR increased to 29.5%. The project also used updated values for social values of CO2 emissions



                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



based on the last World Bank guidelines (US $31.4 per tCO2e), which estimated the EIRR at the ICR stage to
reach 30.9% in the low social value scenario and further up to 44.1% in the high social value scenario.

The major benefits from rehabilitation and expansion of DH systems consisted of: (a) actual and projected fuel
efficiency improvements generated by connecting existing and new building areas to more efficient and cleaner
heating sources: CHPs (in Chengde, Zhangjiakou, and Pingshan) and industrial waste heat (in Xingtai); (b)
reduced heat losses stemming from improving existing networks and substations and installed BLS; (c) cost
savings in operation, maintenance, and repair for both alternatives; and (d) environmental benefits of reduced
TSP, SO2, CO2, and NOx emissions through avoided local and global emissions as a result of the project. The
assumptions for the baseline emissions included the use of current boilers for the existing buildings and new
boilers with emission reduction equipment for the new (planned) heating areas.

Financial Analysis

The FIRR was compared with the estimated corporate-level and project-level Weighted Average Cost of Capital
(WACC) for the company carrying out the Subcomponent. The consolidated WACC for the project was
estimated to be 2.5% at appraisal and 2.73% in the ICR. At appraisal, the FIRR was calculated at 13.2%; at ICR
the FIRR was 13.54%, exceeding the benchmark of 2.73%. The ICR states that “the primary reason [for the
minimal increase in FIRR] is that the heating area served and sold is larger than the estimate at appraisal with
exception of Xingtai subproject.” (pp. 48-49). Two reasons were given for this: 1) the delayed development of
real estate in the new district due to the government’s policies and 2) the percentage of actual heating area
served is only about 55% of the heating area connected due to low occupation rate of new communities in the
first 2-3 years but is forecasted to rise to 85% after the transitional period.

There were no noted implementation issues affecting efficiency that were mentioned in the ICR.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                29.30
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                             29.50
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



The relevance of the of the project objectives is rated high. The project’s overall efficacy and efficiency in
achieving the project objectives are both rated high. Overall, the outcome rating is highly satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The overall risk to development outcome is low to moderate. The following main risks were identified in the
ICR:

        Sustainability of project investments
        Risk of scale-up of BLS in the heating sector
        Risk of scale-up of CBB application in the heating sector
        Sustainability of use of SCADA system in the participating DH companies
        Sustainability of clean air policy environment in Hebei Province.

The project team should be commended for reducing the inherent risks due to COVID-19, which are detailed
on p. 16 of the ICR. For example, even though there was a hike in commodity prices, this had negligible
effects of the project since all contracts were already signed, and prices were secured and fixed before the
pandemic. This was credit in large part to the good work of the HPMO. Additionally, the HPMO was able to
avoid any COVID infections for employers, contractors, and supervision engineers by “working closely with
the project management consulting firm, communicating with each implementing DH company (Project
Implementation Unit) to assess the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of the project implementation and
identified associated risks.”




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goal of promoting energy efficiency and environmental performance of heating
  systems was of high priority because of China’s dependence on fossil fuels and the environmental
  pollution caused by these systems. Experience gained in previous projects was reflected in the project’s
  design and approach. For example, the project benefitted from lessons learned from district heating
  projects in Europe and Central Asia. These lessons included familiarizing DH companies with the
  application of BLS, CCB, and SCADA systems in DH networks as well as technical assistance activities
  for institutional development of DH companies. One of the key lessons learned that was reflected in the
  project design at entry was having a central Project Management Office, which is critical to success for
  projects with multiple subprojects (PAD, p. 8). Therefore, the Hebei Clean Heating Project selected the
  Hebei Provincial Management Office (HPMO) which the World Bank had previously worked with and was



                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



  well respected for their strong supervision work. The project benefitted from the experience of HPMO as
  the central managing entity for this project.

  Economic and financial analyses were sound and adequately conducted in accordance with Bank
  requirements. All project implementation entities had sufficient administrative and financial management
  capacity. As noted in the PAD (p. 15), the Bank’s assessment of the FM arrangements identified the
  principal risk to be the lack of experience for the four companies in implementing Bank-financed projects.
  To reduce this risk, for example, further risk management measures were taken, including preparation
  and issuance of a Financial Management Manual acceptable to the Bank to standardize the project’s FM
  procedures. Further, the entry-level financial analysis showed that the principal financial indicators for the
  four companies were projected to remain at satisfactory levels during implementation (PAD, p. 13). It was
  also noteworthy that no subcomponents were cancelled throughout the lifetime of the project.

  The overall risk assessment was realistic and mitigation measures were put in place. Project
  implementation arrangements were adequate. Fiduciary aspects of the project were clearly defined, and
  internal controls were well designed. The M&E design had some shortcomings in that there were few
  qualitative outcomes of the technical assistance support and a lack of explanation of how the survey was
  designed and utilized to get beneficiary input on the projects (see Section 9, M&E Design,
  Implementation, and Utilization below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve supervision missions were held: one approximately every six months, including regular field trips to
 all project sites site visits. The supervision missions included all the specialists required to assess project
 progress and resolve issues during the project implementation. There was consistency in leadership in that
 the four Task Team Leaders who supervised the project were in place throughout its lifetime. Close
 working relationships between Bank staff, clients, the HPMO, and the consulting firm helped to maintain
 good supervision of the project. Errors in the data from appraisal and activity adjustments during
 implementation were accounted for through in-depth reviews of the underlying calculations and
 methodology, which helped to ensure integrity of results. Gender was accounted for in the DH companies
 and a dedicated country office staff helped to oversee project implementation.

 Trainings were provided to project implementing DH companies on fiduciary and safeguards during
 implementation. Support missions provided timely guidance and advice for project issues, including
 procurement inquiries.

 Notably, over 50% of the total contracts were signed with contract prices secured and fixed during the first
 year of implementation. This helped to avoid price escalations due to the COVID-19 pandemic.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the M&E design was sound, and findings were reported regularly. The theory of change showing
 how the key activities and outputs were to lead to the outcomes was sound. The objective-level indicators
 were designed to measure the preparation and issuance of national guidelines and methodologies. The
 intermediate results indicators were mostly adequate to capture the implementation of the project activities.
 Technical assistance support given to PMOs was not captured by the theory of change on p. 7 of the ICR,
 nor was the assumption of “promotion of the system efficiency by adopting new technology, such as BLS
 and advanced billing system of CBB based on municipal development plans and the projected urbanization
 rate at appraisal.” (p. 6 of ICR). The indicators were mostly specific, achievable, and time-bound. The team
 made a good effort to have sufficient number of indicators to capture project’s achievements, although
 there were only 2 outcome indicators. The M&E arrangements were sufficiently embedded institutionally,
 and the project implementation entities had the capacity to monitor and evaluate project progress.



b. M&E Implementation
  Twelve implementation support missions and monthly regular monthly meetings were held during the life
  of the project. Project implementing DH companies regularly reported to the HPMO for monitoring
  activities and it regularly reviewed the quality and consistency of inputs from the companies. The task
  team also received HPMO, implementing agencies, and the consulting firm quarterly progress and FM
  reports, and annual audits of project accounts. The results framework was also revised during the MTR
  for the Intermediate Results indicator “Number of BLS installed [besides the revision of measurement of
  indicator, the target was also reduced from 154 (in PAD) to 99 (MTR) to reflect slowdown in real estate
  development in the Hebei province. However, the final value at closing is 116, up by 117% relative to the
  target set at MTR], which was improved to count the number of heat exchanger loops--a more refined
  measure of project achievements. In addition, definition of intermediate results indicator 5 (beneficiaries
  who feel project investments reflected their needs) was clarified at the MTR, but the ICR does not explain
  how beneficiary feedback was obtained and by whom.

  Twelve Indicators included in the results framework were regularly measured and reported. The use of
  Project Monitoring and Implementation System ensured the accuracy of information. All project
  documents were electronically recorded into the system, which was accessible to project evaluation
  teams and the Bank’s supervision mission teams.

  The focus of M&E remained at the output level, however, but still adequately captured the progress of
  implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



c. M&E Utilization
  The task team utilized the results to monitor project progress, alignment with the PDO, and identify any
  implementation issues. The M&E findings were successfully used to make necessary changes to project
  activities. For example, when energy consumption per heating floor area in Pingshan County showed a
  10 percent increase in the 2018– 2019 heating season relative to that in the 2017–2018 heating season-
  -this was a notable sign of deteriorating performance that contrasted with the project design. Using
  recommendations from the investigations and diagnostic, Pingshan DH company implemented
  investments to reduce energy consumption by rehabilitating its primary network and associated
  equipment. This resulted in decreasing energy consumption per heating floor area during the 2019–2020
  and 2020–2021 heating seasons.

  The M&E findings were reported regularly to stakeholders at the national and municipal levels and also
  to the Bank. The project had a complex design consisting of many project implementation entities and
  numerous contracts. The M&E data were used to provide evidence of application of inputs and
  achievement of outputs. The focus on the achievement of outcomes was correct, but more outcome
  indicators could have been tracked and reported on.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category A under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The
   safeguards policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) was also triggered by the project.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): OP/BP 4.01 was triggered from the start since the project
   directly supported the new construction and rehabilitation of heating facilities (ICR, p. 24). The project was
   classified as Category A because of potentially linked facilities (heating sources), the scope of the project,
   the displacement of workers, and the potential operating safety risks during the operation phase. These
   impacts were expected to be localized, limited and managed with accepted measures of good
   environmental codes of practice (ECOP) and site-specific mitigation measures for potential adverse impacts
   during construction and operation (PAD, p. 18).

   Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37): The Xingtai RISUN Group, which supplies industrial waste heat under the
   Xingtai subproject, is using cooling water from the Yangwuowam Reservoir upstream of the RISUN Group.
   An operations manual and emergency preparedness plan were prepared and the EMP included an annual
   review of the operations and maintenance of the dam and its appurtenances by a dam safety expert
   satisfactory to the Bank (PAD, p. 19). It should be noted that this safeguard was not mentioned in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



   At appraisal, the project implementation entities prepared and adopted the Financial Management
   Manuals. Trainings were provided to the project financial staff before and during project implementation.
   The Bank loan proceeds, including overseeing the designed account, was managed by the HPFB, which
   had previous experience with Bank disbursement and financial management-related requirements (PAD,
   p. 15)

   Financial management of the project was conducted as planned and carried out satisfactorily in
   accordance with Bank’s financial management requirements. All project accounting and financial reporting
   aligned with the regulations from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the requirements specified in the Loan
   Agreement. There were no significant FM issues were during project implementation. The loan proceeds
   were disbursed on time.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Heating connection and service subsidy policies assisted low-income households. A survey conducted by
   the consulting firm hired by the PMO stated that approximately 781,876 of residents in Hebei Province
   benefitted from improved urban living conditions at project completion, which exceed the target of 714,896
   at appraisal. The percentage of females benefitting from the project at completion (383,119) exceed the
   target set at appraisal (361,591).



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The task team offered 4 lessons and recommendations. Of those, the following have high value for
broad applicability and replicability for future Bank clean energy projects:

Wider deployment of BLS is more likely to be realized in commercial and public buildings
than in residential buildings. The pilot projects revealed that owners of commercial buildings in the

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)



BLS pilot benefited from sizable energy savings due to use of BLS, and space occupied by BLS in
commercial buildings seems trivial to the building owners. Thus, cost-effectiveness of BLS
significantly increases from the perspective of owners of commercial and public buildings and they
are more likely to embrace this technology.

Avoiding cancellation of subcomponents typical to DH projects requires three layers of
safeguards. First, there should be an appropriate and manageable number of subprojects across
several participating cities, which is more practical and instrumental to avoid the cancellation of
subprojects. Second, a careful evaluation of Subcomponents is required before deciding whether to
include it in a DH project. Third, detailed designs of Subcomponents require thorough technical due
diligence for optimal performance. A lesson learned here is that there was an unmanageable
number of subprojects and inclusion of subcomponents that did not go through adequate due
diligence and prior evaluation as they should have.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR provides a detailed overview of the project, with a candid narrative to support most of its
findings. There is sufficient clarity in the report’s message. It is internally consistent. The Annex 1, Results
Framework and Key Outputs provides detailed information about the project’s activities and outputs. The report
is mostly evaluative and consistent with the Bank guidance. There is a logical linking and integration of the
various parts of the report.

The theory of change is well presented, and the report emphasizes how activities informed outputs and
outcomes, but there could have been more focus on outcomes. The achievement of the project outcomes and
objectives are assessed by the achievement of the target values of the indicators, which did not fully
encompass the project outcomes. This shortcoming is partially addressed by additional evidence from the ICRs
of the project implementation entities and anecdotal evidence. The ICR’s lessons are mostly useful and based
on evidence outlined in the report. The M&E Quality is rated high in the text, but the narrative in that section
supports a substantial rating. In the key ratings sections of ICR Data Sheet, the task team mistakenly
listed both outcome and bank performance as highly unsatisfactory but intended to rate them as highly
satisfactory instead. Additionally, no mention of the safeguard (OP 4.37 - Safety of Dams) was included in the
ICR, although it was included in the PAD (pp. 18-19). [This may have been due to project restructuring, but this
fact is not verified in the ICR]. The ICR is substantially longer (55 pages) than recommended in the Bank
guidance (15-20 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Hebei Clean Heating Project (P148599)




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
