     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022674

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P122546                                     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                               Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56080,IDA-H7340                         30-Jun-2015                                        95,642,807.99

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Sep-2011                                 31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              99,795,935.52                                             0.00

 Actual                                          95,721,418.32                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the October 3, 2011 Financing Agreement between the Republic of Cote d’Ivoire and IDA
   (Schedule 1, p. 4), the project development objective (PDO) was "to improve access to temporary
   employment and skills development opportunities for young men and women in the Recipient’s territory.” The
   design document, Emergency Project Paper (EPP) of August 31, 2011, presented the same statement (pp.
   vii, 8, 24, and 35).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



   The PDO did not change during the project period. However, PDO-level indicators and targets were revised
   as a part of the project’s Additional Financing (AF), approved in March 2015. Notably: (i) targets for two of the
   three original indicators were increased to reflect increased financing and an extended implementation period,
   while the value of the third original indicator remained unchanged; and (ii) a new PDO-level indicator was
   added to measure employment following the internship program and retooling program, to reflect an activity
   added under the AF, and providing a useful measure of the effectiveness of improved access to skills
   development opportunities. The intermediate results indicators were refined to provide better measurement of
   outputs and intermediate outcomes and to capture new activities. None of these changes warrant a split rating
   methodology.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   ---

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Project support was delivered through three components.

   Component 1: Temporary Employment Opportunities (original estimate of $20 million + $15 million
   in AF, amounting to a revised estimate of $35 million; actual cost: $34.8 million). This component was
   to support transitory employment opportunities through labor intensive public works (LIPW) for
   unskilled/low-skilled youth in urban, peri-urban, and rural areas. The target group was composed of youth
   18-30 years of age who were not enrolled in any form of education, whether formal or informal. The LIPW
   program also included a savings program and a basic life skills and entrepreneurship training program for
   participants to enhance their future employability and labor market insertion prospects. A share of the
   wages earned would be retained and put in a savings account for each of the beneficiaries. This was to
   enable them to accumulate start-up capital for potential self-employment after program completion, and thus
   increase sustainability beyond the project life. The basic life skills and entrepreneurship training was to be
   included in Component 2. The implementation of the works would be the responsibility of national roads
   agency (Agence de Gestion des Routes) and, if waste collection activities were to be performed, the
   National Urban Sanitation Agency (Agence Nationale de la Salubrite Urbaine). The project was to fund
   beneficiaries’ wages and small tools and equipment necessary for the works (e.g., wheelbarrows and safety
   vests).

   Component 2: Skills Development and Employment Support (original estimate of $25.0 million +
   $30.0 million in AF, amounting to a revised estimate of $55.0 million; actual cost: $49.2 million). This
   component aimed to improve youth employability by providing youth with different skills levels with a first
   work experience and training. Provisions included: (i) apprenticeships in micro, small, and medium
   enterprises in the formal and informal sectors; (ii) internships in medium and large companies in the formal
   sector; (iii) professional training programs of various durations in key economic growth sectors; (iv)

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



entrepreneurship training and follow-up business development support for highly skilled graduates (e.g. In
the form of business plan competitions); and (v) basic live skills and entrepreneurship training for LIPW
participants. These programs aimed to reach a total of 15,000 beneficiaries over the (original) three-year
implementation period. Trainees were to receive certificates upon program completion.

The apprenticeship and internship programs were already in place, executed by the National Employment
Agency (AGEPE -- Agence d’Etudes et de Promotion d’Emploi) and the National Professional Training
Agency (AGEFOP – Agence nationale de la formation professionnelle) and their regional
structures. Business plan competitions (mostly in urban areas) supporting entrepreneurship and business
development assistance for highly skilled youth had already been successfully undertaken as part of the
State and Peace-Building Fund Financing Young Entrepreneurs and Urban Job Creation Project. This
activity was to be implemented by competitively selected service providers with a proven track record in
entrepreneurship training, already carrying out similar activities. All performance contracts financed under
this component were to be established between the project implementation unit (PIU) and the service
providers contracted to undertake the activities. The project was to fund training activities, training materials,
and small tools and equipment needed for training.

Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Capacity (original estimate of $5.0 million + $5.0 million in
AF, amounting to a revised estimate of $10.0 million; actual cost: $11.7 million. This component
aimed to: (i) reinforce the capacity of selected institutions critical to project implementation and policy
dialogue on youth employment and skills development; and (ii) improve the knowledge base on employment
and youth. The component was to finance: (i) capacity building activities (e.g., training, South-South
exchanges) for a number of public and private sector organizations experienced in and committed to the
promotion of youth employment (e.g., training institutions, AGEFOP, Chamber of Commerce, private sector
associations) to promote policy dialogue, planning, coordination, execution, and evaluation of job creation
and skills development programs; and (ii) technical assistance with the establishment of, and support to,
regional institutional structures (e.g., AGEPE regional offices); (iii) selected studies, (e.g., on the system and
utilization of the training tax and the development of a sustainable funding mechanism for training, and
specific professional branches); (iv) communication campaigns to increase awareness of the project among
youth and other key stakeholders; and (v) financing of the PIU.

Revisions to Components

When substantial AF was approved in March 2015, project components were revised both to scale up
activities and to increase the project’s focus on rural areas. Changes under each component are
summarized here.

Component 1 (Temporary Employment Opportunities for Youth) retained its focus on creating
temporary employment opportunities through LIPW. However: (i) the geographical focus of the component
shifted primarily to rural areas (around secondary urban poles), underserved by employment interventions,
and where poverty was most concentrated and where a high proportion of underemployed, poorly qualified
youth lived; and (ii) complementary activities to support post-LIPW employment were to be strengthened
(savings, life skills training, technical and business skills, and assistance for job search and self-
employment support).

Component 2 (Skills Development and Employment Support for Youth) was more effectively targeted
to priority areas identified from employment data and focused on reform of technical and vocational training
centers to support project implementation and sustainability. Moreover, component support for professional


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



  training programs of short duration in key economic growth sectors was dropped, and replaced with three
  new/revised activities:

  Apprenticeships support was expanded to support dual apprenticeships (combining theory and practice),
  improve training institutions, and lead to professional certification. Training centers would be reformed to
  support the principles of autonomous management with public private partnerships to facilitate private
  sector participation and alignment of training with labor market needs.

  Internships support was continued but with better targeting to support the successful placement of
  interns. About 2,000 youth were expected to benefit from the focus on unemployed graduates under 35
  years of age. A new focus was also placed on retooling/reskilling/requalification of graduates with degrees
  in areas offering limited employment prospects. Formal professional re-training (6-12 months) in skills highly
  demanded by the private sector was also a focus.

  Entrepreneurship and self-employment support combined entrepreneurship and basic life skills and
  entrepreneurship training for LIPW participants, providing a better focus on self-employment support and
  facilitating the transition to more productive self-employment for vulnerable populations. This included
  entrepreneurship training for 5,000 additional beneficiaries, with start-up funding and kits for 3,000
  beneficiaries to start micro-enterprise projects.

  Component 3 (Strengthening Institutional Capacity) continued to expand the knowledge base on
  employment and skills and accelerate and increase the range of institutional reforms adopted to promote
  more efficient governance of employment policy and interventions.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The original project was estimated at $50 million, of which 100 percent was to be financed by an IDA
  grant of SDR 31.3 million ($50 million equivalent at prevailing exchange rates). With the approval in March
  2015 of Additional Financing through an IDA credit of SDR 35.5 million ($50 million equivalent at prevailing
  exchange rates) in support of expanded activities, the total estimated cost of the project increased to $100
  million. Actual component costs were close to those estimated at the time of the AF (itemized in section 2d):
  100 percent of estimate for Component 1; 89 percent for Component 2; and 117 percent for Component 3.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was 100 percent financed by IDA. Data in the Bank’s
  information system indicate that the original IDA grant was 99 percent disbursed (SDR 31.13 million out of a
  total of SDR 31.3 million); and the IDA credit, approved in March 2015 to provide AF, was 100 percent
  disbursed. The ICR (p. 52) points out that, in terms of US dollars, the project had $3.42 million in exchange
  rate losses. No government contribution was foreseen or provided.

  Key Dates. The project was approved on September 15, 2011 and became effective three months later on
  December 27, 2011. The project was restructured four times, once in the context of an AF.

  In March 2015, an AF exercise: added $50 million equivalent to the original $50 million parent project to
  scale up activities and increase the focus on deprived rural areas; modified and scaled up activities (see
  Section 2d. above); added a fourth PDO indicator for better measurement of outcomes; modified




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



   intermediate results indicators to reflect changes to the components; established the AF closing as June 30,
   2019; and updated the disbursement estimates.

   In June 2015, a restructuring of the original grant extended its closing date by 20 months (from June 30,
   2015 to February 27, 2017) to allow the project to continue implementation and payment of related
   expenses, including a key study for a new governance framework for scaled-up activities under the AF. It
   also involved the allocation of unallocated funds to each of the three components commensurate with their
   needs.

   In February 2017, another restructuring of the original grant extended the closing date by an additional
   four months (to June 30, 2017) to ensure full disbursement of remaining funds to pay for 800 apprenticeship
   beneficiaries and 300 entrepreneurship beneficiaries enrolled under the original financing, and for
   completion of feasibility studies on the new dual apprenticeship model and the new model for agricultural
   incubators.

   Finally, in May 2019, a restructuring of the AF: extended the closing date by 18 months (from June 30,
   2019 to December 30, 2020); and reallocated credit funds across categories. These changes
   accommodated: an increase in the number of LIPW beneficiaries in rural areas and the number of days per
   month for LIPW; a reduction (from six to four) in the vocational training centers to be rehabilitated, in light of
   other donor support; a reduction in the income generation activities subvention for entrepreneurship
   beneficiaries; and an increase in the operating costs, brought about by the extended closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. Cote d’Ivoire is transitioning away from the
post-crisis environment that prevailed at the time of project design to one increasingly characterized by
political and economic stability. Even with great strides in economic recovery achieved over the past
several years, continued economic development and inclusive growth require the sustained revitalization of
the economy and the continued provision and expansion of enhanced employment opportunities for young
people. Youth continue to have the highest levels of unemployment among all age groups in Cote
d’Ivoire. Many who are ready to enter the work force have low levels of education and do not have the basic
knowledge and skills to fill the minimum requirements of many jobs. Even those with secondary or higher
levels of education have difficulty finding employment, with mismatches between their skills and the
demands and needs of the labor market. Opportunities for low skill, labor-intensive employment are
limited. Access to jobs training and other supports to improve employment prospects, including the
acquisition of skills and experience on-the-job through apprenticeships and internships, is limited. There is a
disconnect between the supply and nature of training (including that provided in secondary schools, higher
education, and technical and vocational education and training [TVET]) on the one hand, and the needs of
the market (including the private sector) on the other.

The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. The project is highly
relevant to Cote d’Ivoire’s Strategic Plan for the Reform of TVET (2016-2025), which aims to increase the
accessibility of jobs training and employment programs, improve the quality of training, strengthen
partnerships with the labor market for professional integration of students upon graduation, and unite all

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



               stakeholders of the system around a shared vision. Its seven strategic areas of focus are: business training
               and professional integration partnerships; training access; training supply; skills certification; system
               governance; stabilization and supervision of private establishments; and system financing. The project is
               also highly relevant to the forthcoming National Development Plan (2021-2025), which aims to address
               youth employment and inclusion. The Plan aims to streamline and improve the coordination of youth
               interventions and includes the following employment-specific priorities: development of national
               entrepreneurship; better access to and completion of a two-year TVET cycle, in rural areas in particular; a
               stronger institutional framework to ensure a better managed and accountable system to improve internal
               and external efficiency of TVET; a stronger institutional framework to better monitor the National Youth
               Policy 2021-2025; development of programs and projects to improve youth integration into the job market;
               and strengthened access to decent jobs.

               Moreover, the PDO continues to be highly relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF, 2016-2019), which was extended to FY2021. The CPF (as well as Cote d’Ivoire’s
               National Development Plan) includes an important focus on Cote d’Ivoire’s education system, with special
               attention to technical and vocational training. It highlights persistent challenges of technical and vocational
               training, notably: weak governance, lack of a clearly defined mission, and poor linkages with private sector
               stakeholders and labor market needs. Moreover, the CPF includes as part of its strategy a proposed follow-
               on Project, Cote d’Ivoire Youth Employment and Skills Development Project – Phase 3, which aims to build
               upon the successful activities and results observed under this project. Youth who are chronically
               unemployed continue to be at high risk of truancy and violence.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access to temporary employment for young men and women in Cote d’Ivoire

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change presented in the ICR (p. 10) provides a good overview of the project rationale and the
                             strong coherence between activities, outputs, and outcomes. The first component was designed to provide
                             transitory job opportunities through a six-month cycle LIPW program for unskilled men and women 18-30
                             years of age and a program to encourage these beneficiaries to save part of their earnings to invest in their
                             futures. These activities were directly supportive of the first objective of the PDO statement: to improve
                             temporary employment for young men and women. The second project component supported three
                             interventions all directly supporting the second objective of the PDO statement: to improve skills development
                             opportunities for young men and women (for better employment prospects). The three interventions were: (1)
                             apprenticeships for low-skilled youth in agriculture and non-agriculture areas, in both formal and informal
                             sectors, and the introduction of a dual apprenticeship program in vocational training centers, designed to

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



combine theoretical and on-the-job training; (2) reskilling internships for highly skilled, long-term unemployed
youth, who lacked experience and/or whose skills and training offered limited employment opportunities; and
(3) entrepreneurship and self-employment support for youth (18-34 years old), including: training,
entrepreneurship start-up funding and kits, and start-up seed funding to start a micro-enterprise. The third
component’s activities to strengthen institutional capacity were also supportive of PDO achievement with their
focus on promoting and strengthening job counseling and support services and the inclusion of monitoring
and evaluation activities to enable the tracking of performance and measurement of results, and their use in
learning and decision-making.

Outputs and intermediate results:

Supporting temporary employment for young men and women:

      A total of 3,631 km of roads were rehabilitated/maintained under the LIPW program, exceeding both
       the original target of 1,000 and the revised target of 3,537.
      The share of the total costs going to the wage bill was 56 percent in 2020, not reaching the original
       target of 70 percent, but exceeding the revised target of 50 percent.
      One hundred percent of the wages of LIPW participants were paid in a timely manner per six-month
       cycle, exceeding the original target of 90 percent and the revised target of 95 percent.
      A survey conducted by the BCP-Employment Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (Office for the
       Coordination of Employment Programs) in 12 municipalities participating in the LIPW program under
       the AF found that:
            o 97 percent of the LIPW participants also attended entrepreneurship training;
            o Female participation in the 12 municipalities continuously increased: 47 percent in the first
               wave; 55 percent in the second wave; and 57 percent in the third and final wave;
            o 87 percent of the young people who were working after the program were involved in income
               generation activities.

Institutional strengthening, supporting both project objectives:

      Four tracer surveys were carried out with project support, fully achieving the target. Of these:
       SOFRECO (a French consulting firm) carried out two surveys; a third survey following graduates was
       carried out by an individual consultant; and the firm IPSOS carried out a survey on the impact of
       COVID, delivered in October 2020.
      Ten staff received training in impact evaluation methods, exceeding the target of 8.
      Two impact evaluations were completed, fully achieving the target.

Outcomes:

Project data quantified achievements against PDO indicators, all of which surpassed outcome targets:

      A total of 65,631 youth directly benefited from the LIPW program and the skills and entrepreneurship
       development support, exceeding the original target of 27,500 and the revised target of
       56,922. Forty-three percent of beneficiaries were female, exceeding the target of 30 percent.
      Of the 65,631 beneficiaries, 25,777 benefitted from the LIPW temporary employment, double the
       original target of 12,500 and slightly exceeding the revised target of 25,175; and 39,854 benefited
       from skills development beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 15,000 and the revised

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



       target of 31,747. Beneficiaries of skills development activities are broken down as follows: 4,869
       internships; 1,631 participating in requalification program; 16,117 apprenticeships; and 17,237
       entrepreneurships.
      A total of 2,953,933 workdays were completed under the LIPW program, exceeding both the
       original and revised targets of 1,650,000 and 2,679,649 workdays, respectively.

Project-financed surveys and studies provided further insight and evidence of positive outcomes and impacts
for program participants:

      According to a 2014 tracer study financed by the project, employment among the LIPW beneficiaries
         increased from 59 to 70 percent post-program.
      A follow-up 2019 survey undertaken by external consultants showed that the first LIPW cohort had an
         insertion rate (share of beneficiaries who were employed following program interventions, whether
         self-employed or employed in formal and informal sectors) of 89 percent, and Cohort 3 had an
         insertion rate of 77 percent.
        The 2019 survey reported that 78 percent of beneficiaries reported savings during the program, with
         relatively large monthly savings, ranging from $20 to $60. The survey goes on note that, thanks to
         judicious investment of these savings, most employment gains were in self-employment.
        An Office for the Coordination of Employment Programs survey in 12 municipalities participating in the
         LIPW program under the AF also found that:
               o active employment of LIPW participants increased from 48 percent pre-program to 83 percent
                 post-program;
               o average income of participants increased by 52 percent after switching to the program (from
                 FCFA 28,047 to FCFA 42,603);
        A 2017 impact evaluation of the LIPW program found that participation in the program raised earnings
         and psychological wellbeing, both during and after program completion.
               o Post-program earnings gains were achieved primarily through more small-scale
                 entrepreneurial activities, likely attributable to participants’ success in saving part of their
                 earnings and to the skills they developed, both with project assistance. Public works led to an
                 increase in earnings a year after the end of the project of US$11 per month, or 12 percent
                 more than the earnings of the control group. The increase in earnings was concentrated in
                 self-employment, within which earnings increased by $12.40 per month, or 32 percent.
               o Changes in youth’s psychological wellbeing was particularly relevant for the post-conflict
                 setting of Cote-d’Ivoire because they pointed to potential program externalities on social
                 cohesion. Participating youth reported feeling happy and proud, with increased self-esteem
                 and less anger and frustration in daily life.
        Significant institutional strengthening was achieved, including:
               o Strengthened ownership and capacity at the local level, where municipalities (and the Regional
                 Councils representing them) assumed primary responsibility for LIPW, apprenticeships, and
                 internships derived from their local plans, and through training and acquired experience
                 strengthened their skills in contract negotiation and management.
               o Toward the end of the project, and in the context of growing support of other partners for youth
                 employment and skills development, the high-performing PIU provided the foundation for its
                 transformation into a permanent Bureau of Coordination of Employment Programs (BCPE).




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve skills development opportunities for young men and women in Cote d’Ivoire

Rationale
Outputs and intermediate results:

Under the apprenticeship program (focused on hospitality and catering, transport, driving and maintaining
public vehicles and equipment, agriculture, building and construction, and public works):

        A total of 16,177 youth were enrolled in the apprenticeship/dual training program, exceeding the
           target of 14,295.
          Female participants made up 33 percent of the participants, slightly exceeding the target of 30
           percent.
          Eighty-eight percent of participants completed the apprenticeship/dual training programs, exceeding
           the target of 80 percent.
          Sixty-six percent of participants who completed the apprenticeship/dual training programs were
           employed or self-employed within six months of the date of program completion, almost achieving (4
           percent short of) the 70 percent target.
          A total of 10 public private joint management agreements were signed in the centers supported under
           the project, fully achieving the target.
          Additional achievements supporting the apprenticeship program included:
                o Support for a diagnostic study to determine how best to integrate apprenticeships into the
                   training institutions;
                o The revision of the laws and related decrees that supported the inclusion of apprenticeships
                   into the vocational training curriculum; and
                o Piloting the new governance structure reforms in four project beneficiary centers in Bouake
                   (masonry and sanitary installation), Ferke (agricultural mechanics), Abidjan-Riviera (hospitality
                   and culinary), and Abidjan-Vridi (car body painting).
                o The project also supported these four centers with capacity development and re-training of 525
                   teaching staff to implement the dual training program and rehabilitation of the centers.

Under the internship/retooling program:

        The project developed and delivered a retooling/requalification program, which included 52 training
         courses focusing on six sectors: agriculture; earth-moving and mining; hotel; mechanics and welding;
         information and communications technology; and electricity.
        Ninety-two percent of participants in the internship/retooling program completed the program,
         exceeding the target of 80 percent.
        A total of 147,736 internships/retooling weeks were provided under the project, falling short of the
         target of 193,342 weeks. However, it should be noted that the project target was over-estimated,



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



       based on the assumption that all theoretical training would be 9 months in duration. In fact, programs’
       actual duration varied between three and nine months.

Under the entrepreneurship and self-employment program:

     A total of 3,000 income-generating or micro projects were supported by the project, fully achieving the
      target. These projects were provided with seed funding not exceeding $2,000, guided by approved
      business plans. The calls for business plans were based on local development plans or studies that
      identified opportunities for sustainable business projects. Eligibility required participation in programs
      and youth with innovative ideas and aptitude.
     A total of 17,237 youth received entrepreneurship training, achieving more than twice the target of
      7,077. The breakdown of the training beneficiaries was: 13,864 for income generation activities; 2,793
      for savings and loans village associations; 400 for micro and small enterprises; and 180 for
      incubators.
     The project supported the creation and management of the Associations of Village Savings and
      Credits, in which 2000 youth involved in the project participated in the regions of Kabadougou, San
      Pedro, Me, Belier, Bagoue, Moronou, Gbokle, Agneby-Tiassa, Haut Sassandra, and the District of
      Yamoussoukro. These associations provided additional access to financing, beyond the cooperative
      projects, to foster the rapid development of individual micro-enterprises. It was a simple savings and
      loans scheme, whereby 20 villagers would self select, voluntarily set up their association, put forth
      their own money, and lend to each other. Low-interest loans were typically used to invest in an
      income-generation activity. Consultants hired to set up the associations were so successful that they
      formed a consulting firm, and this activity will be continued and expanded in a follow-on project.
     Drawing on a project-financed feasibility study for the establishment of agricultural business
      incubators in five regions, the project supported two incubators: the Institute of Agricultural New
      Techniques in Agneby-Tissa region and the European Institute for Cooperation and Development in
      the Yamoussoukro District. The incubators provided intensive training and coaching for participants
      as well as business plan development, validation of the business plans by a board, support for
      opening a business account, and resources for the businesses.

Cross-program intermediate results:

     On March 16, 2020, due to COVID-19, all schools, including vocational schools, were closed,
       suspending theoretical and practical training for all 17 trades included in the program. After school
       closings, all 17 trades received on-line training through pre-recorded video clips. On May 25, schools
       in Abidjan and most firms reopened and thus were able to continue internships and face-to-face
       training. Nevertheless, BCPE decided with Agence Emploi Jeunes (executing agency) and training
       firms (providers) to continue online training through tools (e.g. WhatsApp) or other dedicated
       platforms. The focus was to pilot online training for selected trades: agricultural production, manager,
       dam inspector, post agent and network administration for a total of 104 beneficiaries.



Outcomes:

     Eighty-nine percent of youth participating in the apprenticeship and internship programs completed
       these programs by project closing, exceeding the target of 80 percent.

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)




                                    Females made up 32 percent of all apprenticeship and internship program participants, achieving 80
                                     percent of the target of 40 percent.
                                    Within six months of completion of the internship/retooling/requalification program, 81 percent of
                                     participants were employed or self-employed, exceeding the target of 70 percent. The results for this
                                     indicator are based on the third beneficiaries’ satisfaction survey, conducted in 2019. Insertion rates
                                     broken down by gender and cohort show a consistently high rate for men and a lower starting point,
                                     but steady improvement, for women:
                                           o For men: 86 percent for Cohort 1; 87 percent for Cohort 2; and 82 percent for Cohort 3
                                           o For women: 64 percent for Cohort 1; 70 percent for Cohort 2; and 78 percent for Cohort 3
                                    Of all youth who were employed or self-employed within six months of completion of an
                                     internship/retooling program, 42 percent were female, fully achieving the target.
                                    The project-financed impact evaluation, and a follow-up telephone survey conducted 18-24 months
                                     after program completion, found that young people in the treatment group (i.e., those who completed
                                     an apprenticeship program): (i) had significantly higher incomes 18-24 months after the end of the
                                     program (CFAF 9,394, or 15 percent higher wages than those in the control group who followed
                                     traditional apprenticeships); and (ii) possessed superior skills. Overall findings indicate that the
                                     program expanded access to learning, facilitated the acquisition of skills by young people, and
                                     increased the income of young people.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Rationale: Achievement of the project’s first objective – to improve temporary employment – surpassed
                            expectations. The PDO targets were all exceeded. Significantly more youth benefited from the LIPW program,
                            and females made up a larger share of program beneficiaries, than the targets set. Moreover, studies and
                            surveys revealed a range of benefits and impacts emanating from this program, including higher levels of
                            employment post-program, high insertion rates, significant savings achieved by 78 percent of participants,
                            increased earnings, and improved psychological wellbeing, both during the program and post-
                            program. Achievement of the project’s second objective – to improve skills development opportunities for
                            young men and women – also surpassed expectations. Targets for key PDO indicators (completion rates and
                            post-program employment for apprenticeships and internships) were exceeded. Moreover, project-financed
                            studies documented other significant benefits and impacts of the apprenticeship program, including expanded
                            access to learning, and higher wages and higher skills levels for those completing the program, compared
                            with a control group. Additionally, important institutional strengthening was achieved, most notably: (i) the
                            development of a regulatory and legal framework for TVET supporting more autonomy of training centers,
                            private sector participation, and the inclusion of apprenticeships into the vocational training curriculum; and (ii)
                            the strengthening of monitoring and evaluation capacity, complementing the sound tracking of project data
                            with studies and impact evaluations, facilitating a richer assessment of achievements and learning.



                                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



  Attribution of outcomes to the Bank project is strong. The ICR (p. 27) notes that, at the time of appraisal, the
  Bank was the only development partner providing support for youth employment and skills development in
  Cote d’Ivoire. By 2015, when the AF was approved, other donors were involved in supporting the sector:
  African Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, European Union, French Agency for Development,
  and the United Nations Development Program. While they did not establish a pooled fund mechanism, these
  development partners did align their projects with the Bank project’s design, approach, and implementation
  structure to ensure proper coordination and alignment across efforts. The TTL and ICR Main Contributor
  confirmed in a 11-1-21 meeting with IEG that it was in large part the Bank’s technical leadership in designing
  and implementing an effective approach to youth employment that attracted the support of other
  partners. Over and above the learning and adaptation emanating from project M&E, the Bank leveraged
  increased information and learning through complementary surveys and analytic work (“Cote d’Ivoire Jobs
  Diagnostic,” 2017), which generated a stronger evidence base and improved targeting of interventions
  financed by the Bank under AF, as well as those of other partners.

  Counterfactual. While not addressed in the ICR, the TTL and ICR Main Contributor in a 11-1-21 meeting
  with IEG provided the following insight about the project’s counterfactual. In the absence of the Bank’s
  project, the outcomes, as outlined in this section, would not likely have been achieved, since it was the
  Bank that initiated this type of support which, in turn, eventually attracted the additional support of other
  partners. The impact evaluation noted considerable impacts of those benefiting from the apprenticeship
  support, especially the dual apprenticeships (covering theoretical and on-the-job training). Compared with the
  control group (traditional apprentices), beneficiaries of the dual apprenticeship programs, a unique
  intervention supported under the project, had more significant improvements in skills, income, and
  productivity. Moreover, the project’s support of subsidies for apprentices to offset the opportunity cost of
  participating (foregone income) boosted the number of beneficiaries. In the absence of the program, thus,
  there would have been fewer apprentices, and apprenticeships would have had lower impact. While the
  impact evaluation did not measure this specifically, the TTL expressed his sense that the LIPW employment
  opportunities had a strong impact on the social cohesion of villages whose youth benefited from temporary
  employment. Also, in the absence of the project it is unlikely that significant donor support would have been
  generated and/or that such support would have been coordinated around the highly effective approaches and
  institutional capacity and reform supported by the Bank. It is also unlikely that the local level initiatives and
  innovations to support income generation activities for youth would have been developed and supported.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis undertaken at appraisal provided a strong rationale for investing in education and skills
development in Cote d’Ivoire, which remained equally compelling at project closing. The analysis found that
returns on an additional year of schooling are positive, and individuals with higher levels of education are more
likely to engage in higher-paying economic activities. At the national level, an additional year of schooling yields
a 10 percent return. The rate of return ranges from 15 percent for individuals with some primary education to
159 percent for individuals with higher education, relative to individuals with no education. The analysis also
found that education is not only associated with higher wage earnings, but also increases the likelihood of wage

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



employment and employment in sectors with higher returns and employment contracts, which offer greater job
stability. Specifically, an additional year of education was noted to increase the probability of working in sectors
with higher returns (industry and services) by 14 percent on average.

An end-of-project cost-benefit analysis confirmed that the project is likely to have generated substantial benefits
and also to have generated reasonably high rates of return. The lower bound of the present discounted value of
benefits for the overall project is estimated at $92.9 million; and the present discounted value of costs is
estimated at $75.6 million, including other non-quantifiable costs. The resulting net present value of program
benefits is $17.3 million. The internal rate of return (IRR) for the total project was calculated at 6.9 percent (6.3
percent for Component 1, and 9.2 percent for Component 2), higher than the IRR estimated at the AF
stage. The end-of-project benefit-cost ratio was found to be 1.2 at the ICR stage. In short, although some
benefits could not be fully quantifiable, the NPV of the quantifiable benefits is larger than the NPV costs, which
provides convincing evidence of the viability and efficiency of project investments.

Implementation efficiency appears to be substantial, based on a number of factors. IDA funds were fully utilized,
with the original IDA grant of $50 million and the additional IDA credit of $50 million, respectively, 100 percent
and 99 percent disbursed. Outcome targets were exceeded, and analytic work and evaluations documented
substantial, positive impacts beyond the PDO. This is particularly impressive given that the ICR reports a loss in
value of the IDA funding of $3.42 million due to exchange rate fluctuations. Actual component costs remained
close to original estimates. The exception was a slight overrun in the estimated cost of Component 3 to cover
the incremental costs of PIU operations, due to closing date extensions. The project implementation period was
extended from an initial four-year period to a ten-year period, which might be considered as an inefficiency, in
and of itself. However, this extension enabled: (i) the full and efficient use of all funding (which was doubled from
$50 to $100 million with the AF at the time of the original closing date); (ii) the completion of studies, surveys,
and impact evaluations, which provided insights and lessons for fine-tuning this project, as well as the design of
a follow-on project; and (iii) important gains in institutional strengthening.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                       Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)




The PDO was highly relevant to the current country situation, the government’s development priorities, and the
Bank’s current strategy in Cote d’Ivoire. Efficacy is also rated as high. Achievement of both objectives
embedded in the PDO exceeded expectations. PDO targets were surpassed, and analytic work (studies,
surveys, and impact evaluations) corroborated outcomes and documented substantial impacts beyond the PDO
statement. Project efficiency was substantial. The strong economic rationale for investing in education and skills
development, the robust results of the end-of-project cost-benefit analysis, and substantial implementation
efficiency all provide convincing evidence that the project was economically viable and efficient. These results
point to virtually no shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, producing an Outcome rating
of Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Substantial institutional capacity development achieved under the project has strengthened the prospects for
project sustainability. Capacity risks identified at the project’s outset were mitigated through the institutional
strengthening of the Regional Councils. Moreover, vocational training system capacity was improved thanks
to support under the AF to the development of the regulatory framework for vocational training and the
piloting of reforms. Additionally, capacity to conduct impact evaluations to improve the monitoring of progress
of employment-related interventions has combined with improvements in the data system to support and
encourage the use of data to inform employment policies. All of these elements of capacity strengthening
contribute to the likelihood of project interventions and results being sustained in the project areas.

A persistent risk to development outcomes is the country context of continuing political tension and conflicts
between rival groups. During the past decade, poor education outcomes, combined with relatively high
unemployment and poverty, have made Cote d’Ivoire’s young people, who make up a large segment of the
total population, particularly susceptible to ongoing political tensions. In order to mitigate these ongoing risks,
the country will need to continue to nurture and support more productive employment throughout the
economy, including the large number of self-employed, informal workers in the agriculture and services
sectors.

The ability to mitigate this political risk is highly linked to the challenges of assuring both the technical and
the financial sustainability of these various employment and skills development programs. In the medium-
term, during a time when the programs will be refined and further expanded, the Bank is providing continued
technical and financial support to the labor sector. This support includes the preparation of a follow-on
Emergency Youth Employment and Skills Development project to continue successful activities under this
recently closed project, continue the learning and policy reforms, and expand coverage to regions that were
not previously supported. Additionally, the Bank is financing several other operations that will contribute to
improved competitiveness, supporting value chains that would create more and better jobs, and to increased
access to financing for underserved farmers and firms. All of these complementary operations stand to
increase and/or alter the skills needed in the job market and employment opportunities available to young
Ivoirians.



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The original project design was well aligned with the government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
  (2009-2015), which had been adjusted, post-crisis, to jump-start basic social services delivery and critical
  infrastructure rehabilitation in the aftermath of the short civil war. Its design as an emergency operation
  was highly appropriate for providing a quick response to the country’s post-crisis needs, thus contributing
  to peace-building and reconciliation efforts. The project’s theory of change was sound and evidence-
  based. Design quality was enriched by careful consideration of peer reviewers’ recommendations and
  internationally recognized research that establishes the critical role of job creation for vulnerable youth in
  post-conflict recovery efforts. The AF built on the strengths of this design and both refined and expanded
  its scope, and was aligned with the Strategic Plan for the Reform of TVET (2016-2025). For both the
  original and revised designs: (i) risks and activities for their mitigation were appropriately identified; (ii)
  relevant technical expertise was brought to the design process; and (iii) project preparation benefited
  from a highly collaborative and consultative process with the government.

  Environmental and social safeguards and fiduciary aspects were well-prepared, in accordance with Bank
  guidelines. Project M&E was extremely well prepared, not only with a well developed results framework
  and well-chosen, measurable indicators, but also with the vision and foresight to generate supplemental
  information (both quantitative and qualitative) through the conduct of studies, surveys, and impact
  evaluations. Implementation arrangements were also sound, built from a baseline of no PIU, and
  reflected the right choices and strategies for: recruitment of qualified staff; capacity building; the right
  institutional home (Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs and Solidarity Cabinet) and oversight arrangements (a
  technical steering committee with wide representation of stakeholders); and building national and local-
  level ownership.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Rooted in the strong M&E design and its successful implementation, the Bank’s supervision was focused
 on development impact. Supervision missions systematically documented project progress in aide-
 memoires, back-to-office reports, and the internal reporting system, drawing on project data,
 complemented by data and information emanating from the studies, surveys, and evaluations. This
 information kept Bank management well informed of progress and provided the foundation for the
 ICR. Additionally, during a period overlapping with project implementation (2013-2017), the Bank became
 engaged in analytic work supporting the jobs agenda, including technical support to national employment
 surveys, analysis of new sources of employment data, and facilitation of policy dialogue on
 employment. This analytic work filled critical information gaps and informed the following key strategic
 documents of the Bank: Systematic Country Diagnostic, Country Partnership Framework, and the 2015


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



 Economic Update focused on the topic of employment. It also culminated in the production of a “Jobs
 Diagnostic Report” in 2017, which serves as an important reference for investments in the jobs sector.

 Missions were conducted semi-annually and were properly staffed with education and labor market
 specialists, fiduciary staff, and consultants. In between formal semi-annual missions, the in-country team of
 the Bank had the relevant technical expertise to provide consistent supervision and to support the
 government and its various implementation units. Throughout the project’s life, the Bank team addressed
 the various implementation challenges that arose (e.g., regional capacity constraints, COVID-19 pandemic,
 among others) proactively, and collaboratively with the government, to find solutions that would not
 compromise the integrity of project design. In this vein, the Bank worked with BCPE and other responsible
 agencies to provide strong support to address implementation delays related to capacity constraints,
 including training, technical assistance, guidance, follow-up, and even a revision and piloting of the TVET
 regulatory framework. The Bank’s capable in-country presence and engagement with the government was
 a strong contributing factor in the capacity development of implementing agencies.

 The Bank’s supervision teams consistently reported on financial management, procurement, and
 safeguards progress and compliance, which were monitored regularly, and worked with the PIU and other
 implementation agencies to build their capacity in these critical areas. The Bank’s agreement to grant the
 government’s requests for project extensions enabled the completion of the project as designed, and the
 institutionalization of many activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change was sound, based on in-country and global evidence, with the links between
 the inputs, outputs, and intermediate outcomes both logical and plausibly supportive of a clearly stated
 PDO. The results framework provided good measures of the project’s performance and outcomes. The
 PDO-level indicators and intermediate outcome indicators, as presented in the EPP, were appropriately
 chosen, clearly defined, measurable, and reflective of the results chain, with intermediate results indicators
 capturing components’ contributions to outcomes. Baselines and achievable targets were set for each
 indicator. Revisions to the results framework at the time of Additional Financing refined measurement of an
 unchanged PDO, reflected the changes and additions to the project components, and improved the
 articulation and measurement of intermediate outcome indicators to better capture institutional
 strengthening.

 The M&E design had two essential and complementary components. First, it was designed to monitor and
 report on progress in achieving the targets of the PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators,
 through regular routine collection of project data, monitoring, and reporting by the PIU. Second, the

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



 systematic tracking of project performance and outcome data was complemented by beneficiary surveys,
 tracer studies, and impact evaluation, which generated additional insight and information, both qualitative
 and quantitative. These surveys, studies, and evaluations: (i) improved the availability of employment data
 for the national employment statistics system; (ii) nurtured and supported a better understanding of the
 impact of project interventions; and (iii) developed the evaluation capacity of staff of the PIU and of the
 Ministry of State of Labor, Social Affairs and Solidarity. The inclusion of three M&E-related intermediate
 outcome indicators, tracking tracer surveys, and impact evaluations placed emphasis on their importance
 for institutional strengthening.



b. M&E Implementation
  All of the indicators in the results framework were tracked regularly, and the performance and outcome
  data were updated on a timely basis for supervision missions, including the mid-term review. During the
  project period, four tracer studies were carried out. These studies collected data on beneficiary
  satisfaction of the various programs: LIPW, internships, apprenticeships, and entrepreneurship. Impact
  evaluations were also undertaken to provide rigorous evidence on the effectiveness of core activities
  related to LIPW, apprenticeships, and basic self-employment. These studies provided significant value
  added to the monitoring of routine project data to measure performance and outcome indicators, and
  were used extensively in the assessment of efficacy. All three M&E-related intermediate outcome targets
  were achieved: (i) all four targeted tracer surveys were conducted; (ii) more staff than targeted (10 versus
  8) were trained in impact evaluation methods; and (iii) the two planned impact evaluations were
  completed. Geo-enabling Methods of Monitoring and Supervision was piloted in 10 regions, with 339
  coordinates collected and mapped. The pilot was still ongoing at the project’s closing. Additionally, the
  BCPE started implementation of a geo-located monitoring system of the project beneficiaries. The TTL
  specified that this system supports the mapping of project beneficiaries to provide a notion of the project’s
  reach.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on project performance and outcome served to update the results framework on a regular basis. It
  thus served as a regular tool for monitoring project performance and was key in informing the end-of-
  project evaluation. The tracer studies provided more reliable data on national employment and were
  used by the national employment statistics system for sector-wide information and monitoring. Impact
  evaluation data have been used to inform the government and the World Bank of the impact of the
  various programs supported by the project. Data, information and analysis generated by the extensive
  M&E activities supported under the project have also been used to inform the design of the follow-on
  Emergency Youth Employment and Skills Development project, and relevant programs of the
  government. Additionally, the geo-located monitoring system data were provided to the BCPE, which is
  using this data to prepare an analytical report.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At the design stage, the project was rated as Category B, triggering the Bank’s operational policy OP/BP
   4.01, “Environment Assessment," in light of the potential adverse environmental and social impacts
   associated with the LIPW activities. The project also triggered OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, with
   the EPP’s caveat (p. 69) that the need for involuntary resettlement or land acquisition in specific subproject
   areas would only be known during project implementation, when site-specific plans are available. Two
   frameworks, an Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF), were thus prepared to assist the PIU in: screening all the LIPW subprojects for their
   likely social and environmental impacts; identifying documentation and preparation requirements; and
   prioritizing the investments. Because the project was processed under the Rapid Response Emergency
   OP/BP 8.00, disclosure of social and environmental safeguards instruments was deferred to six months
   after project effectiveness. Both the ESMF and the RPF were received within this timeframe and disclosed
   on August 1, 2012 in the World Bank InfoShop and in-country. At the time of the AF in 2015, the safeguards
   category remained the same, since no significant changes were made to project activities. The ESMF and
   RPF were updated and disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop, respectively on February 12, 2015 and
   February 11, 2015.

   Safeguards were supervised and monitored on a regular basis throughout project implementation,
   consistently receiving ratings in the satisfactory range (satisfactory and moderately
   satisfactory). Additionally, formal safeguards assessments carried out during the project period prompted
   recommendations and actions suggested by the teams. These assessments identified a number of
   weaknesses: (i) limited mechanisms for managing complaints and accident incidences; (ii) delays in the
   regular transmission of environmental reports; and (iii) difficulties in establishing a payment mechanism to
   facilitate access to health services for LIPW beneficiaries, in case of accidents. In 2018 the project
   developed and finalized a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and distributed the information to the
   public. Grievances can be lodged through social networks, emails, and regular mail. There was evidence of
   grievances received, and monthly reports were filed on the complaints and their resolutions. The GRM will
   be enhanced during the follow-on project, and there will be continued outreach to the public to increase
   awareness of the GRM system.

   The TTL confirmed in a 11-1-21 exchange with IEG that the project completed mitigation activities and that
   the PIU consultant was effective in carrying out his work. The TTL also noted that the PIU has recently
   increased its safeguards staffing to two specialists (one each for environmental and social safeguards) for
   the follow-on youth employment and skills development project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   During project design, a financial management assessment was undertaken to appraise project
   arrangements and their compliance with Bank policy OP/BP 10.02 on Financial Management (FM) and
   with the FM manual dated March 1, 2010. A number of measures were identified to ensure adherence to
   minimum Bank requirements, notably: (i) recruitment and training of an FM expert to work in the PIU and

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



  adequate staffing of the FM unit within the PIU; (ii) recruitment of an internal auditor to strengthen the
  internal control system; (iii) purchase and installation of a computerized accounting system for the PIU; (iv)
  establishment of a procedure manual for project administration and FM; and (v) recruitment of an external
  auditor. Additionally, in keeping with Ministry of Economy and Finance’s instruction 192, a public
  accountant and financial controller were also to be assigned to the project by the ministry. FM risks were
  assessed as high due to the country’s post-crisis context, deterioration of governance and transparency,
  and their negative impacts on controls, budget execution, and disbursements.

  The ICR reports FM performance ratings in the satisfactory range throughout project implementation,
  thanks to a strong FM team in place and the PIU’s regular submission of unaudited interim financial reports
  of acceptable quality. Audits were submitted to the Bank in compliance with the Financing Agreement, all
  of them unqualified throughout the project period. A total of 13 audit reports were delivered. The BCPE’s
  integrated financial management system, SIGFIP, was used for the project. The Bank held capacity
  development workshops for PIU FM staff and regional staff to help with implementation of FM
  requirements. All resources were fully accounted for at the project’s closing. There were exchange rate
  losses of $0.2 million from the original project and $3.42 million from the AF, and there were $0.06 million
  in unused funds.

  Procurement

  At the time of project design, a national procurement capacity building program was being implemented at
  central and decentralized levels, and an electronic system for collecting and disseminating procurement
  information and monitoring procurement statistics had been set up. While a procurement capacity
  assessment could not be carried out due to country circumstances (and no PIU yet established), the Bank
  proposed the following risk mitigation measures to meet the minimum requirement of a procurement unit:
  (i) the hiring of two procurement specialists; and (ii) the purchase of necessary equipment.

  Procurement was consistently rated satisfactory in the project’s internal reporting system. The World Bank
  provided procurement training to the PIU to ensure compliance with Bank guidelines. Moreover, the PIU
  demonstrated a high level of competency in working with the regions and service providers to ensure that
  the high volume of contracts were signed and executed at the regional level. In 2020, the PIU migrated to
  the Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), with procurement activities included
  in the STEP platform. Procurement plans were updated regularly and submitted to the Bank, and were
  always of good quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  At the project’s outset (2011), the Bank was the only development partner actively supporting for youth
  employment and skills development. Four years later, at the time of AF approval, five additional donors
  were supporting this sector and aligned their projects with the Bank project’s implementation structure (see
  Attribution paragraph in Section 5). In the context of this expanded interest and support, the government,
  with the World Bank’s support, elevated the status of the PIU to the level of a bureau (Bureau of
  Coordination of Employment Programs), which now focuses on the sector-wide program and coordinates
  all related investments to ensure overall coherence and alignment of efforts. The BCPE staffing includes a
  program coordinator and a deputy coordinator. This has been a highly successful initiative by the



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



   government to build institutional capacity for ensuring program coordination and donor collaboration for the
   sector.

   The focus of project support under the AF shifted to include rural areas and the deconcentrated
   management of activities. This prompted a greater role for municipalities and Regional Councils (RCs),
   which represented municipalities, as they became responsible for the implementation of LIPW activities,
   selected from their own local development plans in collaboration with the relevant technical ministries. This
   approach sought both to promote local ownership and to build local planning and management
   capacity. Thanks to project-related capacity building activities, RCs were able to negotiate contracts for the
   LIPW, internship, and apprenticeship activities. Beyond project expectations, by project closing, RCs set
   up a guarantee fund of $0.7 million to support income generation activities for local youth and signed
   Memoranda of Understanding with microfinancing institutions to provide better access to credit for these
   activities.



d. Other
   The project’s focus on gender was strong. Relevant indicators were gender disaggregated, ensuring
   continued efforts to improve gender equity. Half of all jobs within the LIPW program were reserved for
   women. In the 12 municipalities supported under the AF, female participation increased from 47 percent in
   the first wave to 57 percent in the third and final wave, and the insertion of women after their completion of
   internship programs increased from 64 to 78 percent between 2014 and 2018. Overall, participation of
   women in programs supported under the project reached 43 percent. There are still challenges, however,
   with TVET programs being still primarily geared toward urban areas and boys. The new Bank-supported
   Youth Employment and Skills Development Project is designed to consolidate and further expand gains in
   gender equity.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Project efficacy is rated high, as
                                                                                   most targets and
Outcome                         Satisfactory              Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   accomplishments exceeded
                                                                                   expectations.
                                                                                   The project's M&E, beyond the
                                                                                   collection of project data on
                                                                                   relevant indicators, included
                                                                                   tracer surveys, studies, and
                                                                                   impact evaluations that provided
Bank Performance                Satisfactory              Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   an enhanced assessment of
                                                                                   project performance, outcomes,
                                                                                   impacts, and lessons.
                                                                                   Complementary analytic work in
                                                                                   the jobs sector enhanced the



                                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



                                                                                    targeting of interventions and
                                                                                    policy dialogue.
Quality of M&E                     Substantial              High                    See above.

Quality of ICR                     ---                      High


12. Lessons

The following lessons are a subset of the seven relevant and insightful lessons presented in the ICR,
some slightly reworded by IEG to be more succinct:

        Jobs and skills development projects can be remarkably successful in post-conflict countries,
           especially when project designs adapt to a changing country environment and the flexibility
           of World Bank support and procedures are fully exploited. In this project, the original design
           accommodated the country’s immediate post-conflict needs and evolved, with AF and an
           extended implementation period as the country emerged from the post-conflict situation, to
           include a focus on rural areas and more capacity and institution building at central, regional,
           and local levels.
          Labor-intensive public works programs that include training and savings opportunities are
           important for providing economic integration of vulnerable groups and can be effective in
           raising their earnings, improving their psychological wellbeing, and improving their post-
           program employment prospects.
          Entrepreneurship training and seed funds are critical for new entrepreneurs to begin and
           sustain their businesses. During this project, individual savings, though substantial, were not
           sufficient to fund income generation initiatives completely. However, as a complement to
           individual savings, the development of a competitive seed funding mechanism to support
           good business plans and the proactive role of Regional Councils working with local financial
           institutions proved to be effective.
          Two factors can make critical contributions to the success of internship and apprenticeship
           programs: (i) payment of participants to offset their indirect/opportunity costs and
           compensation of companies for taking the participants on board; and (ii) the undertaking of
           impact evaluations and tracer studies to assess program effectiveness, inform needed
           adjustments, and document the usefulness of the programs for participants and companies.
          Ensuring the existence of a sound regulatory framework is essential for addressing systems
           weaknesses, which in this case were undermining the potential of the vocational education
           and training system. Systems reform undertaken under the AF significantly enhanced
           capacity, including private sector participation and the introduction of a dual apprenticeship
           program, combining theory with on-the-job experience.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                       Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - Emerg. Youth Empl & Skills Dev. Pro (P122546)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. Thanks to the high-quality design and implementation of M&E, the ICR’s evidence base
was strong, drawing on project data and trends on relevant indicators, and complemented with quantitative and
qualitative data generated through project-financed tracer studies, surveys, and two impact evaluations.

There is one caveat to an otherwise excellent presentation of evidence. The data labeled as baselines,
presented in the Efficacy section of the main text and in Annex 1 (Results Framework), were actually
documenting the progress at the time of the AF (3+ years into project implementation). The original baselines
established in the EPP should have been cited. Additionally, all of the targets in the Results Framework were
presented as original targets, with the column for formally revised targets left blank. The original targets, as set
in the EPP, should have been put under the original targets column, and the revised targets established at the
time of AF under the revised targets column.

Quality of Analysis and Results Orientation. The ICR effectively used the wide array of data and information
generated by the strong M&E to triangulate evidence and develop a rich analysis of the project’s performance
and outcomes, and some insights about its impact. The analysis also featured additional information and
insights, both in well-placed footnotes and in the main text, about underlying factors facilitating or constraining
performance and outcomes. The analysis was well built around the project results chain, giving the ICR a
strong results orientation.

Quality of Lessons. Lessons presented were grounded in the ICR’s evidence and analysis and highly
relevant to the challenges of youth employment and skills development in a fragile, post-conflict country
context. They were both insightful and practical.

Internal Consistency/adherence to guidelines. The ICR was internally consistent and respectful of the
guidelines. A small caveat is that on page 2 of the ICR, in the financing section, the original project cost and
original financing were shown as $100 million, but the original estimate and original financing were both $50
million. It was only under the Additional Financing, approved in March 2015, more than four years after
approval of the original project, that an additional $50 million grant was approved.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                       Page 22 of 22
