     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022882

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P169624                                    Armenia Development Policy Operation

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Armenia                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-90210                                 31-Dec-2020                                           51,055,550.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Nov-2019                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         51,055,550.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) as set out on page14 of the Program Document (there was no
PDO in the Loan Agreement) was to support the Government's actions to strengthen economic, fiscal, and
public sector governance by: (i) improving pro‐competition, pro‐trade and streamlined quality regulations and
processes, (ii) enhancing the efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment,


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



and (iii) strengthening anti‐corruption initiatives and the performance of the justice sector and the civil
service.

For purposes of this ICRR, the three objectives of the operation are:

1. Improving pro-competition, pro-trade and streamlined quality regulations and processes;

2. Enhancing efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment;

3. Strengthening anti-corruption initiatives, including the performance of the justice sector and civil service.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation addresses three pillars/policy areas that describe the areas of reform to achieve each of the
three policy objectives. Eight PAs support the policy objectives' achievement, and eight results indicators
(RIs) measure progress towards meeting the objectives.

The pillars/policy areas provide a results chain linking PAs to each pillar/policy area and, consequently, to
each objective. PAs and RIs are listed in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. The pillars/policy areas are:

Pillar 1: Economic governance. This pillar/policy area was to improve government effectiveness by
rationalizing the impact of government regulations through increased regulatory quality (PA1), greater
customs efficiency to boost trade (PA2), and increased competition (PA3).

Pillar 2: Fiscal governance. This pillar/policy area focused on fiscal sustainability by improving the credibility
of the tax administration to raise the efficiency of revenue collection (PA4), and on public investment
management to increase quality and efficiency in public capital spending (PA5).

Pillar 3: Public sector governance. This pillar/policy action was to support public sector efficiency,
transparency, accountability, and performance by strengthening anti-corruption services (PA6), the rule of law
(PA7) and the rationalization of civil service management (PA8).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The World Bank financed the DPO by a loan of US$50 million equivalent, approved on November 21, 2019. It
became effective on December 18, 2019, and closed on December 31, 2019, after disbursing US$51.06 million
(the difference reflects exchange rate variations between the US dollar and the Euro).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The operation's objectives are aligned with government objectives and World Bank strategy for Armenia. If
 achieved, they would help tackle specific development constraints in the country, notably weak governance
 and widespread economic inefficiencies due to entrenched patronage and widespread corruption. These

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



factors had led to the overthrow of the previous government and the election of a new, reform-minded
one. Strategies for change focused on three broad areas: liberalize an oligopolistic market structure, create
fiscal space and more efficient public investment, and increase transparency and accountability in the public
sector.

The DPL supported the Government's 2019-23 reform program and reflected the major economic
development constraints identified in the Bank Group’s Systematic Country Diagnosis (SCD) – corruption and
conflicts of interest, an uncertain business environment, and weak management of public resources. It was
aligned with priorities identified in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY19-23 for Armenia,
focusing on areas where the Bank considered sustainable reforms to be feasible and sought to prepare the
ground for longer-term change. Key areas included boosting competition, strengthening trade, streamlining
bureaucratic processes, enhancing revenue mobilization and the efficiency of public investment, and
strengthening the performance of public institutions. All were areas that were likely to benefit from improved
efficiency: that is, better selection, regulation, and management.

The Bank justified the use of a stand-alone operation because of limited headroom for IBRD lending (see
Section 8a). However, this is not a convincing justification as even limited headroom can be divided over more
than one operation. Given that many of the reforms were complex and, according to Bank staff, warranted a
measured approach to reform, a two-operation series might have allowed scope for more focused policy
dialogue and more deliberate movement along the result chain linking prior actions and the achievement of
objectives.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1.Prior Actions (PAs) by Objective

 Objective 1: Improving pro-competition, pro-trade and streamlined quality regulations and processes
 Prior action 1: The Government established a Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) department under the
 Prime Minister’s office and elucidated principles (including methodology, scope, and the institutional
 mandate) for its operation consistent with international best practice.
 Prior Action 2: The Government (a) amended a decree to allow for risk based management of truck scanning
 at border crossings; (b) through the State Revenue Committee (SRC) order, required advanced declaration
 submissions and (c) mandated the extension of the National Single Window System to facilitate cross border
 movement
 Prior action 3: The Government approves a bill to be submitted to Parliament that amends the Law on
 Protection of Economic Competition to make state aid accountable and less distortionary by (a) defining what
 constitutes state aid; (b) setting reporting requirements for government bodies with respect to state aid
 schemes and aid that has been granted.
 Objective 2: Enhancing efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment
 Prior action 4: The SRC started to implement the full functionality of the Tax Audit Case Management
 System, which replaced the existed SRC audit system
 Prior action 5: A Public Investment Management (PIM) and Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Department
 has been established (staffed and budgeted) within the Ministry of Economy to improve the public investment
 management framework through effective evaluations of the large public investment projects

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



Objective 3: Strengthening anti-corruption initiatives including the performance of the justice sector
and civil service
Prior action 6: The Cabinet has approved an anti-corruption strategy and action plan that establishes the
structure and mechanisms for strengthening the fight against corruption. PA6(b): An electronic platform is
established that allows anonymous “whistleblowing” by the public and government employees to report
corrupt acts.
Prior action 7 (a): The Cabinet has approved a judicial sector strategy and action plan to establish a new
architecture and mechanisms for judicial reform

Prior action 7(b): A fast-track procedure for processing small claims through the court has been established
Prior action 8: The Cabinet approved draft amendments for submission to the National Assembly, merging
different civil service regimes and extending the performance management system to a larger part of the civil
service.

There were altogether 8 PAs, with three PAs supporting Objective 1 (improving government effectiveness), two
supporting Objective 2 (revenue and capital spending), and three supporting Objective 3 (efficiency and
transparency in public sector governance.

Objective 1. Improving pro-competition, pro-trade and streamlined quality regulations and
processes (PAs 1-3)

Objective 1 was to be achieved by improving regulatory quality and efficiency (PA1), raising customs efficiency
to boost trade (PA2), and raising market contestability and competition (PA3).

PA1. The complexity, length, and low quality of regulatory processes adversely affected the business climate,
and the lack of an open and consultative approach weakened trust in the Government. To address these
issues, PA1 supported the implementation of a 2018 law establishing an RIA framework for assessing the
consequences of government actions (laws and regulations) to ensure better policy options. It focused RIAs on
regulations judged to have the most significant impact on competitiveness, public spending, small businesses,
and climate change. While setting up the department and adopting the decree were described by Bank staff as
critical steps toward improving regulatory quality, these are essentially inputs into a process that when applied
will contribute to increased efficiency and productivity. Therefore, the steps were followed by further measures
supporting implementation of the RIA, including the introduction of operating procedures and capacity building
within the RIA department and in line ministries to allow a decentralized approach to RIA.

Relevance of PA1 = MS

PA2 was to streamline costly and time-consuming border crossing processes. The World Bank’s Logistics
Performance Index ranked Armenia 111th in border-crossing movement, influenced by several issues: the
absence of a national single-window system for cross-border trade resulting in all trucks entering Armenia being
systematically x-rayed and inspected at the border. An electronic declaration system is in place, but not yet
fully implemented. The Bank considered these key obstacles to cross-border movement of goods and services,
critical for a land-locked, small, open economy. To address these issues, PA2(a) introduced risk-based
scanning of trucks at border crossings, (b) advance submission of customs declarations, and (c) a national
single-window system; all promoting the faster and more efficient movement of goods through
customs. However, there was no clear explanation of how the PA would make headway against the pervasive
corruption that contributed to costly and time-consuming border crossing


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



Relevance of PA2(a), PA2(b), PA2(c) = MU

PA3. The lack of market contestability and competition was a key factor underlying slow private sector
development in Armenia, where business risk relating to weak competition policies was rated the second
highest in the Europe and Central Asia Region according to the Economist: the lack of neutral competition and
firm rules of the award of State aid were significant distortionary factors in resource allocation. PA3 sought to
define the rules and set the reporting requirements of State aid, including publication of the database, as a step
toward leveling the playing field, enhancing market contestability and promoting competitive neutrality to hinder
vested interests from gaining untoward competitive advantage. However, it was not clear how these actions
would make progress given more fundamental governance challenges.

Relevance of PA3 = MU

All three PAs represent tentative technical solutions to more fundamental governance challenges and do not
seem to derive from a nuanced appreciation of the underlying political economy.

The relevance of PAs to achieving Objective 1 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory

Objective 2. PAs supporting enhancing efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment (PAs 4
and 5)

PA4 and PA5, respectively, focused on improving tax administration and strengthening public investment
management.

The tax administration lacked a modern risk-based tax audit system. Instead, state capture and collusion
between business and tax authorities had led to pervasive tax non-compliance and shortfalls in public
revenue. PA4 started the process of operationalizing a risk-based audit management system to reduce
discretion and emphasize accountability and results. It was hoped that starting to implement the full
functionality of the Tax Audit Case Management System would lead to more efficient and transparent targeting
of audit efforts, including by reducing the number of tax audits, strengthening self-assessments, and by better
targeting of high-risk transactions. While starting implementation is a positive step, it does not confront the
underlying issues of state capture and collusion and is not a convincing movement along the necessary results
chain.

Armenia underperforms in terms of efficiency in public investment management (PIM) in the face of strong
vested interests and in absence of rigorous analysis of public investment projects. The portfolio has
shown weaknesses in selection, regulation, and management, as well as in low levels of public investment,
which contributed to weak PIM and pose a particular challenge for a country with limited fiscal space. PA5
focused on developing a results-based PIM system, including establishing a PIM and public-private partnership
department in the Ministry of Economy with projects screened for efficiency and impact according to pre-defined
criteria, which would result in projects with higher rates of returns going forward. The Bank team notes that this
is a clear departure from previous practice, and helps move the agenda forward on two significant issues -
efficiency in resource use and a better control over corruption.

Relevance of PA4 = MS; PA5 = MS

The relevance of PAs to achieving Objective 2 is judged to be Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



Objective 3. PAs supporting strengthening anti-corruption initiatives including the performance of the
justice sector and civil service (PAs 6 to 8)

The first two reform areas, addressed by PAs 6 and 7, are closely linked, focusing on transparency, while the
third one (PA8) concerned institutional capacity and public sector performance. All three were cross-cutting
areas influencing performance across the operation.

PA6 and PA7 were to address corruption, considered a key obstacle to Armenia's development, and
consequently both PAs are considered by Bank staff to be core elements of the Government's reform
program. Previously, anti-corruption policies had been fragmented, weakening any prevention, detection, or
enforcement measures that might have been introduced. With the new government that came into power on a
platform of improving governance specifically focused on the rule of law and anti-corruption, an anti-corruption
strategy and a related judiciary reform strategy were introduced.

PA6 supported (a) the comprehensive anti-corruption strategy and related action plan to provide an institutional
and legal framework for identifying and prosecuting corrupt actions, and (b) a whistleblower platform. PA7
targeted the judiciary, considered one of the most captured sectors, and where corruption is a major obstacle to
the rule of law and fair trials, fueling widespread distrust in the justice system. PA7(a) supported the
introduction of a justice sector strategy that sought to achieve equal access to and fair delivery of judicial
services, through a stronger case management system; and (b) a fast-track procedure for processing small
claims. Given the long history of corruption in Armenia’s justice sector, PA7(a), the articulation of a strategy is
not itself a meaningful movement along the results chain. However, PA7(b) is more concrete and has the
potential to eliminate some opportunities for corruption. It introduced streamlined procedures for small-claims
management for quick and inexpensive resolution of small value legal disputes. Because it functions at
grassroots level, it has the potential to be a quick win in raising credibility in the system among the
citizenry. While justice reform is notoriously challenging, this prior action more directly targets the source of the
underlying problem.

Relevance of PA6(a) = MU; PA6(b) = MS;

Relevance of PA7(a) = MS; PA7(b) = S

PA8 was to support an ongoing restructuring of the Armenian public sector from an inward-looking,
bureaucratic, and process-oriented organization susceptible to interference by vested interests, toward a more
transparent, accountable, and efficient model of public sector governance. Together with pervasive corruption,
the Armenian bureaucracy offered difficult access to and poor quality of services for citizens. A process of
restructuring the civil service had started before the current operation, which sought to take forward that
ongoing reform. It supported greater consolidation of civil service regimes aiming at reducing fragmentation
and inefficiencies, and facilitating and expanding on performance management of civil servants. The expected
results were to be a merit-based, results-driven and more efficient civil service with greater capacity for strategic
management. The focus was ambitious, and the expected results were long-term rather than immediate, albeit
highly relevant ones.

Relevance of PA8 = S

The relevance of PAs to achieving Objective 3 is judged to be Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicators (RIs), Associated PAs, Baselines, Targets, Status

                                                                      Actual
                                                                               RI
                 Assoc. RI                                            vs.
 RIs                              Baseline Target         Actual               achievement
                 PAs    relevance                                     targeted
                                                                               ratio
                                                                      change
 Objective 1: Improving pro-competition, pro-trade and streamlined quality regulations
 and processes
 RI1: # of high-
 impact new
 laws and
 regulations      PA1   MU        0                       5           25%      Modest
 subject to RIAs                            20
 and public
 consultation
 RI2(a): % of
 trucks scanned                                           Risk-based
 at border,       PA2   MS        100%      75%           inspections n.a.
 based on risk                                            tested
 assessment                                                                    Negligible
 RI2(b): Increase
 in # of agencies                           12(all
                  PA2   MS        3                       3           0%
 in single                                  agencies)
 window
 RI3: State Aid
 database
                                  No        Database
 functional,
                  PA3   MU        published functions but Partly met 50%       Modest
 published and
                                  info      not public
 used to monitor
 grant aid
 Objective 2: Enhancing efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment
 RI4: average
 amount owed                      AMD 60.1 10%            21%         Over
                  PA4   S                                                      High
 per taxpayer                     million   increase      increase 100%
 audited
 RI5:new large
                                                                       100% s
 publ. inv.       PA5   MS        0         50%           100%                 Modest
                                                                      creened
 projects

                                                                                             Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



screened,
appraised,
prioritized in
compliance with
gvt PIM
guidelines
Objective 3: Strengthening anti-corruption initiatives including the performance of the
justice sector and civil service
RI6(a): Anti-
corruption                       Strategy
                                            All action               Met
strategy and                     and plan
                  PA6(a) S                  items         100%       change High
action plan                      approved
                                            implemented              target
2010-2022                        by cabinet
implemented
RI6(b): Whistle-
blower reports                              30% used to               Over
are submitted PA6(b) S           0          investigate 39%          100% of High
using electronic                            corruption               target
platform
                                                          100%(33%
RI7(a): actions
                                            100%(60% complete,
under justice
                  PA7(a) MU      0          complete, 64% partly, 55%        Substantial
strategy started
                                            40% partly) 3%
and on track
                                                          postponed)
RI7(b): share of
small claims
                                            10pp          15 pp
cases eligible PA7(b) MU         n.a.                                n.a.    Negligible
                                            increase      decrease
for small claims
procedures
RI8: nr of
institutions
                                                                     Over
included in civil PA8    MS      40         60            68                 High
                                                                     100%
service
perform. mgmt

Objective 1: Improving pro-competition, pro-trade and streamlined quality regulations and
processes

RI1 measured the number of new laws and regulations with “potentially significant economic impact” that
had been subject to RIA and timely public consultation because of PA1. It did not, however, measure the
potential (or actual) gains that arose from RIA in terms of increased efficiency and effectiveness of
legislation – the ultimate purpose of PA1. It also did not define “significant economic impact.”

Relevance = MU

RI2 measured the impact of customs reform introduced under PA2 on border traffic in terms of (i) the
reduction in the share of trucks being scanned at the border, and (ii) the number of agencies included in


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



the single-window system. While these are relevant measures of improved border traffic, the main
concern underlying PA2 was the time taken to cross the border. While it is reasonable to assume that the
PA contributed to reduced crossing times, the ultimate purpose – speedy crossings – is not captured in
either of the RIs.

Relevance of RI2(a) and RI2(b) = MS

RI3 determined to what extent key steps for establishing a state aid control framework as set out in PA3
were in place – a functional, published database to allow monitoring how and on what basis state aid is
distributed. The indicator did not effectively monitor the underlying intention of the PA – an improved
competitive environment; instead, it remained at the level of a collection of information on state aid in the
form of a database.

Relevance = MU

Objective 2. Enhancing efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment

RI4 sought to capture the effects of introducing a risk-based audit management system by measuring
efficiency, that is, the average liabilities identified per audit, which was related to improving tax
administration: more efficient auditing was expected to generate higher revenues by reducing non-
compliance.

Relevance = S

RI5 was related to PA5 and government efforts to increase returns to public investment: an increase in
projects screened, appraised, and prioritized for implementation as a function of appraisal results would
ensure that projects with higher rates of return would go forward, improving the efficiency of public
spending. However, the RI has several weaknesses, including the lack of a clear definition of “large,” and
uncertainty about the share of public investment this would cover. It would also have been stronger if it
referred to the share (in value terms) of new public investment screened.

Relevance = MS

Objective 3. Strengthening anti-corruption initiatives including the performance of the justice
sector and civil service

 RI6 targeted implementation of anti-corruption elements that the operation was addressing, all initiated
under PA6 (which formally launched the country’s anti-corruption strategy). RI6(a) monitored the
implementation of action items in anti-corruption strategy; and RI6(b) monitored submission and pick-up of
whistleblower reports of corrupt acts by the public and government employees to an electronic platform.

Relevance of RI6(a) = S; RI6(b) = S

RI7 measured (a) progress on implementing the judicial sector strategy by the rate with which planned
actions under the strategy were being implemented, and (b) the increase in cases managed as small
claims. The former was a relevant indicator of improved processes and as such an indicator of a more
active judicial system. It did not, however, indicate its impact on corruption, which was a major aim of



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



               both judicial reforms: that will only become apparent over time. The latter reform – the increase in small
               claims – would prove not to be easily measurable in the absence of a baseline .

               Relevance of RI7(a) = MU; RI7(b) = MU

                RI8 measured the number of institutions covered by the new performance management system for
               consolidating civil service regimes. While RI8 was a relevant indicator of how the reform was
               progressing, it did not provide information about the immediate or the longer-term impact of such
               consolidation on changes in either the management structure, operational efficiency, or service
               delivery. The current focus on number of institutions involved, serves as an initial output indicator
               measuring one aspect of management changes.

               Relevance of RI8 = MS



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improving pro-competition, pro-trade and streamlined quality regulations and processes

                Rationale
                Supported by PAs 1-3; progress measured by RIs 1-3.

                The objective was to be achieved by improving government effectiveness through (i) increased regulatory
                quality and efficiency; (ii) reform of the customs process to facilitate cross-border commerce; and (iii) by
                making state aid more transparent and less biased, thus opening up competition in the marketplace.

                The RI target set for PA1 – 20 laws and regulations with potentially significant economic impact subject to RIA
                and timely public consultation, up from a baseline of 8 - was not achieved as roll-out of the scheme turned out
                not to be possible within the project period. Moreover, even if it had been achieved, the RI did not capture the
                impact of applying RIAs to determine the efficiency and effectiveness of reviewed laws and regulations, which
                was the main purpose of the RI. It also did not provide indication of the eventual influence of the RIA process
                on corruption. Achievement I s rated modest.

                The RI2 targets set for PA2 measured the impact of PA2 on facilitating cross-border traffic. The target for
                RI2a on scanning of trucks at the border was only partly achieved due to inadequate infrastructure, with the
                activity limited to scanning being piloted at one post. Implementation of the single-window - RI2b - also was
                not achieved, being implemented in 3 agencies against a target of 12 agencies. As was the case for the
                previous RI, one of the RIs, RI2a, did not capture the main sought-after objective, border crossing times, nor
                did it address eventual impact on corruption. Achievement of RI2 is rated negligible.



                                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



The RI3 target set for PA3 was partly achieved. The state aid database is functional but not yet public (due to
technical issues, according to the World Bank team). Achievement is rated modest.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhancing efficiency of revenue mobilization and public investment

Rationale
Supported by PAs 4-5; progress measured by RIs 4-5

The objective was to be achieved by (i) improving tax administration, and (ii) strengthening public investment
management. The former was to result in a more efficient and transparent targeting of auditing efforts, which,
in turn, was expected to generate higher revenues and reduce tax non-compliance. The latter was measured
by the increase in average amounts owed per taxpayer audited (that is, by the increased efficiency of the tax
audit).

The RI4 target set for PA4 was achieved. Measuring the increase in average amounts owed per taxpayer
audited (that is, the increased efficiency of the tax audit), resulted in a 21 percent increase in the average
amount of tax received per audit (2020/2021) against a baseline of AMD 60.01 million (2018/2019), and a
targeted increase of 10 percent. Achievement is rated high.

The RI5 target set for PA5 was in the process of being achieved. The RI focuses on screening large-scale
projects (at or above US$10.5 million) of which 50 percent would be subject to rigorous economic analysis,
including estimating their internal rates of return. At the time of Program closing, 15 projects were in the
pipeline and ten at the pre-appraisal stage. Where the RI fell short and rendered results on coverage less
useful was the absence of information on the share of investments being monitored and hence providing only
partial understanding of the efficiency of public investments. Based on that, achievement is rated modest.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthening anti-corruption initiatives including the performance of the justice sector and civil service

Rationale
Supported by PAs 6-8; progress measured by RIs 6-8



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



                      The objective was to be achieved by strengthening (i) anti-corruption mechanisms; (ii) justice services; and
                      (iii) civil service reform.

                      The RI6 targets set for PA6 - strengthening anti-corruption mechanisms - were being met. The RI6a target
                      for PA6a -implementing the Government’s anti-corruption strategy and action plan, and its whistleblower
                      strategy (RI6b) – were met with all actionable items in the anti-corruption strategy under implementation at
                      project closing. The RI6b target for PA6b was met with 39 percent of whistleblower complaints being pursued
                      against a target of at least 30 percent. The achievement of those two RIs is rated high.

                      The RI7 targets set for PA7 to strengthen justice service were substantially met. The RI7a target for PA7a
                      concerning justice sector reform and processing of civil cases, was substantially achieved with 100 percent of
                      action items underway, equal to the target. Of these, 33 percent had been completed by project closing,
                      against a target of 60 percent. Achievement of RI7a is rated substantial.

                      The RI7b target for PA7b concerning the share of small claims eligible for streamlined treatment in small
                      claims court saw a 15 percentage point decline rather than a targeted 10 percentage point increase. The
                      result was influenced by external circumstances, including COVID-19 and the introduction of measures to
                      mitigate the effects of the COVID-related lockdown on small businesses. Achievement of RI7b is rated
                      negligible.

                      Achievement for RI7 overall is rated modest.

                      The RI8 target for PA8 concerning institutions included in the civil service performance management reform
                      reached all 68 public agencies covered by the law compared to a baseline of 40 agencies and a target of 60
                      agencies. Achievement of this item is rated high.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall achievement of objectives for this operation is rated moderately satisfactory based on the efficacy
ratings for each objective. Objective 1, on economic governance, was rated moderately unsatisfactory based on
the status of targets at Program closing: while it fell short on all three, efforts to introduce competition into the
provision of state aid were partly successful, efforts at improving the quality and impact of laws and regulations,
as well as introducing more efficient customs processes, remained at the pilot stage. Objective 2, on fiscal
governance, was rated moderately satisfactory, achieving its target for revenue mobilization, but only in the
process of achieving its target for public investment management. Objective 3 on strengthening public sector
governance was rated satisfactory. It achieved two of its targets – anti-corruption and civil service reform - and
partly its target for justice services, while falling short on streamlining the small claims process.



                                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

Relevance of PAs was rated moderately satisfactory with two S ratings, five MS ratings, and five MU
ratings. The calculation takes into account split ratings. Overall efficacy was rated Moderately Satisfactory,
reflecting strong performance in revenue generation and public investment management, albeit tempered by
shortfalls in meeting targets for economic governance, where the immediate effects of policy changes were
recorded (institution in place) but not key intentions (speedier transit). The latter reflected immediate institution-
building results, but not longer term impact, which could have led to a better (or worse) rating.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. While Bank staff consider the current government’s resolve to proceed with reforms to be
strong according to the ICR (page 28), political uncertainties following the regime change and the war in
Afghanistan may change policy priorities, especially if there is a change in the government. In turn, that
could occur if the reform process is slow and public support is eroded. This is particularly likely given the
tentative nature of a number of the prior actions.

Governance. The operation is based on the assumption that the new government will remain committed to
good governance and anti-corruption. If that does not happen, or there are significant changes in
government or the civil service, achievements in governance aimed at with this project may well not be
achieved. In the meantime, the Bank team indicates that it will work with the client to maintain governance
issues high on the agenda.

 Institutional risk. Both political and governance risks which influence full achievement of all three areas of
governance, also influence the still early stages of implementation of the PAs, some of which lay the legal
and institutional foundations for better governance, but still need to evolve over time to ensure longer-term
continuity of reforms.

COVID-19. Covid-19 had a significant impact on the speed of reform during the implementation of the
operation, and it could still have adverse effects on the implementation of PDO reforms depending on the
pace of decline of its prevalence.




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



If the above risks materialize, they will weaken the Government’s efforts to strengthen all three areas of
governance: efforts at improving competition, trade, and regulatory processes; efficiency of revenue
mobilization and public investment; and anti-corruption efforts and streamlining of the civil service.

However, these risks may well diminish over time. Already, results indicators and field-level surveys
confirm a decline in corruption, pointing to the likelihood that the Government will maintain its
commitments. However, technical assistance must be provided in a timely manner. For example, the Bank,
USAID, and an EU-Bank trust fund provide ongoing technical assistance to support the RIA framework, yet a
critical component provided by the Bank was delayed, with a knock-on effect on the achievement of the
targeted result. Future assistance needs to be carefully sequenced with policy advances to reduce the risk
of further delays.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


At a high level, the operation was strategically relevant and aligned with Government and World Bank
priorities. It was introduced following a change in government and a change in priorities, with the new
government emphasizing good governance and anti-corruption. Previous Bank interventions had also
focused on governance (a programmatic DPL series, and tax administration and a public administration
project), and provided some background for the current operation, albeit now applied to a more favorable
environment. Past experience may have guided program design and influenced the choice of relatively
modest, albeit pragmatic, prior actions and results indicators where actions often did not
sufficiently address underlying governance issues, for instance as reflected in several RIs. A more
ambitious approach may also have been limited by the single tranche approach (driven by constraints on
foreign borrowing). That said, the Bank did seek to draw benefit from a government committed to change
in critical areas - the Bank team notes that PAs were set more ambitiously under this, limited operation,
than might have been the case in a programmatic operation.

The operation was prepared taking into account the new orientations of a new government - to strengthen
governance and address corruption. In doing so, it built on previous experience (studies and analytical
work, interactions with civil society and donors, and other Bank projects and programs.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



The operation was supported by technical assistance and advisory services throughout the short period of
implementation. Supervision was supported by World Bank staff located in the field plus several initiatives that
had further backing in other ongoing (investment) projects.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The operation was prepared taking into account the new orientations of a new government - to strengthen
governance and address corruption. In doing so, it built on previous experience (studies and analytical work,
interactions with civil society and donors, and other Bank projects and programs). While the Bank team noted
that the interventions were appropriate for the new political environment and in fact benefited from it,
interventions nevertheless appear cautious in some instances.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

None identified.



b. Environmental

None identified.



c. Gender

None identified.



d. Other

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)




None identified.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is mostly thorough and candid in its assessment of the operation. It provides a coherent narrative that
allows challenges to be understood and allow the logical sequence of events from prior actions to indicators to
outcomes to be understood and be evaluated. Still, the analysis could have gained if, for example, indicators
such as technical assistance and advisory services could have been provided with some content. Beyond
that, all the sections were thorough and provided sufficient material for the evaluator to make their own
judgements about the processes and conclusions.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                 Outcome reflects both relevance
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   of PAs and efficacy being rated
                                                                                 MU.
                                                                                 The rating was influenced by
                                                                                 discordance between actions
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 taken (PAs) and actions required
                                                                                 for good governance
Relevance of Results
                                ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR:

Political economy, and prior work and investment lending, should be carefully assessed for successful
results. The operation was largely based on a change in the political economy that was believed to open the
door for substantive governance reform and stronger anti-corruption policies. Still, several policy changes in the



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Armenia Development Policy Operation (P169624)



DPO fell short of generating significant reforms, indicating insufficient political economy analysis and a policy
environment that was not as ripe for substantial change as expected.

IEG added additional lessons:

A stand-alone policy-supporting operation can gain from a more discerning review of past
experience. When much of the focus of an operation is on strategies, action plans and institution-building, a
more nuanced review of past experience may be called for, especially when, as noted above, there appears to
be political change.

Technical assistance can complement the policy actions supported by a DPO, but the timing is
critical. In his case, a delay for external reasons of 18 months in providing the Bank's technical assistance
support to the RIA department led to missing an expected targeted result.

Tax audits can be effective in bringing discipline into tax administration. Critical to tax compliance and tax
collection efficiency is a rigorous tax audit system that relies on objective rules-based criteria. In Armenia,
collusion between the tax office and the private sector vested interests generated significant tax evasion,
weakening competitiveness and public finances. Introducing a case management audit system into the tax
authority ensured that the audit process followed a digitalized process with random assignment of inspectors
and thereby limiting discretion.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 17
