      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022581

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P171851                                    Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 North Macedonia                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-90100                                 31-May-2020                                        139,019,390.63

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Sep-2019                                31-May-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           139,250,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            139,250,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        139,019,390.63                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Clay Wescott                Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page 15), the program development objective of the North Macedonia
Public Finance and Competitiveness Development Policy Loan (DPO) was "to support reforms to strengthen
public finances, improve market competition, and reduce the regulatory burden in North Macedonia."

For purposes of this ICR review, the program objective is parsed into:

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)




Objective 1: To mobilize additional revenues
Objective 2: To make spending programs more efficient and bolster public financial management
Objective 3: To improve market competition and reduce the regulatory burden [on businesses]


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Program had three pillars and eight prior actions.

Pillar 1 - Mobilizing Additional Revenues supported enactment of:

      PA1 - Personal Income Tax Law to introduce the progressive income tax rate of 18 percent, remove
       exemptions on capital income taxation and increase the capital income tax rate to 15 percent, and
       reduce the allowed tax deductions while increasing the personal tax allowance to protect the low-
       income households; and,
      PA2 - Law on Excises to introduce excise taxes on coal, gas, and electricity.

Pillar 2 - Making Spending Programs More Efficient and Bolstering Public Financial
Management supported enactment of:

      PA3 - Amendments to the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance, the Law on Compulsory Capitally
       Funded Pension Insurance, and the Law on Compulsory Social Insurance Contributions to introduce
       the price indexation of benefits, harmonize the accrual rates, and introduce a higher pension
       contribution rate to improve the fiscal and social sustainability of the multi-pillar pension system;
      PA4 - Law on Social Protection and Amendments to the Law on Child Protection to consolidate social
       assistance benefits, expand the coverage of the bottom quintile and protect the energy- poor, while
       maintaining targeting through the introduction of a Guaranteed Minimum Assistance program; and
      PA5 - Law on Reporting and Monitoring the Liabilities to identify and monitor arrears of the general
       government and launch the quarterly publication of reported arrears from September 2018 onward.

Pillar 3 - Improving Market Competition and Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Businesses supported
enactment of:

      PA6 - Energy Law to deregulate electricity generation, open the electricity supply market for all
       customers, and introduce competitive-based support mechanisms for renewable energy generation;
      PA7 - Public Procurement Law to strengthen transparency and increase private-sector competition in
       public procurement; and
      PA8 - Inspection Supervision Law to introduce risk-based inspections, a provision for inspectors to
       issue warnings, and a grace period for businesses to correct first-time infractions.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing: The DPO was financed by a development policy loan from IBRD with EUR 125
million (US$139.25 million). EUR 125 million (US$139.019 million) was fully disbursed. The difference in the
U.S. dollar amounts was due to changes in the EUR/US$ rate between the appraisal and disbursement dates.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)




Dates: The DPO was approved on September 19, 2019, became effective on October 21, 2019, and closed as
scheduled on May 31, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to Country Development Constraints. This DPO aimed to address constraints to economic
 growth and development arising out of adverse fiscal and public financial management events and private
 sector development issues that had festered throughout 2009-17 and that tested the government as it
 prepared to negotiate its accession to the European Union (EU) in 2018-19.

       Fiscal fragility stemmed from: low personal income tax revenues and regressive personal income
        taxes; low excise tax revenues; unsustainable government spending on pensions; inadequate and
        poorly targeted social assistance spending; and the accumulation of public sector arrears.
       Private enterprise lacked dynamism, affected by: the poor operational performance of critical service
        sectors, especially electricity generation and supply; the lack of a competitive process in the
        procurement by the government of goods and services; and the poor environment to doing business,
        marked by indiscriminate government inspections of businesses.
       It was an opportune time to undertake economic reforms, as the international political environment had
        turned favorable to the country: (a) after North Macedonia settled its name dispute with Greece, the EU
        Council started the screening process for accession negotiations in 2018 (North Macedonia had been
        an EU candidate country since 2005); (b) the accession negotiations would start in 2019, and as a
        candidate for EU membership, North Macedonia would need to adhere to a range of EU economic
        directives; (c) the policy reforms supported by this operation would help North Macedonia align its laws
        and regulations to these directives – Directive 2014/14, requiring that public contracts for the provision
        of works, supplies, and services be awarded to the most economically advantageous tender identified
        on the basis of the best price-quality ratio; Directive 2014/15, introducing new standard forms for
        publishing public procurement notices by entities in the water, energy, transport and postal sectors to
        obtain works, supplies, and services; and the Third Package of Energy Market Regulation covering,
        among others, the introduction of open and fair retail energy markets and the unbundling of energy
        supply and generation from the operation of transmission networks; and (d) the North Atlantic Treaty
        Organization had agreed to sign an accession protocol with North Macedonia also in 2019, providing a
        durable security setting to economic policymaking by the government.

 Relevance to Government Priorities. The development objectives of the operation were aligned with the
 government’s medium-term priorities of reinforcing macroeconomic stability, social equity, and
 competitiveness.

       The Economic Reform Program 2019-21 aimed to strengthen revenues, improve public financial
        management, increase market competition, make the environment for doing business more attractive,
        and strengthen the labor market and social protection.
       The Government Fiscal Strategy 2019-22 aimed to contain fiscal risks and proposed gradual fiscal
        consolidation. According to the strategy, public debt would moderate starting in 2021 – the primary
        deficit would decline to 0.8 percent in 2021, which would lead to a decline in public and publicly-

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



       guaranteed (PPG) debt to 50.8 percent of GDP after its peak in 2020, when highway construction
       ended. The debt limit would be kept at 60 percent of GDP for PPG debt and a maximum of 13 percent
       of GDP for guaranteed debt. Revenues would be boosted by: progressive personal income
       taxation; higher social contributions for pension and health insurance (by 0.4 in percentage points in
       2019 and 0.1 percentage points in 2020); stricter control of both wage expenses and
       employment; reform of social benefits to improve their efficiency; and pension reform, to contain the
       growth of spending.

Relevance to Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were consistent with the Bank Group's strategy
in North Macedonia.

      The Country Partnership Strategy for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for the Period of
       FY2015 - FY2018 (CPS) committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities ("two
       pillars") – Growth and Competitiveness, and Skills and Inclusion. The first program objective was
       aligned with the outcome envisioned under the first CPS pillar to have "improved fiscal and public
       financial management." The second program objective was aligned with two other outcomes under the
       first CPS pillar to have "more clean energy available" and to attain "better conditions for private
       investment."
      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of North Macedonia 2019-2023 (CPF)
       supported the country's development priorities ("three focus areas") – Export-Led Growth (improving
       the environment for a competitive private sector), Inclusive Growth (expanding skills and opportunities
       for the most vulnerable), and Sustainable Growth (enhancing sustainability and enhancing resilience to
       shocks). The first program pillar was consistent with the objective under the third CPF focus area to
       "strengthen fiscal and public finance management," specifically with the targets to "reduce general
       government deficit and arrears" and to "reduce the pension deficit." The second program pillar was
       consistent with the objective under the third CPF focus area to "accelerate the transition to a more
       sustainable energy mix" and the objective under the first CPF focus area to "improve connectivity and
       access to markets."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar 1 - Mobilizing Additional Revenues

      PA1: Enactment of the Personal Income Tax Law to introduce a progressive rate of 18 percent, remove
       the exemption on capital income taxation and increase the rate to 15 percent, and reduce the allowed
       tax deductions, while increasing the personal tax allowance to protect the low-income households. This
       prior action aimed to address the low contribution to government revenues of the personal income tax,
       which was regressive: (a) personal income taxes were only 2.4 percent of GDP, compared to 9 percent
       of GDP in the EU; (b) the personal income tax was regressive – the tax rate remained as low as 10
       percent and deductions and exemptions were allowed for capital, property, and other types of income to
       the benefit of the rich; and (c) the capital income tax was particularly regressive – capital accounted for
       more than 30 percent of the income of the rich and only 2.5 percent of the income of the poor,
       but exemptions rendered the effective tax rate less than 10 percent. This prior action would contribute
       to the objective to mobilize additional revenues: (a) the new marginal personal income tax rate would

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



      rise to 18 percent for labor incomes above Macedonian denar (MKD) 90,000 (US$1,710) a month,
      equivalent to 26 percent of GDP per capita; (b) a higher personal income tax rate of 15 percent flat
      would apply to capital income; (c) tax allowances would be cut by at least 30 percent for rental income,
      capital gains, royalties, and authorship rights; (d) tax exemptions would be eliminated for interest
      earnings, insurance income, and capital gains from securities; and (e) the tax allowance would rise from
      MKD 7,500 (US$143) to MKD 8,000 (US$152) per month to protect low-income households. The
      personal income tax reform measures comprising this prior action would have an estimated fiscal impact
      of +0.25 percent of GDP, according to the Program Document (page 16). The relevance of PA1 is rated
      highly satisfactory.
     PA2: Enactment of the Law on Excises that introduces excise on coal, gas, and electricity. This prior
      action aimed to address the low contribution of excise taxes to government revenues: (a) excise taxes
      were only 3.7 percent of GDP, lower than in peer countries Montenegro (5.3 percent of GDP) and
      Croatia (4.2 percent of GDP); (b) excise taxes on diesel fuel accounted for a low one-third of total excise
      taxes; and (c) the excise tax rates were not harmonized with the EU rates. This prior action would
      contribute to the objective to mobilize additional revenues: (a) the excise tax on diesel fuel would rise by
      25 percent or MKD 3.00 (US$0.057) per liter beginning in 2018 – the fiscal impact was estimated at
      +0.3 percent of GDP; (b) a new excise tax on coal, gas, and electricity would be introduced, taking the
      share of fossil fuel consumption subject to excise taxation from 58 percent in 2017 to 93 percent by
      2019; (c) although the law would retain the current excise tax rate on coke and fuel, it would expand the
      products subject to excise taxation to include e-cigarettes and heat-not-burn tobacco (tobacco products
      that produced aerosols containing nicotine and other chemicals). The relevance of PA2 is rated highly
      satisfactory.


Pillar 2 - Making Spending Programs More Efficient and Bolstering Public Financial Management

     PA3: Enactment of the amendments to the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance, the amendments
      to the Law on Compulsory Capitally Funded Pension Insurance, and the amendments to the Law on
      Compulsory Social Insurance Contributions to introduce price indexation of benefits, harmonize the
      accrual rates, and introduce a higher pension contribution rate to improve fiscal and social sustainability
      of the multi-pillar pension system. This prior action aimed to address the fiscal unsustainability of
      pension spending: (a) the contribution rate of, and pension revenues from, the three-pillar system (pay-
      as-you-go [PAYG], fully-funded mandatory individual accounts, and voluntary private-open pension
      fund) were low; (b) accrual rates were high and disproportionately lower for fully-funded than for PAYG
      participants; (c) indexation was overly generous; (d) as a result, government budget transfers to the
      pension system reached almost half of the pension spending (10.6 percent of GDP in 2017), half of
      which covered the residual PAYG deficit (2.3 percent of GDP). By restoring the fiscal sustainability of
      the pension system, this prior action would contribute to the objective to bolster public financial
      management: (a) pension insurance contribution rates would be raised by 0.4 percentage
      points annually in 2019 and 2020, increasing overall contributions; (b) accrual rates would become more
      harmonized between participants in the old system, whose accruals would be lowered, and participants
      in the multi-pillar system, whose accruals would be raised; (c) second-pillar participants born before
      1967 would return to the PAYG system, avoiding the risk of pension cuts; (d) contribution arrears would
      be paid; (e) pensions would be consumer-price-indexed; and (f) in case real GDP grew above 4 percent,
      pensions would, in supplement, be real GDP wage-indexed. The pension system reform measures
      comprising this prior action would have an estimated fiscal impact of +0.35 percent of GDP, including
      +0.15 percent of GDP due to the increase in the pension contribution rate, according to the Program
      Document (page 16). The relevance of PA3 is rated satisfactory.

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



 PA4: Enactment of the Law on Social Protection and the amendments to the Law on Child Protection to
  consolidate social assistance benefits, expand the coverage of the bottom quintile and protect the
  energy poor, while maintaining good targeting accuracy through the introduction of a Guaranteed
  Minimum Assistance program. This prior action aimed to address low levels of social assistance
  spending for an economy with a comparatively high level of poverty: (a) social assistance spending was
  a low 1.2 percent of GDP, compared to average social assistance spending of 2.2 percent of GDP in the
  Europe and Central Asia region, and covered only one-third of the poorest-quintile in the income
  distribution, the lowest coverage in the same region; (b) benefits were low; (c) while incentives for work
  were non-existent – parental allowances dis-incentivized job search, while least-resort benefits were not
  available in the transition to the labor market; (d) spending was fragmented across various programs,
  with questionable rates of cost-effectiveness; and (e) new initiatives, notably the Parental Allowance
  Program, skewed spending to non-means-tested approaches, with the result that while spending
  amounted to 0.5 percent of GDP, the allowance program benefitted only 23 percent of the poorest
  quintile. By upgrading the social assistance system and converting all benefits to means testing, this
  prior action would contribute to the objective to make social spending more efficient and bolster public
  financial management: (a) a new Guaranteed Minimum Assistance Program would consolidate all
  existing social assistance benefits, with the level of support set against a threshold of MKD 7,200
  (US$136.80) a month, or 28 percent of median income – the new program would benefit 50 percent
  more households than before; (b) the Child Allowance Program would be redesigned and a new
  Education Allowance Program would be introduced, with the level of support set against a threshold of
  MKD 15,000 (US$285) – the new program would provide both primary and secondary education
  benefits; (c) a new Social Safety for the Elderly Program would replace the Permanent Financial
  Assistance Program, with the support set at 40 percent of the regular pension – the new program shifts
  spending on all elderly without pensions to a means-tested social protection program targeting the
  bottom 40 percent of the population; (d) overall, social assistance coverage of the bottom quintile would
  rise from 30 percent in 2016 to 50 percent in 2019. The social benefit reform measures comprising this
  prior action would have an estimated net fiscal impact of +0.15 percent of GDP, according to the
  Program Document (page 16), broken down into: the means-testing of the parental allowance, +0.23
  percent of GDP; the increase in the child allowance, -0.01 percent of GDP, and the guaranteed
  minimum benefit and pro-poor energy programs, -0.07 percent of GDP. The relevance of PA4 is rated
  satisfactory.
 PA5: Enactment of the Law on Reporting and Monitoring the Liabilities to effectively identify and monitor
  arrears of the general government and the launch of the quarterly publication of reported arrears from
  September 2018. This prior action aimed to address systematic deficiencies with public financial
  management, specifically with financial reporting, that allowed the accumulation of arrears – central and
  local government arrears topped 3.5 percent of GDP in 2017, notwithstanding previous efforts dating
  back to 2012 to clear the arrears. By upgrading the financial monitoring and reporting system, this prior
  action would contribute to the objective to bolster public financial management: (a) all public entities
  would start reporting their monthly liabilities and arrears, allowing the government to identify and monitor
  all arrears; and (b) while better reporting alone would not reduce arrears, the new monitoring and
  reporting system would work in conjunction with other reforms (albeit not included in this operation) –
  the broadening of the definition of the budget to cover all funding sources under the new Organic Budget
  Law; the expansion of the Single Treasury Account under a new proposed law; and the planned
  adoption of a fiscal rule, creation of a fiscal council, and inclusion of fiscal risks in the fiscal strategy
  under PFM Reform Program 2018–20. The relevance of PA5 is rated satisfactory.




                                                                                                Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)




Pillar 3 - Improving Market Competition and Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Businesses

     PA6: Enactment of the Energy Law to deregulate electricity generation, open the electricity supply
      market for all customers, and introduce competitive-based support mechanism for renewable energy
      generation. This prior action aimed to address the heavy regulation, excessive subsidization, and lack
      of market competition in the electricity generation market: (a) only half the electricity market was
      liberalized, benefitting mostly large industrial and commercial consumers; (b) small businesses and
      households were not able to procure electricity from other than the state-owned EVN Macedonia, with
      the electricity tariffs set by the Energy Regulatory Commission; (c) commercial consumers subsidized
      households, which paid half the commercial price of MKD 8.63 (US$0.16) per kilowatt-hour; and (d) the
      market restrictions were contrary to North Macedonia's obligations under the EU Energy Community
      Treaty, which aimed to open internal electricity and gas markets to competition. By liberalizing the
      electricity generation and supply market, this prior action would contribute to the objective to improve
      competition and reduce the regulatory burden: (a) all electricity and gas consumers would be allowed to
      freely select their suppliers; (b) the sale by EVN Macedonia of electricity to the universal service
      supplier would be scaled down from 80 percent in 2019 to 30 percent by 2025; and (c) auction-based
      premiums would be introduced for renewable energy generation using transparent tender procedures to
      encourage private investment in renewable energy. The relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.
     PA7: Enactment of the Public Procurement Law to strengthen transparency and increase private-sector
      competition in public procurement. This prior action aimed to address the lack of competition and
      transparency in public procurement: (a) public procurement was cornered by few companies offering a
      single bid for a large number of tenders – some 25 percent of tenders in 2018 had only one bid,
      according to the U.S. Agency for International Development; and (b) participation in public procurement
      was costly and burdensome for small companies because procedures were opaque and charges and
      fees were exorbitant. By reducing the burden on all firms to participate in public procurement and
      easing restrictions for small firms, this prior action would contribute to the objective to improve
      competition and reduce the regulatory burden: (a) the principle of “proportionality”, which states
      that procedures followed for awarding a contract must be proportionate to the value of the contract,
      would be adopted when setting eligibility criteria for contractors, implying that smaller-value contracts
      which would be the domain of small firms would require comparatively less stringent qualification
      hurdles than large-value contracts which would be the domain of large firms; (b) e-auctions would
      become optional, in particular in contracting for professional services that are awarded principally on the
      basis of price – bidders misused the system by resorting to price-dumping only to have the contracts
      subsequently amended to raise contract prices; (c) "quality" would be added to "lowest price" as a
      criterion for contract awards; and (d) new pro-competitive procedures would be introduced – an e-
      marketplace and e-catalog for small-value procurement; the annual publication of procurement plans;
      notification of signed contracts; upgrades to the e-procurement system; creation of an e-appeal system;
      and an ex-ante control role for the Public Procurement Bureau. The relevance of PA7 is rated
      satisfactory.
     PA8: Enactment of the Inspection Supervision Law to introduce risk-based inspections, a provision for
      inspectors to issue warnings, and a grace period for businesses to correct first-time infractions. This
      prior action aimed to rectify dysfunctions in the country's system of business inspections: (a)
      indiscriminate inspection practices discouraged the entry of new firms and the growth of incumbent
      firms, as evidenced by studies conducted separately on North Macedonia by the U.S. Agency for
      International Development and the European Commission; (b) inspectors had considerable discretion
      about which sanctions to impose, with the range of fines for infractions varying widely from EUR 200 to
      EUR 5,000; (c) non-compliance judgments often resulted in disproportionate fines and charges, with the

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



         law providing little guidance about issuing warnings prior to imposing fines, such that numerous
         sanctions were levied for minimal infractions; and (d) the Inspection Council had a weak mandate, which
         precluded intervention in the action of various inspection authorities. By reforming the business
         inspection system, this prior action would contribute to the objective to improve competition and reduce
         the regulatory burden: (a) a risk-based business inspection system would be adopted; (b) checklists
         would be used to ensure predictability, uniformity, and transparency; (c) inspectors would be required to
         issue warnings, except when infractions were flagrant; (d) grace periods would be allowed for corrective
         actions; and (e) the Council of Inspection Authorities would have the power to resolve issues with
         inspectorates under implementing rules that would define the operating procedures for the new risk-
         based business inspection system. The relevance of PA8 is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program defined eight results indicators.


                                       Associated
    RI (number and description)                              Baseline / Target              Status
                                      Prior Actions
 Pillar 1 - Mobilizing Additional Revenues
 RI1. Personal income tax revenues PA1              Baseline: 2.5 percent of GDP       2.72 percent of
                                                    (2017)                             GDP (2019)
                                                    Target: 2.7 percent of GDP (2019) 2.8 percent of
                                                                                       GDP (2020)
 RI2. Share of fossil fuel          PA2             Baseline: 57.5 percent (2017)      98.3 percent
 consumption subject to excise                      Target: above 92.9 percent (2019) (2019)
 taxation increased.
 Pillar 2 - Making Spending Programs More Efficient and Bolstering Public Financial Management
 RI3. Overall PAYG pension deficit PA3              Baseline: 4.8 percent of GDP       4.53 percent of
                                                    (2017)                             GDP (2019)
                                                    Target: 4.45 percent of GDP (2019) 4.72 percent of
                                                                                       GDP (2020,
                                                                                       estimate)
 RI4. Social assistance coverage of PA4             Baseline: 33 percent and 22.6      58.1 and 61.6
 the bottom quintile, total                         percent (2016)                     (2019,
 households and female-led                          Target: 50 percent and 40 percent simulation)
 households                                         (2019)
 RI5. General government arrears PA5                Baseline: 3.5 percent of GDP       2.42 percent of
                                                    (2017)                             GDP (2019)

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



                                                 Target: Below 2.7 percent of GDP 2.65 percent of
                                                 (2019)                           GDP (2020,
                                                                                  estimate)
Pillar 3 - Improving Market Competition and Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Businesses
RI6. Percentage of electricity       PA6         Baseline: 50 percent (2017)      100 percent
consumers able to choose an                      Target: 100 percent (2019)       (2019)
electricity supplier on the open                                                  100 percent
market                                                                            (2020)
RI7. Average number of bidders       PA7         Baseline: 3.41 (2017)            3.34 (2019)
per competitive procurement                      Target: Above 3.41 (2019)        3.63 (2020)
procedure
RI8. Risk-based inspection           PA8         Baseline: 0 inspectorates        0 (2020)
introduced in inspectorates relevant             Target: 3 inspectorates (June    4 (January 2021)
for businesses.                                  2020)



Pillar 1 - Mobilizing Additional Revenues

      RI1: Personal income tax revenues, in percent of GDP only partly measured the result of the
       enactment of the Personal Income Tax Law, which aimed to increase direct tax revenues. While
       this indicator would measure progress toward revenue mobilization, it could not measure progress
       toward progressivity, which was a key part of reforms to the personal income tax system –
        introduction of a progressive rate of 18 percent, removal of the exemption on capital income
       taxation and increase in the rate to 15 percent, reduction by at least 30 percent in the allowed tax
       deductions for rental income and capital gains, elimination of tax exemptions for interest earnings,
       insurance income, and capital gains from securities, increase in the tax allowance for low-income
       households. A separate indicator should have been introduced to measure progressivity,
       considering that the regressiveness of the personal income tax system was
       thoroughly emphasized at appraisal and closing – "the PIT was not progressive", "deductions and
       exemptions that could be applied to capital, property, and other specific types of income made the
       system even regressive", "because of the exemptions, the effective tax rate on capital income was
       actually less than 10 percent", and "this contributed to rising income inequality, which is among the
       highest in the region." Because of the omission, this results indicator is rated moderately
       unsatisfactory.
      RI2: The share of fossil fuel consumption subject to excise taxation was fully adequate to
       capture the result of the enactment of the Law on Excises, which aimed to increase indirect tax
       revenues, and to measure progress toward the objective of mobilizing additional tax revenues. An
       increase in the share of fossil fuel consumption that was subject to excise taxation would reflect
       the introduction of excise taxes on coal, gas, and electricity. This results indicator is rated
       satisfactory.

Based on the foregoing results, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 1 is rated as moderately
satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



Pillar 2 - Making Spending Programs More Efficient and Bolstering Public Financial Management

      RI3: Overall PAYG pension deficit, in percent of GDP was mostly adequate to capture the result of
       amendments to the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance, the Law on Compulsory Capitally
       Funded Pension Insurance, and the Law on Compulsory Social Insurance Contributions (PA1) and
       to measure progress toward the objective of bolstering public financial management by improving
       the fiscal sustainability of the multi-pillar pension system and hence reducing budgetary
       financing of the PAYG pension deficit. This indicator would reflect the result of increasing
       contribution rates, harmonizing accrual rates, eliminating overly-generous benefit indexation rules,
       and reducing pension contribution arrears. However, a separate indicator assessing pension
       adequacy would be needed to reflect the result of indexing pension benefits to inflation. This
       results indicator is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI4: Social assistance coverage of the bottom quintile, all households and female-led households,
       in percentage was mostly adequate to measure the impact of the enactment of the Law on Social
       Protection and amendments to the Law on Child Protection. An increase in the coverage of the
       bottom quintile of all households would reflect the results of efforts to consolidate social benefits
       programs, to resort to means-testing, and to emphasize the poor. The focus on the lowest quintile
       was well aligned to better target the poor. Moreover, the inclusion of female-led households as a
       results indicator was consistent with gender objectives in Bank operations. This results indicator is
       rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI5: General government arrears, in percent of GDP only partly measured the result of the
       enactment of the Law on Reporting and Monitoring Liabilities, which aimed to improve fiscal
       transparency and accountability and control the accumulation of arrears, and progress toward the
       objective of bolstering public financial management. The underlying argument was that better
       monitoring, reporting, and measurement of government arrears would lead to better control of
       government arrears. However, because there are many drivers of the volume of arrears,
       attributing a reduction in arrears to better monitoring and reporting alone raises results attribution
       issues. This results indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

Based on the foregoing results, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 2 is rated as moderately
satisfactory.


Pillar 3 - Improving Market Competition and Reducing the Regulatory Burden on Businesses

      RI6: The percentage of electricity consumers able to choose an electricity supplier in the open
       market was fully adequate to measure the result of the enactment of the Energy Law, which aimed
       to deregulate the generation and supply of electricity, and progress toward the objective of
       improving market competition. Retail consumers did not have a choice of an electricity supplier
       prior to the liberalization measure (PA6) and were wedded to the incumbent national or universal
       supplier. The results indicator would reflect the extent to which the Energy Law enabled
       customers to switch from the universal to other suppliers, including new entrants, in the open
       market. While customer choice does not fully capture the degree to which market competition has
       been achieved, it suffices to measure the result of the first step of a long market liberalization
       process, the end-stage of which could later be evidenced by market concentration measures
       like the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, which quantifies the market shares of firms competing in a
       market and provides a measure of the degree of market concentration and competition. This
       results indicator is rated satisfactory.

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



                     RI7: The average number of bidders per competitive procurement procedure only partly measured
                      the result of the enactment of the Public Procurement Law, and progress toward the objective of
                      improving market competition. While this indicator is considered one of several credible indicators
                      of competition in procurement (the others include the proportion of open tenders, proportion of
                      single tenders, proportion of value awarded in single-bid contracts, number of unique suppliers by
                      item, and number of unique suppliers by entity), the use of an average number fails to convey
                      information whether greater competition was achieved for large-value government contracts, which
                      are the subject of complaints and controversy. This results indicator is rated moderately
                      unsatisfactory.
                     RI8: The number of risk-based inspections introduced in inspectorates relevant for
                      businesses was fully adequate to capture the result of the enactment of the Inspection Supervision
                      Law, which aimed to reduce the costs of business inspections to firms by introducing a risk-based
                      inspection system, and to measure progress toward the objective of reducing the regulatory
                      burden on businesses. . An increase in the number of risk-based inspections in the inspectorates
                      that were relevant to businesses would reflect progress made with risk-based inspections. This
                      results indicator is rated satisfactory.

               Based on the foregoing results, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 3 is rated as moderately
               satisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To mobilize additional revenues.

                Rationale
                     Personal income tax revenues increased from 2.5 percent of GDP in 2017 to 2.72 percent of GDP in
                       2019, exceeding the target of 2.7 percent of GDP. More recent data from the government indicate
                       that personal income tax revenues rose further to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2020. However, vital parts of
                       the fiscal reform supported by this operation, including the introduction of a progressive tax rate and
                       removal of exemptions on capital income taxation, have been postponed to 2023, three years after the
                       closing of this operation. Meanwhile, the government recently disclosed that it was working with the
                       International Monetary Fund and the EU on an "optimal direct taxation model" that could be discussed
                       with the public by mid-2022. But, because of the reversal of key parts of the personal income tax
                       reform (postponement beyond the closing date) and because of the absence of an indicator to capture
                       the objective of progressivity, efficacy is rated modest despite exceeding the target.
                      The share of fossil fuel consumption subject to excise taxation increased from 57.5 percent to 98.3
                       percent, exceeding the target of 92.9 percent. The government issued Decree-Law on the Application
                       of the Law on Excises During the State of Emergency in April 2021 to ensure the continued
                       application of the new method to calculate excise duties on fuels during the COVID-19

                                                                                                                   Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



       pandemic. Progress was also made with the excise tax on tobacco, albeit not part of this program, by
       broadening the tax base for tobacco taxation.

With the achievement of the first of the RI targets rated modest, and the second, high, the efficacy of this
pillar is rated moderately satisfactory. A higher rating would have required a maintenance of the income tax
reform schedule and evidence of a reduction in the regressiveness of revenue collection.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To make spending programs more efficient and bolster public financial management.

Rationale
     The overall PAYG pension deficit was reduced from 4.8 percent of GDP in 2017 to 4.53 percent of
       GDP in 2019, meeting about three-quarters of the target reduction to 4.45 percent of GDP in
       2019. However, a return to ad hoc indexation (based on the growth of minimum and average wages)
       partially reversed the reform at the end of 2019 and most of the gains were wiped out when the PAYG
       pension deficit widened to 4.72 percent of GDP in 2020.
      Social assistance coverage of the bottom quintile of all households rose from 33 percent in 2016 to
       58.1 percent in 2019, exceeding the target of 50 percent. Social assistance coverage of the bottom
       quintile, female-led households, rose from 22.6 percent in 2016 to 61.6 percent in 2019, exceeding the
       target of 40 percent. The reform proved particularly timely as the country faced the COVID-19
       crisis. Additional progress was made with the reform of the social service system with more cases
       placed under case management.
      General government arrears were reduced from 3.5 percent of GDP in 2017 to 2.42 percent in 2019,
       exceeding the targeted reduction to 2.7 percent of GDP. However, largely due to the impact of the
       COVID-19 crisis, general government arrears rose somewhat to 2.65 percent of GDP in 2020
       preserving only part of the progress achieved. Additional actions have been initiated since as part of
       the broader PFM reform strategy, but the enactment of the new organic budget law and the
       introduction of the integrated financial management information system have been postponed to 2021
       because of the economic downturn in 2020.

With the achievement of two of the three RI targets rated modest or higher, and the third, lower at negligible,
the efficacy of this pillar is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)




Objective
To improve market competition and reduce the regulatory burden on businesses.

Rationale
     The percentage of electricity consumers able to choose an electricity supplier on the open market rose
       from 50 percent in 2017 to 100 percent in 2019, meeting the target of 100 percent. All customers are
       also able to mutually arrange the terms and prices of their electricity purchases. Since the
       deregulation of the electricity sector, over 90 percent of industrial and commercial consumers have
       switched electricity providers and decreased their electricity costs by a reported 30 percent. Recent
       date supplied by the government indicate that the percentage of electricity consumed in the open
       market, which stood at 47.5 percent in 2018, increased to 49.1 percent in 2019 and 52.2 percent in
       2020. The Energy and Water Services Regulatory Commission has also started to calculate and
       publish in its annual report the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index for various sectors of the energy market,
       although the 2020 data still indicate a highly concentrated retail electricity market and a moderately
       concentrated wholesale market. Meanwhile, the new auction-based premiums for generating
       renewable energy have attracted new investment from the private sector, and tenders have resulted in
       agreements with 32 investors for 56 megawatts of installed electricity capacity from renewables. The
       Annual Implementation Report (November 2021) of the Energy Community, the international
       organization established by the EU and its neighbors in 2005 to create an integrated pan-European
       energy market, declared that "Implementation in the electricity sector of North Macedonia is almost
       completed" and that "The retail market is open for competition. Small customers and households are
       entitled to universal service at regulated prices."
      The average number of bidders per competitive procurement procedure increased from 3.43 in
       2017 to 3.63 in 2020, exceeding the target of 3.41, albeit with a one-year delay. However, there was
       no indication if the increase in the number of bidders was prominent for large value government
       contracts. Improved transparency, fairer competition principles, and lower costs may have increased
       the number of appeals by participant firms, but a least-cost selection method still dominates the award
       of public contracts, and the pace of reforms is slowed by weak capacity among the contracting
       authorities. The European Commission's North Macedonia 2021 Report observed that although the
       legal framework on public procurement was now "largely harmonized with the EU acquis", there was
       still "limited progress" made with the "implementation of the bylaws to the Law on Public Procurement"
       and that the "authorities should implement more effective anti-corruption measures into the
       procurement cycle." On large value contracts, the Center for Civil Communication's Shadow Report
       on Public Procurements in North Macedonia noted that of 80 large-scale tenders for which the Public
       Procurement Bureau conducted "administrative control" in 2019, 28 (35 percent) were issued either
       instructions for tender annulment or recommendations to repeat the bid-evaluation process. The
       results remained similar in 2020, when irregularities were found in a third of 128 procurement
       procedures for which the Bureau conducted "administrative control." Because of the one-year delay in
       meeting the target, the weakness of the indicator to measure progress with large-value contracts,
       and the foregoing findings, efficacy is rated modest.
      The number of risk-based inspections introduced in inspectorates relevant for businesses rose from
       zero in 2017 to four in 2021, exceeding the target of three, albeit after a one-year delay. Additional
       progress included: the finalization of plans for 14 inspectorates; the launch of risk-based inspections in
       four inspectorates; the creation of a complex set of bylaws, checklists, and methodologies for risk-
       based inspection; the training of 900 inspectors; and the decrease in the number of fines from 950 to




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



                             151. Nonetheless, because of the one-year delay in meeting the target, efficacy is rated substantial
                             despite exceeding the target.

                      With the achievement of two of the three RI targets rated substantial or better, the efficacy of this pillar is
                      rated satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With the achievement of at least half the RI targets rated modest or better, the overall efficacy is rated moderately
satisfactory.


                              Relevance Ratings for RIs, and Efficacy Ratings
                                                                   Pillar Efficacy  Overall Efficacy
  Results Indicator Relevance Rating Achievement Rating
                                                                       Rating             Rating
                       Pillar 1 - Mobilizing Additional Revenues
                       Moderately
 RI1                                         Modest             Moderately
                       Unsatisfactory
                                                                Satisfactory
 RI2                   Satisfactory          High
     Pillar 2 - Making Spending Programs More Efficient and Bolstering Public
                                  Financial Management
                       Moderately
 RI3                                         Negligible
                       Satisfactory
                                                                                   Moderately
                       Moderately                               Moderately
 RI4                                         High                                  Satisfactory
                       Satisfactory                             Satisfactory
                       Moderately
 RI5                                         Modest
                       Unsatisfactory
  Pillar 3 - Improving Market Competition and Reducing the Regulatory Burden
 RI6                   Satisfactory          High
                       Moderately
 RI7                                         Modest             Satisfactory
                       Unsatisfactory
 RI8                   Satisfactory          Substantial

Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                                           Page 14 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions is rated satisfactory. The overall efficacy is rated moderately satisfactory. The
outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk. According to the ICR, the political context in which the current coalition government operates
remains difficult, which could affect the sustainability of the reforms supported by the DPO. Although
it enacted the Personal Income Tax Law in 2018 (shifting to a progressive personal income tax rate) and
exceeded the target for an increase in personal income tax revenue (of 2.7 percent of GDP), North
Macedonia soon rolled back the personal income tax reforms in 2019 and deferred their implementation to
2023: all personal income would be taxed again at the flat rate of 10 percent beginning in January 2020;
capital gains and interest on savings would once again be tax-exempt; and tax allowances would not be
reversed. The government offered various reasons for the reversal, including that fiscal gains in the first
semester of 2019 were lower than expected and that inequality narrowed only slightly.

The ad-hoc indexation to pensions could provide grounds for similar actions going forward. In addition, the
Parliament is considering new provisions for early retirement. These measures could put at risk the fiscal and
social sustainability of the pension system, and illustrate the high political risk to the sustainability of certain
program outcomes.

Institutional Capacity Risk. Institutional capacity risk is substantial concerning the procurement reforms,
according to the ICR. In particular, there are serious concerns about the ability of contracting authorities to
carry out the new tender procedures, considering limitations both with staffing and with staff skills.

Macroeconomic Risk. Macroeconomic risks appear to be coming down. After an economic downturn of -
4.5 percent in 2020, a rebound is underway with GDP growth projected at 4.6 percent in 2021. As the
recovery takes hold, carefully balancing the withdrawal of fiscal support – which was boosted in 2020 to
aid households and firms but which raised public debt to more than 62 percent of GDP – with structural and
institutional reforms would be key to restoring public finance sustainability. The central bank would also
need to find the right balance between supporting domestic demand and responding to rising inflationary
pressures.

COVID-19 Risk. The COVID-19 pandemic inflicted significant human and economic costs on North
Macedonia, and any escalation of the health crisis could pose risks to the sustainability of the fiscal and
business reforms achieved under this operation. The public health response and supportive macroeconomic
and financial policies have so far helped mitigate the impact of the pandemic on health outcomes and on the
economy. Resolving the health crisis through an effective vaccination program would remain the priority.


                                                                                                        Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The performance of the Bank with design was moderately satisfactory. The three policy reform areas – tax
revenue mobilization (personal income taxes, excise taxes), public financial management (pension
spending, social assistance spending, and arrears reduction) and market competition (in electricity
services, government procurement, and business inspections) were strategic choices arising from long-
running constraints to development and were also opportune areas to help advance North Macedonia’s
accession to the EU. The eight prior actions – eleven pieces of key legislation – were well conceived and
relevant to achieving the program objective to support reforms to strengthen public finances, improve
market competition, and reduce the regulatory burden. However, some of the results indicators were weak
choices to measure the degree of achievement of the program objectives. For this reason, the Bank’s
performance with design is rated moderately satisfactory despite the strength of the Bank’s work on the
analytical foundations, linkage with other operations, stakeholder consultation, and donor coordination as
detailed below.

Analytical Foundations. The preparation of this operation was informed by analytic and technical
assistance work by the Bank. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Systematic Country
Diagnostic (2018) analyzed challenges in the energy sector, competition in public procurement, and
barriers to doing business. The North Macedonia Public Finance Review (2018) analyzed the
sustainability of the pension system, the equity and effectiveness of social assistance, aspects of public
financial management, and the progressivity of the personal income tax and tax exemptions. The
Technical Assistance on Pension System Reform (2018) elaborated on the implementation aspects of
pension reform. The Technical Assistance on Social Assistance (2018) helped with the design of reform
measures related to social assistance. The Technical Assistance on Public Procurement (2012-14)
explored e-procurement modalities.

Linkage with Other Bank Operations. This program was built on the Bank’s long engagement in North
Macedonia. Previous operations introduced fiscal, public financial management, and private sector
development reform measures that progressively led to the reform program supported by this operation.
The FYR Macedonia Policy Based Guarantee (P125837) aimed to strengthen public finances, improve the
resilience of the financial sector, and promote the sustainability of social safety nets. The FYR Macedonia
Public Expenditure Policy Based Guarantee (P133791) aimed to improve the efficiency of public
expenditures and public financial management, strengthen pension and health systems, and improve
social inclusion and the targeting of social assistance. The First and Second Programmatic
Competitiveness Development Policy Loan (P126038 and P130847) aimed to
strengthen competitiveness. The Bank took into account lessons learned from these operations in the
following manner: (a) the personal income tax reform and the excise tax reform considered the likely
impact of tax changes on poor households; (b) pension reform was matched by social
protection measures, both following the Project Performance Assessment Report for the FYR Macedonia
Policy Based Guarantee (2016) which found that the policy based guarantee (PBG) operation has not


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



addressed policy issues related to public financial management comprehensively; and (c) this operation
was renegotiated as a loan rather than a PBG.

Stakeholder Consultation. The Program Document indicated that consultations with stakeholders were
conducted using the framework set by the Rules of Procedure of the Government of the Republic of North
Macedonia for public consultations on all new laws. Arrangements included: the use of the website ENER
to disclose draft laws for consultation; the preparation of regulatory impact assessments (RIA) of all laws
proposed to be enacted by Parliament; the issuance of a minimum 15-day notice for consultations; and
the engagement of all stakeholders in the RIA process. According to the ICR, laws supported by this
program went through this consultation process. However, in the case of the personal income tax reforms,
the consultation period was too short (two months) to have solidified stakeholder support for the reform
measures.

Donor Coordination. The Bank collaborated closely with other development partners in the design, as
well as implementation, of this program. The principal partners included the International Monetary Fund
(on fiscal reforms), the EU (on governance reforms), the European Commission (on public procurement
reforms), the United States Agency for International Development (on doing business reforms), the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, United Nations International Children's Emergency
Fund, and the Energy Community Secretariat, based in Vienna (on energy reforms).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring. According to the ICR, the Bank closely monitored the implementation of the reforms supported by
this operation. The Bank prepared monitoring notes for the Government - the notes were used by the
government in its public communications program. The Bank also engaged directly with stakeholders to
discuss the reforms during program implementation, including with representatives of the private sector,
members of civil society, and with officers of the development partners that participated in the design of the
various reform programs. The Bank also maintained its policy discussions with the government.

Adaptation. After the Bank disbursed the loan proceeds in October 2019, the government reversed two reform
measures that had been advanced with the legal and regulatory measures supported by this program as prior
actions. The government suspended the implementation of the progressive personal income tax rate of 18
percent and the new tax on capital income of 15 percent for three years; both had been parts of the Personal
Income Tax Law passed in 2018 as PA4. The government introduced the wage indexation of pensions, in
addition to the price indexation of pensions; the latter had been part of the Law on Pension and Disability
Insurance which was passed in 2018 as PA3. According to the ICR, the Bank continued to engage the
government in policy dialogue despite the policy reversals. In particular, the Bank: (a) developed a micro-
simulation tool to evaluate the potential impact of the personal income tax reform package, using the 2019 data
on tax returns and the 2019 Survey of Income and Living Conditions; (b) also simulated the effects of the
pension benefits indexation reform package, compared to the status quo; and (c) discussed these analyses at

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



length with the government. The dialogue has resulted in the commitment by the government to the principles
of "fairness in taxation" as pronounced in the new Tax System Reform Strategy 2021-2025. Specifically, the
government announced that: (a) it will lift its suspension of the reforms passed in the Personal Income Tax
Law by 2023, following the evaluation of the partial reform results, the comparison of pre-2019, 2019, and 2021
personal income tax results, and consultations with all involved stakeholders; and (b) it has rejected measures
earlier announced that would reverse pension reform, including early retirement, service period buyout, and
introduction of the full wage indexation of benefits, following the Bank's policy dialogue with the Ministry of
Labor and Social Assistance.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank performance in design is rated moderately satisfactory. Bank performance in implementation is rated
moderately satisfactory. Overall Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

According to the ICR, several reform measures had positive social and poverty impacts.

      The excise tax reform protected energy-poor consumers.
      The pension reform protected the elderly.
      The social assistance reform targeted the poor more accurately.



b. Environmental

According to the ICR, several reform measures had positive environmental impacts.

      The Law on Excises, enacted in 2018 as PA2, would discourage demand for coal and gas as the prices of
       these fossil fuels rose with the new excise taxes.



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



       The Law on Social Protection, enacted in 2018 as PA4, provided social benefits to poor households
        vulnerable to weather disasters and other climate change risks.
       The Energy Law, enacted in 2018 as PA6, brought climate change co-benefits through new competitive
        schemes for renewable energy investments. The law, which harmonized the country's energy legislation
        with the Energy Community's Third Energy Package, promoted direct financing of energy-efficiency
        upgrades in homes. Focusing on renewables and energy efficiency helped reduce greenhouse gas
        emissions.
       The Public Procurement Law, enacted in 2016 as PA7, required that environmental and climate change
        impacts be disclosed as part of the technical specifications of public contracts for works and services.



c. Gender

The reforms expanded social benefit coverage to the bottom quintile of female-headed households, and
are expected to have a gradual, future impact on female employment (ICR, p. 26).



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides an informative context for this project across a broad range of fiscal and public financial
management problems and private sector development issues faced by North Macedonia as it started
negotiations for accession to the EU.

The assessment of the efficacy of the project was candid. While the program fulfilled all the prior actions and
achieved practically all the outcome targets, the policy reversals by the government of key elements of pension
reform and personal income tax reform put at serious risk the sustainability of the country's medium-term fiscal
reform program.

The lessons are well-founded and potentially valuable to future operations that are complex and politically
sensitive.



a. Rating

Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Finance and Competitiveness DPO (P171851)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 30-31), with some adaptation.

A programmatic series of DPOs may be a better instrument when reforms are complex, require intensive
implementation efforts, and are politically sensitive. In this stand-alone operation, the Bank anticipated the
risk of policy reversals in a politically volatile setting where pressure from interest groups was pronounced,
stating in the Program Document (page 29) that "Public discontent against reforms might reduce public support
for the government’s agenda, which would reduce the government’s ability to launch and sustain the needed
fiscal and structural reforms. This could also lead to calls for snap elections." A programmatic approach would
have better sustained the outcomes of this medium-term reform program over the political cycle.

Alignment of reforms in EU candidate countries with the EU accession process helps to fortify a
candidate government's commitment to the reform program. In this operation, the Bank closely aligned the
reform measures on excise taxation, public procurement, energy, and market competition with the requirements
of North Macedonia's accession process with the EU. The approach served to secure greater political
commitment to the reform measures in these policy areas since their implementation also served the purpose of
the country's accession to the EU. In policy areas where there was no link to the accession process – the are
no EU-wide rules on income taxation other than that a country's tax residents and nationals be treated equally –
there was less discipline with the reform plan.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
