     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022933

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P157416                                 TANAP

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Europe and Central Asia                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1400,IBRD-86790,IBRD-86810 31-Jul-2021                                              800,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2016                             31-Jul-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        800,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                         800,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                     800,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Dileep M. Wagle           Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objective was “to diversify Azerbaijan’s gas export markets and improve the
   security of Turkey’s and South-Eastern Europe’s energy supply”. This was as per the Loan Agreement, 2016,
   Schedule 1, p.7, as well as the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), p.11.




                                                                                              Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)



   In the analysis that follows, the PDO can be parsed as follows: (i) “to diversify Azerbaijan’s natural gas export
   markets, (ii) to improve the security of Turkey’s energy supply, and (iii) to improve the security of South-
   Eastern Europe’s energy supply”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Trans Anatolian Natural Gas Pipeline (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$7,700 million;
   Actual cost at closing: US$5,412 million). This component supported the construction of an 1,811 km
   pipeline, beginning at Turkey’s border with Georgia and ending at Turkey's border with Greece, as well as
   associated control systems. It also financed construction of connection points to the Turkish natural gas
   network in two locations (Eskisehir and Thrace) for delivery of 5.7 billion cubic meters (bcm) annually for the
   Turkish gas market. The pipeline up to Eskisehir had a diameter of 56 inches; from Eskisehir to the Greek
   border of 48 inches, except for two parallel 36-inch pipelines for the 18.7 km section crossing the Marmara
   Sea.

   Component 2: Land Acquisition (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$200 million; Actual cost at closing:
   US$157 million). This component financed land acquisition-related costs, covering: (a) cash compensation
   for private land acquisition; (b) other assistance, such as implementation of livelihood restoration plans and
   payments under the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) Fund to assist affected informal land users, settlers
   and other expenses required to meet OP 4.12 provisions; (c) expenses for the forestry lands; and (d)
   design, implementation and monitoring of RAPs. Land acquisition-related costs were met from the
   Borrower’s resources.

   Component 3: Consulting services (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$700 million; Actual cost at closing:
   US$740 million). This component financed consulting services for studies, design, engineering,
   procurement, construction management, supervision and monitoring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing

   Of the US$ 8.6 billion cost of the project, the World Bank financed US$800 million, provided as loans to
   BOTAS (the Petroleum Pipeline Corporation of Turkey) and SGC (Southern Gas Corridor Closed Joint
   Stock Company, Azerbaijan), of US$400 million respectively. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
   (AIIB) co-financed the World bank loans with a US$600 million sovereign loan to SGC. The remaining
   US$7.2 billion were to be financed by commercial and international financing institutions (IFIs). Since actual
   costs at closing turned out to be substantially (27 percent) lower than anticipated, the actual financing
   requirements were lower to that extent. The project had in fact been on-going at the time of appraisal of the
   World Bank loan, with most of the main contracts having been procured and signed during 2012-16, and
   substantial progress having been achieved at the time of Board approval. The Bank role was to act as a

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)



   mobilizer and catalyzer of finance from other partners (including MIGA) and the private sector, and the
   Bank’s participation and due diligence on technical, fiduciary, social and environmental issues helped
   facilitate subsequent support from other partners such as the EBRD and the EIB, as well as the AIIB.

   Financing required for the project was fully mobilized from sovereign and commercial sources within 18
   months of World Bank approval. Besides the US$800 million provided by the World Bank, US$1.39 billion in
   IFI financing for the pipeline (TANAP) was realized between December 2016 and March 2018. TANAP’s
   shareholders were able to raise US$1,159 million in commercial financing, benefiting to some degree from
   the World Bank’s collaboration with commercial financiers, and its due diligence. The remaining US$2,965
   million was mobilized by the Borrowers from sovereign and non-sovereign contributions.

   Borrower contribution

   The Borrower contribution – BOTAS and SGC being the two Borrowers of World Bank loans - was originally
   estimated at US$2,400 million, with US$2,980 million being actually disbursed by closing.

   Dates

   The project was approved on December 20, 2016, becoming effective on January 27, 2017. It closed on
   schedule on July 31, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

The Trans-Anatolian Natural Gas Pipeline (TANAP), which crossed Turkey from East to West, was a critical
part of the Southern Gas Corridor program of gas production development and transmission. This program
consisted of a set of strategically important infrastructure projects aimed at improving the security and
diversity of the energy supply of Turkey and the European Union (EU), by bringing natural gas from the
Caspian region to Europe.

The energy sector was a key contributor to Turkey’s economic growth. A range of reform measures had
helped attract private capital to meet the fast-growing demand for energy; however, Turkey’s heavy
dependence on energy imports – of oil and natural gas – constituted a macroeconomic challenge. Gas
accounted for nearly 50 percent of the country’s total electricity generation, and – at 50 billion cubic meters
(BCM) – Turkey’s gas consumption was the third largest in Europe. More than 50 percent of Turkey’s gas
was imported from Russia, making Turkey the second-largest client of Gazprom after Germany.

Constraints to gas imports and gas market inefficiencies threatened Turkey’s energy security. Network
capacity and storage limitations constrained the flow of gas, as well as the trading of gas. At the time of
appraisal, gas storage capacity was 2.6 bcm, which constituted only 5 percent of annual gas consumption –
compared to 25–30 percent in many European cities – which was considered insufficient to cover demand



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)



spikes or supply bottlenecks. The Project, which would help increase the supply of gas to the country, was
considered critical to Turkey’s energy supply security and macroeconomic stability.

Azerbaijan is one of the oldest oil producing countries in the world. The country had also been developing
its natural gas sector rapidly during the previous decade, with proven reserves of the order of 1,000 bcm.
Production was of the order of 18.8 bcm in 2014, of which some 6.5 bcm/annum were exported to Turkey
under a contract with BOTAS. The Southern Gas Corridor program would increase production at the Shah
Deniz field to about 26 bcm, enabling Azerbaijan to more than triple its annual exports, to 22.5
bcm. Azerbaijan had been facing a macroeconomic crisis due to low international prices during 2014-16,
and the contribution of TANAP to the growth and diversification of its gas exports was considered as critical
for its economic recovery and its goal of closer economic integration with Europe.

For Europe too, the Project represented a major infrastructure priority at the time of appraisal, on account of
its potential contribution to South East Europe’s energy supply security. Two-thirds of EU consumption at
the time came from imports, mostly from Norway and Russia, with EU’s own production being on a
declining trajectory. At the same time EU gas demand was projected to increase through at least 2030 in
all scenarios of the International Energy Agency (IEA)’s World Energy Outlook 2015. Against this
background, the European Commission (EC) stressed the high priority of the Southern Gas Corridor in the
2014 “European Energy Security Strategy”.


Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives were broadly consistent with the World Bank Group (WBG)’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-20 (which remains the latest CPF for Azerbaijan at the current
time). Diversification of Azerbaijan’s gas exports via TANAP and the Southern Gas Corridor Program was
in line with the objectives of Focus Area 2 on “Economic Competitiveness”, to the extent that this aimed to
integrate Azerbaijan with regional and European energy markets, thereby strengthening its connectivity and
transit role, and increasing its exports. There was also some consistency with the objectives of Focus Area
1 (“Public Sector Management and Service Delivery”), through support for improving reporting of extractive
industry revenue and use of funds – though this consistency was less than substantial, on account of
Azerbaijan’s withdrawal from EITI candidate status in 2017.

The Project’s objectives were fully aligned with the WBG’s CPF for Turkey (FY18-21). Under the CPF’s
Focus Area 7 (“Sustainability”), Objective 7 specifically included the goals of increasing capacity of gas
storage, and of securing and diversifying Turkey’s gas supply, including through gas imports from
Azerbaijan through the TANAP project.

While the landscape for EU energy and climate policy had evolved during the implementation period of the
Project, the Project’s development objectives of improving South-East Europe’s energy security via the
integration of energy markets remained fully aligned with the EC’s strategy of the clean energy
transition. The European Green Deal, introduced in 2019, aimed to transform the EU into a modern,
resource-efficient economy, ensuring the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by at least 55
percent by 2030 relative to 1990 levels, and zero emissions by 2050. Two of the three key principles of this
clean energy transition under the European Green Deal included the ensuring of a ‘secure and affordable
EU energy supply’ and the development of a ‘fully integrated, interconnected and digitalized EU energy
market’, which were strongly aligned to the objectives of the Project; in addition to which, the increased
availability of gas would enable a more rapid transition out of coal, which is still consumed in some EU


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TANAP (P157416)



               countries. To this extent, the Project’s objectives could be considered highly relevant for South-East
               Europe at the time of project closing.

               Overall, these objectives were broadly relevant to Azerbaijan’s CPF, highly relevant to the CPF for Turkey,
               and substantially relevant to the sector strategy for the EU. The objectives were sufficiently outcome-
               oriented and pitched for development status and capacity for the countries involved. As such, the
               relevance of the project’s objectives is assessed as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To diversify Azerbaijan’s natural gas export markets”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             The project was designed to help diversify Azerbaijan’s gas export markets, whilst improving the security of
                             Turkey’s and South Eastern-Europe’s energy supply. Towards this end, a broad causal connection could be
                             drawn between the project’s activities and its outputs and outcomes. Key activities consisted of (a) the
                             construction of an 1,811 km-long gas pipeline across Turkey, from the border with Georgia to the border with
                             Greece, to deliver gas to the Turkish market, as well as to connect with the Trans-Adriatic Natural gas
                             Pipeline (TAP), for conveying gas to European markets; (b) Preparation and implementation of Resettlement
                             Action Plans, Livelihood Restoration Plans, and other assistance to affected persons and communities; and
                             (c) Consultancy services for studies, design, engineering, procurement, construction, management,
                             supervision and monitoring. Outputs produced by these activities included (i) the transmission of gas from
                             Azerbaijan to South-Eastern Europe (plateau level of 10 bcm by 2022) and from Azerbaijan to Turkey (6 bcm
                             plateau level by 2022), (ii) implementation of the TANAP project in a technically sound way, and in
                             compliance with the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies. These in turn led directly to
                             PDO-level outcomes, to help ensure that Azerbaijan’s gas export deliveries increased to new offtake markets,
                             that the security of Turkey’s energy supply would be enhanced, with enhanced gas deliveries through
                             additional imports, and the security of South Eastern-Europe’s energy supply would be improved, with
                             increased deliveries from new supply sources by end-2020. The pipelines themselves were designed to be
                             expandable to carry 31 bcm and 20 bcm of gas, to European and Turkish markets respectively, in the future –
                              to be able to transport additional volumes of gas to be produced from Shah Deniz and other fields in
                             Azerbaijan to Turkey and Europe. Higher-level outcomes arising from the project could include enhanced
                             growth and competitiveness of these economies, greater macroeconomic resilience from the deeper



                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TANAP (P157416)



integration of Azerbaijan, Turkey and South-Eastern Europe into international energy markets, and
sustainable energy sector development and improved gas sector governance in Azerbaijan and Turkey.

While the activities were broadly appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes, the theory of change (TOC)
discussion in the ICR does not specifically analyze whether they were of adequate scale to create a critical
mass for change.

The above-mentioned TOC also applies to the efficacy assessment of PDO2 and PDO3, below.

Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were consistent with the above results chain. For
PDO Indicator 1, the target for assessing diversification of Azerbaijan’s natural gas markets to new off-take
markets was 4.0 bcm per year by end-2020. For Indicator 2, assessment of the improvement in Turkey’s
energy supply was based on a target of 4.5 bcm a year of additional gas imports expected by end-2020. For
PDO Indicator 3, the target for assessing improvement of South-East Europe’s security of energy supply, of
4.0 bcm per year of gas imports from new supply sources by end-2020, was designed to be the mirror
indicator of PDO Indicator 1, measuring South-East Europe’s gas imports from a new source:
Azerbaijan. Projected increases in these deliveries (not used as targets) to plateau levels, from 2022
onwards, were as indicated above.

Outputs

- TANAP’s gas transmission capacity to South-Eastern Europe was fully established by end-2020 (there was
a delay of some months in commercial operation on account of a slight delay in completion on the TAP side:
however the TANAP pipeline construction was completed on schedule, by October 2019).

- Availability of TANAP for gas supply to Turkey reached 5.7 bcm per year by January 2021, more than fully
achieving its target of 5.4 bcm per year.

- Gas deliveries to TAP commenced on December 31, 2020, reaching an annualized value of 6.2 bcm per
year in January 2021 – surpassing the target of 4.0 bcm.

- Registered grievances addressed within the stipulated time frame (98.73 percent) exceeded the target (of
93 percent) by December 2021.

- As a measure of the pace of resettlement implementation, progress in registration of affected private land
parcels (from a baseline of 32 percent in 2016) almost fully achieved the target (99.62 percent vs. 100
percent). Progress in this area was important to enabling on-schedule completion of the pipeline
interconnection with South-East Europe.

Outcomes

The diversification of Azerbaijan’s gas export markets took place on schedule, exports exceeding their end-
2020 target value of 4.0 bcm by July 2021 (as mentioned above, the delay being on account of delay in
completion of the TAP pipeline, outside the control of TANAP). As of September 30, 2021, a cumulative total
of 5.57 bcm p.a. of gas had been exported from Azerbaijan to new natural gas export markets in South-East
Europe, with annualized gas deliveries reached 7.4 bcm. The plateau of minimum 10.5 bcm (slightly higher




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TANAP (P157416)



than the 10.0 bcm target level in the PAD) was expected to be reached in January 2022, as planned at
appraisal.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To improve the security of Turkey’s energy supply”

Rationale
The goal of improving Turkey’s security of energy supply was assessed via one PDO indicator and two
intermediate indicators.

Outputs

- The availability of TANAP for gas supply to Turkey reached a level of 5.7 bcm p.a. relative to a target of 5.4
bcm by end-2020.

- 17.5 million gas consumers in Turkey benefited from the supply of gas by end-2020, relative to a target of
15 million.

- The number of community consultations held as of the total number of communities along the actively
worked sections of the pipeline fully achieved the target (100 percent) by end-January, 2021.

- The number of community consultations held for women as of the total number of communities along the
actively worked sections of the pipeline (and % of consultations held separately for women) fully achieved the
target (of 40 percent) by end-January, 2021.

- The share of women employed by construction contractors out of the total number of employees achieved
the target (of 6 percent) by end-April, 2018.

Outcomes

TANAP’s capacity for gas transmission to Turkey became fully established by end-June 2018, as planned,
and reached an annualized level of 4.5 bcm in July 2020, with total deliveries for the year reaching 4.7
bcm. The plateau of gas deliveries of 5.7 bcm p.a. (based on a contractual volume of 6 bcm p.a., as per
TANAP’s agreements with BOTAS, assuming a pipeline availability factor of 95.5 percent) was reached in
July 2020, a little ahead of the appraisal timetable, and higher than the anticipated 5.4 bcm. By September
30, 2021, a cumulative total of 12.57 bcm p.a. had been delivered to Turkey, crossing the appraisal target of
8.0 bcm p.a. targeted for mid-December 2020.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TANAP (P157416)



                            High


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            “To improve the security of South-Eastern Europe’s energy supply”

                            Rationale
                            Improvement of the security of South-East Europe’s energy supply was assessed in terms of deliveries of
                            gas, of up to 4.0 bcm per annum by end-2020, from new supply sources.

                            Outputs

                            There were no specific output indicators: the key output being the technically sound implementation of the
                            TANAP project – which was implemented on schedule. However, earlier indicators relating to the number of
                            community consultations held along the actively worked sections of the pipeline, as well as to gender-related
                            targets for women employed by contractors, continued to be relevant here.

                            Outcomes

                            The target of South-Eastern Europe obtaining 4.0 bcm of gas per year from a new supply source, Azerbaijan
                            (the mirror indicator of PDO Indicator 1), was fully achieved in 2021. This contributed significantly to
                            increasing the region’s security of energy supply.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As seen from the above, the project achieved its three objectives, with no shortcomings noted. Efficacy was
                            rated High for all three objectives, leading to an Overall Efficacy rating of High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency


                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TANAP (P157416)



The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at closing was estimated at 12.3 percent, with a Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$3.94 billion (at a 6 percent discount rate), compared to the estimated rate at
appraisal of 10 percent and NPV of US$2.56 billion. It should be noted that the economic costs assumed for the
analysis were the actual investment expenditures for the construction of TANAP, for a pipeline capacity of 31
bcm p.a., while revenues were based on volumes of gas equal to the contractually committed 16 bcm p.a.
only. While revenues were expected to build up over time, investment costs were incurred upfront, creating a
mismatch in cash flows, thereby contributing to a slightly lower economic rate of return.

Operational/Administrative Efficiency

The project’s results were achieved at a total cost of US$6.3 billion, which was substantially less than the
appraisal estimate of US$8.6 billion. These savings (of 27 percent) were in part on account of cost-effective
implementation, including cost-efficient procurement, efficient contract implementation, plus favorable market
conditions affecting prices of some inputs, such as steel pipes. These results were achieved with only minor
delays – related mostly to TAP construction (on account of the Covid-19 pandemic).

From an overall perspective, given the savings in costs and the minimal delays in gas deliveries, which took
place at a time of a health pandemic, the project’s efficiency can be considered to be High.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 10.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              12.37
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives remain substantially relevant to the needs of Azerbaijan’s energy sector,
contributing to the energy security needs of Turkey and South-Eastern Europe. Its overall efficacy is rated High,
the project having achieved its key development objectives. Its efficiency is similarly rated High, on the basis of
both economic analysis and Operational/Administrative efficiency considerations. As such, its overall outcome
is rated Highly Satisfactory. The rating is justified by the project’s performance in terms of budget and timeline,
which can be considered favorably in comparison to other similarly large and complex infrastructure projects.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)



a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key risks to development outcome include (a) possible political risks, given the number of countries crossed
by the Southern Gas Corridor from the Shah Deniz 2 field to Italy - though these risks have now decreased
after all components of the Corridor became operational; and (b) economic and financial risks, arising from
any decline in demand for natural gas in the importing regions or if piped gas through TANAP were to
become severely uncompetitive compared to other fuels – though these risks had also declined as LNG
prices soared during 2020 and 2021. Also, the project could potentially be further expanded, as the TANAP
and TAP pipelines were designed to be expandable to 31 bcma and 20 bcma respectively – which would
solidify the development outcomes achieved. The addition of compressor stations would lead to a doubling
of gas throughput to Europe to 20 bcm, coupled with an increase in gas offtake by Turkey (up to 11 bcm).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was aligned with the larger Southern Gas Corridor, which – at a cost of US$46 billion
  – was by far the largest set of infrastructure investments under development at the time. The Southern
  Gas Corridor brought together the Governments of Azerbaijan and Turkey, along with BP and several
  other state and private companies in a very large public-private partnership program. The cooperation of
  the three main partners in the TANAP program built on the successful Baku-Tbilisi-Ezurum Natural Gas
  pipeline and the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline projects. Project design drew upon the key lessons
  arising, including the need for clearly identifying the scale and complexity of land acquisition, use of
  resettlement fund, monitoring and reporting, and an effective grievance redress mechanism.

  As noted by the ICR (p.31), the project’s design was sound and appropriate for achieving the PDO, as
  was the technical and financial appraisal. The project was able to address Environmental and Social
  Safeguards (E&S) issues identified during appraisal, including via a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP),
  notwithstanding the advanced stage of preparation and implementation activities. The project’s
  institutional and implementation arrangements, which included establishing TANAP as a private company
  under the Turkish Commercial Code to implement the project and operate the pipeline after completion,
  and contracting a major engineering firm to carry out design and engineering for the project, were
  adequate, allowing for successful and on-schedule implementation despite the significant complexity of
  the infrastructure.

  There were two shortcomings. According to the ICR (p.31), the appraisal might have benefited from a
  more comprehensive climate and GHG emissions impact assessment. Similarly, the project team’s
  economic assessment might have benefited from a more thorough assessment of the alternatives to gas
  supply to demonstrate that gas was indeed the least-cost option to achieve the PDO.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project appears to have been adequately supervised. The Bank team conducted 8 bi-annual
 supervision missions over a four-year period, providing exceptional continuity in the task team throughout
 implementation, with one of the task team leaders, as well as the environmental, social, procurement and
 FM team members staying with the operation from beginning to end. This proved to be greatly beneficial to
 the operation in terms of client relations, especially when implementation challenges arose that needed to
 be addressed.

 The Bank coordinated closely with other development partners active in the project throughout
 implementation, ensuring that requests to the client – especially on E&S follow-up - were streamlined and
 consistent. The team also stayed engaged with key stakeholders, maintaining direct lines of
 communication with TANAP and both borrowers, as well as with national governments and international
 private-sector financiers. A close relationship was maintained with MIGA and the Asian Infrastructure
 Investment Bank (AIIB), with the Bank taking the lead in carrying out missions and client communications
 jointly or on behalf of AIIB, as per the Co-Lender’s Agreement.

 The ICR reports (p.33) that performance reporting was candid, facilitating adequate management guidance
 and responses. In early 2020, with the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Bank responded flexibly to the
 situation, switching to virtual arrangements.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Theory of Change was fairly clear and straightforward. PDO indicators reflected the three
 main outcomes of the project and progress on these indicators was attributable to project-related
 activities. Regular reporting on all aspects of the Project was set up to be done on a monthly basis by
 TANAP, thereby providing timely updates and enabling the Bank team to respond to any issues. In view of
 the size of the operation, third-party monitoring companies were contracted by TANAP to conduct regular
 independent environmental and social audits of the project’s activities.

 According to the ICR (p.24), a minor shortcoming was that the project did not have any intermediate
 indicators to measure construction progress prior to commissioning of the infrastructure. Another was that

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TANAP (P157416)



 several indicators did not include current plus cumulative measurement, which might have been more
 useful than just current measurement.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E function appears to have been satisfactorily managed for reporting by TANAP. Data were
  collected on a continuous basis, analyzed in a methodologically sound manner, and reported monthly to
  its shareholders and the World Bank. Towards this end, TANAP invested in a substantial capacity to
  monitor a large number of activities taking place in parallel, in addition to external support from
  independent monitoring agents and an external engineering, procurement and construction management
  consultant. Findings from the project were disseminated via publication of all M&E documents, in
  addition to presentations at conferences and publication of a lessons-learnt note.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on performance and results progress were adequately used by borrowers and the Bank to inform
  project management and decision-making – as for instance the close and frequent monitoring of health
  and safety incident rates, which informed the World Bank’s engagement and recommendations on
  occupational health and safety.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
       a. Safeguards
          The project was classified as Category A, triggering OP 4.01. An Environmental and Social Impact
          Assessment (ESIA) was prepared at the outset, to satisfy both Turkish and IFC standards. A
          comprehensive ESIA package was disclosed on both TANAP’s website the Bank’s external website
          in July 2016. OP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways) was deemed not applicable to the
          project, even though the pipeline would cross a number of international waterways.

          Since the project involved about 7,000 hectares (ha) of land, including 4,576 ha of private land
          acquisition affecting more than 115,000 landowners, resettlement action plans (RAPs) were
          implemented, in compliance with OP 4.12. By project closing, implementation of two RAPs,
          expropriation processes and livelihood restoration plans were substantially complete and
          independently verified. Registration of private land parcels stood at 99.55 percent as of December
          6, 2021. A post-resettlement impact evaluation conducted by TANAP to assess the outcome of
          compensation and livelihood assistance received by the affected people confirmed the satisfactory
          implementation of the agreed actions in the RAP, particularly regarding the key commitments related
          to mandatory compensation payment under Turkish law. TANAP also established a Social and
          Environmental Investment Program (SEIP) to help accelerate socio-economic development and

                                                                                               Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TANAP (P157416)



         protect natural resources along the pipeline route and around the construction sites. This
         broadened the scope of TANAP’s interventions from risk and impact mitigation measures aimed at
         directly-affected households to interventions contributing to the economic and social development of
         local communities more broadly. The SEIP benefited over 40,000 people, prioritizing vulnerable
         groups including children, women, physically challenged persons and farmers to improve their socio-
         economic well-being.

         Although the project had several large associated facilities in the form of upstream gas facilities and
         pipelines, IBRD received from its Board a safeguards policy waiver for TANAP’s associated facilities.

         A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was put in place by TANAP in compliance with the GRM
         provisions in the legal documents. As of December 6, 2021, 5,364 grievances were received in the
         GRM, of which 99 percent were closed. For cases that the GRM process was not able to solve to
         the satisfaction of the complainants, four Appeals Committees with independently appointed
         members were put in place. The Appeals Committees reviewed some 25 cases, of which 3
         remained open at project closing and complainants of four cases indicated that they preferred to
         escalate the issues to the courts.

         By project closing, all reinstatement activities in the four lots had been fully completed, including
         biorestoration and reforestation activities. Biorestoration monitoring continues to be conducted by
         TANAP’s consultants and contractor teams. Additionally, the biodiversity offset management
         strategy, which was in line with EBRD’s performance standards, was finalized and disclosed in-
         country.

         Total greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) during operations were found to have been substantially
         lower than estimated at appraisal (by a factor of about four).Even though additional gas had to
         vented on account of a gas leak, resulting in an increase in GHG emissions, total emissions in 2021,
         at 0.256mt CO2 eq., were far below the appraisal estimate of 0.4 mt CO2 eq./annum at full capacity.

         Third-Party E&S monitoring was initiated from 2014 by TANAP, which engaged three independent
         E&S consultants as monitoring agents during 2014-19, with regular reporting on environmental and
         social issues. The ICR reports (p. 30) that the recommendations of these agents were
         systematically addressed by TANAP.

         As reported by the ICR (p.30), all but one of the intermediate results indicators related to social
         impacts, grievances, consultations and employment of women were successfully met or exceeded
         the end-term targets. The only indicator not fully met was the registration of affected land parcels,
         which however was met to the extent of 99.62 percent by project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  According to the ICR (p.30), TANAP managed satisfactory financial management (FM) arrangements
  throughout implementation. The project utilized IFR-based disbursement, with Interim Financial Reports
  (IFRs) being submitted on time and found to be satisfactory. Audit reports from BOTAS, SGC and TANAP
  were all submitted on time and found to be satisfactory and all FM-related covenants were complied


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        TANAP (P157416)



   with. The ICR does not specify whether audit reports received unqualified opinions from external auditors.

   The ICR reports (p.30) that all procurement-related covenants were complied with, and all major contracts
   completed satisfactorily and on timely basis. TANAP was an early adopter of the Bank’s new Procurement
   Framework, whilst following TANAP’s own procurement procedures. Contracts under the project were
   procured as advance procurement specified in the Bank’s Procurement Regulations. Procurement was
   supported by a skilled external engineering, procurement and construction management contractor
   (EPCM), under a multi-year contract, with close involvement of TANAP’s technical and commercial
   teams. According to the ICR, TANAP managed decisions regarding contract implementation in a highly
   professional way, contributing significantly to the cost savings achieved during the procurement process.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   --



d. Other
   Gender: The project made significant efforts to consult female beneficiaries, and increase female
   employment by contractors. TANAP carried out separate consultations for women in their own dwellings,
   thereby ensuring that they were informed about the project, land acquisition procedures, its benefits, local
   employment opportunities, safety trainings and its planned social investment program. Among the affected
   communities, TANAP provided local employment opportunities through its contractors for unskilled women
   to be able to earn additional income for their households. At project closing the share of female employees
   among contracts stood at 11 percent, more than double the project target of 5 percent.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 High                  High

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. The use of shareholder finance in lieu of project finance can sometimes be useful when
project structures are complex. In the case of the TANAP project, the choice of the financing

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TANAP (P157416)



structure was justified in light of the complexity of the Southern Gas Corridor program project, the
strategic nature of the project, and the possibility of minimizing implementation delays, which would
have had substantial impacts on downstream gas customers and consumers.

2. For large infrastructure projects, it is important for institutional structures for
implementation to be put into place prior to Board approval. The TANAP operation was
implemented on time, under budget, and with full fiduciary compliance, which was possible because
it was appraised when the institutional structure for implementation was fully ready, the main
contracts had already been procured, and works had already begun.

3. The World Bank’s involvement in transformative infrastructure projects can help deepen
engagement with countries at a broader level, thereby enabling wider contributions to
country development agendas. The Bank’s involvement in the TANAP project led to the building
up of trust which facilitated engagement in several other areas under the umbrella of the Bank
Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Azerbaijan FY16-20. It also demonstrated to the
government and wider stakeholders in Azerbaijan how the Bank could engage and deliver on
important projects, thereby paving the way for other partners to support the country.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and internally consistent, and provides a fair amount of detail on implementation issues,
especially on environmental and social compliance. The achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed and
based on solid evidence. Strengths and weaknesses in the M&E system and elsewhere are highlighted and
discussed. Overall, the narrative appears to support the ratings and available evidence. One area which could
have been better framed are the key lessons from the project: the review has tended to present findings and
conclusions more than lessons with a broader application to potential future operations and interventions.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
TANAP (P157416)




                                                                  Page 16 of 16
