     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022841

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P166752                                    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Madagascar                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D4540                                  31-Dec-2020                                           98,720,647.96

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Apr-2019                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         98,720,647.96                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective of the Madagascar Fiscal Sustainability and Energy Development Policy
Operation was to strengthen the quality and transparency of fiscal decision-making and improve the
governance of the electricity sector.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



For this ICR Review, the program development objective is parsed into:

1. To strengthen the quality and transparency of fiscal decision-making.
2. To improve the governance of the electricity sector.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
This operation had two policy areas.

Strengthening the Quality and Transparency of Fiscal Decision-Making supported measures to: (a)
institutionalize risk-based assessment for new financing modalities: direct government loans, loan guarantees,
and on-lending arrangements; (b) enhance the assessment of public and publicly-guaranteed debt and
contingent liabilities; and (c) improve the transparency of the financial operations of state-owned enterprises
(SOEs).

Supporting the Governance of the Electricity Sector supported measures to: (a) improve the corporate
governance of the state-owned electricity and water utility, Jiro sy Rano Malagasy (JIRAMA); (b)
institutionalize least-cost investment planning and competitive procurement in the energy sector; and (c)
reduce commercial losses at JIRAMA and incentivize energy efficiency.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The program was estimated to cost SDR 71.6 million (US$100 million
equivalent) at appraisal and was financed by a development policy grant of the same amount, SDR71.6 million
(US$100 million equivalent), from the International Development Association to the Republic of Madagascar.

Dates. The program was approved on April 30, 2019, became effective on July 2, 2019, and closed as
scheduled on December 31, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Binding Constraints. This operation aimed to address constraints to growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability
 identified in the Madagascar Systematic Country Diagnostic of 2015 pertaining to public finances and
 electricity services.

       On public finances: (a) Madagascar had a relatively low public-debt-to-GDP ratio (37 percent in 2014),
        but two-thirds of the total was external public debt, raising risks of external debt sustainability and
        external debt distress should the currency weaken, fiscal deficits widen, exports drop, or interest rates
        rise; (b) little was known about contingent liabilities, especially those arising from extra-budgetary
        expenditures, liabilities of SOEs, public pension obligations, and informal debt of questionable legality;
        and (c) the poor operational and financial performance of SOEs, both wholly- or partially-owned by the
        state, including JIRAMA, Air Madagascar, and Madarail, raised questions about the state of their
        finances.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



      On electricity services: (a) access to electricity in Madagascar was among the lowest in the world (only
       12 percent of the population had access to electricity in 2010, compared to 33 percent for Sub-Saharan
       Africa) and was expected to deteriorate with rising population; (b) electricity was the second-most-cited
       "major obstacle" to the operations of firms, according to the World Bank Enterprise Surveys of 2009
       and 2013; (c) poor electricity service was the result of poor governance in the sector, reflecting the
       weak performance of JIRAMA and inadequate supervision by the government, compounded by
       powerful vested interests that exploited noncompetitive procurement practices; (d) JIRAMA's
       operational efficiency had declined and its financial position had deteriorated significantly over 2010-
       2013, dragged down by poor management of the utility's assets, high commercial losses (unbilled
       electricity services), and rising prices of imported fuel and other inputs; (e) the firm's poor finances led it
       to under-invest in the maintenance, rehabilitation, and upgrading of the electricity transmission and
       distribution network, resulting in technical losses, in addition to commercial losses; and (f) the country
       continued to depend on oil-based (mainly diesel) power generation, inconsistent with its resource
       endowments (of hydropower).

Government Priorities. Program objectives were consistent with the development priorities of the
government.

      Prepared in 2016 and updated in 2018, the Strategic Plan for the Modernization of Public
       Finances prioritized five fiscal and public financial management reforms that were consistent with those
       supported by this operation: strengthening the regulatory environment for public enterprises, reporting
       transparently on projects financed by development partners, undertaking a comprehensive assessment
       of all contingent liabilities, implementing the public debt strategy, and implementing JIRAMA’s business
       plan to improve operational performance.
      Informed by the Debt Sustainability Assessment of 2018, Madagascar’s Medium-Term Debt Strategy
       2020-22 advocated maximizing the use of concessional financing in the external debt portfolio, shifting
       domestic debt from short-term high-interest-rate Treasury Bonds by Auctions to medium-term bonds,
       and instilling budgetary discipline to help keep state indebtedness at a sustainable level.
      Adopted in 2019, the General Policy of the State advanced the goal for Madagascar to achieve
       emerging economy status in the medium-term. The plan focused on 13 priorities, including
       "development of the energy sector for universal access," a priority supported by this operation.
      Adopted in 2015, the New Energy Policy aimed to increase access to electricity by households to 70
       percent by 2030. The associated investment needs would be substantial: US$1.4 billion to meet
       demand from the existing consumer base beginning in 2017 as well as to transition to cleaner energy
       sources, and US$11 billion to achieve universal electricity access by 2030. Achieving the targets would
       require selecting projects using least-cost planning methodologies, improving JIRAMA’s finances to
       reduce the drain on the state budget and to lower risks for private investors, improving corporate
       financial governance at the state utility by establishing an auditing committee, reducing commercial
       losses, and improving energy efficiency.

Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Madagascar.

      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Madagascar for the Period FY17-FY21 (CPF)
       committed Bank Group support to the country's development strategy organized around two "focus
       areas": increase resilience and reduce fragility, and promote inclusive growth. The program objective to
       strengthen the quality and transparency of fiscal decision-making was aligned with the first CPF
       focus area, specifically with the objective of "enhanced transparency and accountability," and with the


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



        second CPF focus area, specifically with the objective of "increased fiscal capacity to finance priority
        social and infrastructure spending." The program objective to improve the governance of the electricity
        sector was also aligned with the second CPF focus area, specifically with the objective of "improved
        access to energy and transport."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 Objective 1 - Strengthen the Quality and Transparency of Fiscal Decision-Making
 PA1. The Recipient has, through its Ministry of Economy and Finance, issued: (a) Decret no 2018- 589
 fixant les modalitis et procidures d'octroi de garantie sur emprunt du Gouvernement Central; and (b)
 Decret no 2018-590 portant sur les modalitis et conditions d'octrois de prets directs et de prets ritrocidis
 par le Gouvernement Central, said decrees establishing the institutional basis for assessing and awarding
 guarantees, and requiring that all requests for government loans, guarantees, and on-lending
 arrangements are objectively analyzed through a credit risk-based assessment.
 PA2. The Recipient has, through its Ministry of Economy and Finance: (a) issued an Arrete no1
 7975/2018 MFB fixant la description des attributions et l'organisation des Services rattachis aux
 Dipartements du Ministere des Finances et du Budget, an Arrete that establishes a register to consolidate
 information on state majority-owned SOE liabilities, including debt, guarantees, and obligations for Public
 Private Partnership (PPP) projects; and (b) published, on the website of the Ministry of Economy and
 Finance, a debt sustainability analysis for FY2018, all to support improved decision-making processes on
 the management of debt and public sector liabilities.
 PA3. The Recipient has, through its Ministry of Economy and Finance: (a) published on the website of
 the Ministry of Economy and Finance the audited financial statements for all state majority-owned SOEs;
 and (b) issued Decret no 2018-689 portant obligation de publicite des comptes annuels des societes
 commerciales a participation majoritaire publique, requiring all state majority-owned SOEs to publish
 independently audited financial statements within six (6) months of the end of each FY, commencing in
 FY2019, all to increase transparency on the financial statements and performance of all state majority-
 owned SOEs.
 Objective 2 - Support the Governance of the Electricity Sector
 PA4. The Recipient has, through the supervisory board of JIRAMA: (a) issued Resolution no. 23/2018
 portant sur I'approbation des Termes de Refirence concernant la mise en place du Comite d'Audit de la
 Societe au sein de son Conseil d'administration, said resolution approving the establishment of an audit
 committee to provide fiduciary oversight and regularly report to the board on JIRAMA's financial recovery;
 and (b) institutionalized the semi-annual publication of a detailed breakdown of JIRAMA's liabilities.
 PA5. The Recipient has, through its Ministry of Energy, Water and Hydrocarbons, issued Decret no
 2018-692 Portant modalits de passation de contrats pour les investissements dans la production d'nergie
 dlectrique supirieure a 5MW, a decree to restrict the award of concessions and power purchase
 agreements for private power generation with a capacity over 5 MW to projects that are ready for contract
 award and that are part of the Recipient's "Master Plan for the Least Cost Development of the Power
 Sector."
 PA6. The Recipient has, through the supervisory board and the Chief Executive Officer of JIRAMA
 respectively, issued two letters no 002/PCA/18 and no 23/DG/2019 to institutionalize regular targeted
 metering audits of key customers, and has mandated JIRAMA to include targets for commercial loss


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



reduction in performance contracts for its regional director, in order to reduce commercial losses and
incentivize energy efficiency.



Objective 1 - Strengthen the Quality and Transparency of Fiscal Decision-Making

      PA1 aimed to improve the assessment and management of contingent liabilities. Although the
       government had tried to control its exposure to contingent liabilities, notably with the passage of the
       Debt Management Act in 2014, the state budget remained considerably exposed to liabilities arising
       from state companies. According to the World Bank Madagascar Debt Management Performance
       Assessment of 2017: (a) certain classes of state guarantees and loans were not governed by existing
       legal rules and administrative procedures; (b) it was not clear which department in the Ministry of
       Economy and Finance (MEF) was responsible for overseeing, or even collecting information about,
       contingent liabilities; (c) overall, state guarantees and retrocessions (transfers of risk from one reinsurer
       to another) posed a substantial threat to fiscal stability; (d) additionally, large amounts of government
       loans extended to state firms through direct lending or on-lending arrangements were in arrears, as
       JIRAMA's principal and interest arrears on state loans topped Malagasy ariary (MGA) 23 billion (US$6.5
       million equivalent, 0.5 percent of 2017 GDP). This prior action, involving two decrees to implement the
       Public Debt Law of 2014, would establish the framework for assessing and awarding government
       guarantees and loans: (a) in-depth credit risk assessments would be required of all requests for
       government guarantees, guarantees would be capped at 75 percent of guaranteed loan amounts, and
       fees would be levied to incentivize guarantee applications only for viable projects; and (b) the process
       by which government loans were extended to SOEs, public institutions, sub-national entities, and
       commercial entities with public participation would be spelled out, including the process by which
       defaulted loans would be recovered. While these two decrees were valid measures to rationalize the
       process of granting government loans and guarantees, the crucial question remained whether the rules
       would be followed. The World Bank’s Madagascar 2007-21 Country Program Evaluation (CPE) of May
       2022 found that “elite capture of state institutions and weak governance (including poor public financial
       management)” were core binding constraints to development in Madagascar. The report cited the fate of
       previous public financial reform efforts as a glaring example: “For example, several reforms supported
       by the Public Finance Sustainability DPOs were reversed.” The relevance of PA1 is rated moderately
       satisfactory.
      PA2 aimed to improve debt sustainability assessments. Despite recent efforts to improve debt
       management, including with the regular preparation of the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy
       (which sets the debt ceiling), several problems remained: (a) the government had limited capacity to
       assess fiscal risks and debt sustainability, and (b) the government lacked reliable, up-to-date, and
       consolidated information about the liabilities of the public sector, including public debt, on-lending
       arrangements to SOEs, and PPPs. This prior action was intended to raise the quality and transparency
       of debt sustainability assessments: (a) the government would consolidate all information on public
       sector liabilities in one registry, focus especially on the liabilities (tax, customs, pension, repayments on
       on-lending arrangements, obligations on PPPs) of majority-owned SOEs, and strengthen the
       institutional capacity of the SOE Oversight Unit; and (b) the Public Debt Directorate would prepare the
       government's first Debt Sustainability Analysis, covering fiscal year 2018 and following the new Debt
       Sustainability Framework for Low Income Countries adopted by the IMF and the World Bank in 2018,
       and publish it on the website of the MEF. This one-time requirement to prepare the Debt Sustainability
       Analysis for 2018 lacked permanence and reflected the challenges to governance as highlighted by


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



      the CPE: “The Bank had some success in identifying and analyzing political and governance risks, but
      less in operationalizing its findings.” The relevance of PA2 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     PA3 aimed to modernize financial reporting by SOEs. Governed by the Commercial Law, SOEs were
      required to prepare their financial statements six months after the close of each fiscal year and have the
      financial statements independently audited. However: (a) several majority-owned SOEs never produced
      their accounts or had them audited; (b) while the Commercial Law mandated the preparation of SOE
      financial statements, it did not require their publication; (c) the Treasury did not systematically analyze
      the financial performance of SOEs; and (d) the government did not monitor or report on the liabilities
      presented by the SOEs to the state. This prior action aimed to enhance transparency about the financial
      performance of SOEs: (a) all majority-owned SOEs would have to publish their independently-audited
      financial statements six months after the end of each fiscal year, beginning in fiscal year 2019 (plugging
      the loophole in the Commercial Law); and (b) based on the published audited financial statements of all
      majority-owned SOEs, the government would prepare and publish a report on their financial
      performance. While these new directives would update the Commercial Law, they lacked enforcement
      sanctions and penalties for non-compliance. They were likely to be half-effective at best, according to
      the judgment by the CPE about previous SOE reform efforts: “Just 57 percent of the seven prior actions
      to the SOEs were sustained.” The relevance of PA3 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

Objective 2 - Support the Governance of the Electricity Sector

     PA4 aimed to improve corporate finances at JIRAMA. Although the deterioration in the company's
      finances had partly eased following tariff rate adjustments and the installation of a new management
      team, problems remained challenging: (a) unpaid bills to suppliers topped 3.2 percent of GDP in 2017;
      (b) unpaid bills from customers were 1.1 percent of GDP in 2017; (c) the cash shortfall was forecast
      to reach 2 percent of GDP in 2018; (d) the company's solvency would likely remain precarious in the
      near term even as new solar and hydropower sources came online; (e) meanwhile, the lack of
      independently audited and publicly disclosed financial statements constrained the ability of the JIRAMA
      Board to make informed decisions about the utility's financial recovery. This prior action would set up the
      administrative arrangement for JIRAMA to prepare a Financial Recovery Plan: (a) the Board would
      create an audit committee to provide fiduciary oversight over corporate financial management and report
      to the Board on the preparation and execution of the utility's Financial Recovery Plan; and (b) following
      the completion and publication of the first independent audit of JIRAMA, the company would
      henceforth report and disclose its liabilities in detail semi-annually, helping inform recovery
      planning. However, this prior action fell short of actually requiring the preparation, completion, and
      adoption of a Financial Recovery Plan. Moreover, the capacity of the proposed audit committee and the
      Board to prepare, approve, and oversee the execution of such a plan raised credibility issues,
      considering the findings of the CPE about serious governance problems at JIRAMA: “Vested interests
      undermined progress towards improving financial and operation performance of key SOEs such as
      JIRAMA.” For these reasons, the relevance of PA4 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     PA5 aimed to institutionalize “least-cost investment planning” and “competitive procurement” in the
      power sector. Madagascar's energy development was sub-optimal: (a) to revert the energy mix away
      from thermal sources and toward hydropower (in line with the country’s endowment of an
      estimated 8,400 MW of hydropower), some US$1.5 billion of capital investment would be needed; (b)
      however, the Ministry of Energy, Water, and Hydrocarbons (MEWH) and JIRAMA lacked the technical
      and institutional capacity to prioritize projects among different renewable energy generation options; and
      (c) procurement policies and practices were uncompetitive. This prior action aimed to help Madagascar
      to improve the national power supply by adopting the “least-cost planning methodology” for project
      planning and selection and “competitive procurement” for project execution: (a) new power

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



        generation projects (of over 5 MW capacity) by the private sector would be awarded concessions and
        power purchase agreements (PPAs) only if they were part of the Master Plan for the Least Cost
        Development of the Power Sector (PDMC) – essentially if they were selected using the "least cost
        planning principle," the evaluative framework for infrastructure projects that considers demand
        management solutions equally with strategies to increase capacity, assesses all significant impacts
        (costs and benefits), including non-market impacts, and involves the public in developing and evaluating
        alternatives; (b) the projects would have to be competitively procured; and (c) they were ready for
        contract award, defined by a ministerial decree to mean that feasibility and detailed design
        studies, environmental and social impact assessments, financial and budgetary sustainability analyses,
        and risk and cost (to the state) calculations had been completed. However, the prior action suffered from
        two technical deficiencies: it applied only to new projects, exempting capacity additions to existing
        plants, and it did not cover projects rated 5 MW and under. Moreover, as with PA4, governance issues
        at JIRAMA and problems with public procurement raised issues about the credibility of this prior
        action. Specifically, according to the CPE, "elites have captured public procurement and, due to the
        blurring between political and economic interests as well as the phenomenon whereby economic elites
        'sponsor' politicians (political financing remains highly opaque in Madagascar), are able to operate
        above the law.” Therefore, the relevance of PA5 is rated moderately satisfactory.
       PA6 aimed to reduce commercial losses at JIRAMA and incentivize energy efficiency. Total systems
        losses (the sum of technical and commercial losses) were high by international standards, reaching 33
        percent in 2017; (b) for commercial losses, JIRAMA did not have any procedure to systematically audit
        customers' meters to detect fraud; yet (c) auditing high- and medium-voltage consumers, which
        accounted for 39 percent of sales, could reduce commercial losses significantly. This prior action aimed
        to reduce commercial losses at JIRAMA and foster energy efficiency system-wide: (a) targeted audits of
        key customers would be made regularly – the target would be 16,000 audits in 2019, in addition to the
        16,486 completed in 2018; (b) improper connections (tampered or otherwise irregular) would be made
        regular; and (c) the Board would mandate JIRAMA to include targets for commercial loss reduction in
        the performance contracts for regional directors, as the regional offices were best positioned to reduce
        theft and other commercial losses. While customer audits, “regularization” of irregular accounts, and
        performance contracting could, in theory, help to reduce commercial losses, governance issues at
        JIRAMA raised questions about the credibility of this prior action. Specifically, according to the
        CPE, “Madagascar has one of the lowest rates of electrification in the world, with three out of four
        households having no access to electricity (driven in part by the high cost and poor quality of electricity
        services supplied by state-owned JIRAMA).” Therefore, relevance of PA6 is rated moderately
        unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



Results         Associated Relevance       Baseline       Target        Actual Value Actual       Achievement
Indicator       Prior      Rating                                                      Change Rating
                Action                                                                 in Results
                                                                                       Indicator
                                                                                       Relative
                                                                                       to
                                                                                       Targeted
                                                                                       Change
Objective 1 - Strengthen the Quality and Transparency of Fiscal Decision-Making
RI1 -             PA1     Satisfactory (a) Zero         (a) 100         (a) 100        (a) 100 Substantial
 Percentage of                           (2017)         percent         percent        percent
government                               (b) Not        (2020)          (2020)         of
loan                                     applicable     (b) 100         (b) 100        targeted
guarantees and                           (2017)         percent         percent        change
on-lending                                              (2020)          (2020)         (b) 100
agreements                                                                             percent
which are:                                                                             of
(a) subject to a                                                                       targeted
credit risk                                                                            change
assessment
and published;
and
(b) comply with
the guarantee
limit.
RI2 - (a)         PA2     Unsatisfactory (a) Register   (a) Register (a) Register (a) Target Negligible
Consolidated                             does not exist established established not fully
SOE contingent                           (b) Moderate and updated but not              achieved
liabilities                              (2017)         on an annual operational (b) Target
register                                                basis           (b) Moderate fully
produced with                                           (b) Moderate (2021)            achieved,
inputs from the                                         (2020)                         but
SOE oversight                                                                          results
unit, the                                                                              indicator
Department of                                                                          not
Budget, the                                                                            relevant
Public Debt
Directorate,
and the PPP
unit;
(b) Level of risk
of debt
distress.
RI3 - Improved PA3        Moderately     No publication Some            The            Target     Modest
fiscal reporting          Satisfactory or assessment significant        contingent not fully
on contingent                            of contingent contingent       liabilities of achieved
liabilities.                                            liabilities are most SOEs


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



                                           liabilities  quantified and are incorpor
                                           (2017)       published in a ated into
                                                        report         quantitative
                                                        (2020)         analysis
                                                                       carried out
                                                                       by the MEF
                                                                       but not
                                                                       published in
                                                                       a separate
                                                                       report
                                                                       (2021)
Objective 2 - Support the Governance of the Electricity Sector
RI4 - Improved PA4        Moderately   The Recipient’s (a) A           (a) The       (a) Target Negligible
corporate                 Satisfactory Government, Financial           JIRAMA        not
financial                              JIRAMA’s Boa Recovery           Financial     achieved
governance of                          rd, and the      Plan for       Recovery      (b) Target
JIRAMA.                                public have      JIRAMA has Plan for has not fully
                                       limited insight been            not yet been achieved
                                       into the         approved by approved by
                                       implementation its Board        JIRAMA’s B
                                       of the utility’s (b) JIRAMA’s oard
                                       fiduciary        financial      (b) The
                                       performance statements          JIRAMA
                                       and financial are being         financial
                                       recovery.        independently statements
                                       (2018)           audited and for 2018 and
                                                        published with 2019 have
                                                        the auditor’s been
                                                        opinion        published in
                                                        (2020)         the MEF
                                                                       website in
                                                                       May 2021,
                                                                       but without
                                                                       the auditor’s
                                                                       opinion and
                                                                       with
                                                                       substantial
                                                                       delay
                                                                       (2021)
RI5 -             PA5     Moderately   Contracts are Any projects 7 projects (a) 0              Negligible
 Institutionalize         Satisfactory being awarded awarded with above 5 MW percent
d least-cost                           for              concessions in capacity of
planning and                           concessions and power           awarded       targeted
competitive                            and power        purchase       power         change
procurement of                         purchase         agreements purchase          (b) 0
generation                             agreements for for private      agreements, percent
investments in                         private power power             but:          of
                                       generation with generation      (a)           targeted

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



the power                                  a capacity over with a          compliance change
sector.                                    5 MW without capacity over with              (c) 0
                                           adequate        5 MW after      PDMC unver percent
                                           preparation     July 2018:      ified,       of
                                           and             (a) are part of (b)          targeted
                                           prioritization  the PDMC,       compliance change
                                           (2018)          (b) are         with
                                                           competitively competitive
                                                           procured, and procurement
                                                           (c) are ready provision
                                                           for contract unverified,
                                                           award           and
                                                           (2020)          (c)
                                                                           readiness
                                                                           for contract
                                                                           award
                                                                           unverified
                                                                           (2020)
RI6 - Decline in PA6        Moderately     Total system Total system Total system Greater Substantial
total system                Satisfactory   losses at 33    losses no       losses equal than 100
losses (as a                               percent         higher than to 27.38         percent
percentage of                              (2020)          29 percent      percent      of
total electricity                                          (2020)          (2020).      targeted
produced)                                                                               change
through the
reduction of
non-technical
losses.



Objective 1 - Strengthen the Quality and Transparency of Fiscal Decision-Making

      RI1 was fully adequate to measure the impact of PA1 (subjecting applications for government
       loans, guarantees, and on-lending arrangements to systematic credit risk assessments and
       limiting guarantees to three-quarters of the covered loan amounts). The credit risk assessments
       would better inform lending decisions, while the guarantee limits would introduce some measure of
       prudency to guarantee operations. Moreover, the publication of the loan and guarantee
       applications and the associated credit risk assessments would enhance the transparency of these
       financial transactions. The relevance of RI1 is rated satisfactory.
      RI2a (a Consolidated SOE Contingent Liabilities Register) was adequate to measure the result of
       PA2a (consolidation of information on SOE liabilities and institutional and technical capacity
       building at the SOE Oversight Unit). The full accounting and disclosure of SOE liabilities, including
       those associated with guarantees and obligations on PPPs, would help inform and improve the
       management of public sector liabilities. RI2b (a “moderate” level risk of debt distress) was not the
       result of PA2b (conduct and publication by the Public Debt Directorate of a debt sustainability
       analysis). The output of PA2b would be a Debt Sustainability Analysis, not necessarily a debt
       distress risk rating of “moderate,” which would be the outcome of a range of factors including a

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



      judicious public debt strategy, improved public debt management practices, and favorable external
      and domestic economic and financial conditions. The relevance of RI2 is rated unsatisfactory.
     RI3 (improved fiscal reporting on contingent liabilities) was strictly not a results indicator and
      should have been re-stated as “fiscal report on contingent liabilities." A fiscal report on contingent
      liabilities would be the output of PA3 (requiring all SOEs majority owned by the government to
      publish their independently audited financial statements annually). The analysis of SOE contingent
      liabilities by the MEF, made possible by the availability of audited financial statements of the SOEs
      as well as by a newly-created Register of SOE Contingent Liabilities, would enable the
      government to better manage public debt, reflecting improvements both in the quality and
      transparency of fiscal operations. The target that the fiscal report show "some significant"
      contingent liabilities that are quantified, however, lacked specificity. The relevance of RI3 is rated
      moderately satisfactory.

Objective 2 - Support the Governance of the Electricity Sector

     RI4 (improved corporate financial governance of JIRAMA) was strictly not a results indicator and
      would have been best replaced by “JIRAMA Financial Recovery Plan” as RI4a, with the target that
      the plan be approved by the JIRAMA Board, and “JIRAMA financial statements for 2018 and 2019”
      as RI4b. Restated in this manner, the results indicators would be adequate to measure the impact
      of PA4 (establishing the JIRAMA Board of Directors Audit Committee and regularizing the semi-
      annual publication of JIRAMA's liabilities). The Audit Committee was tasked to precisely advise
      and report to the Board on the preparation and implementation of the utility's financial recovery
      plan. Hence, approval of the recovery plan would reflect the effectiveness of the Audit
      Committee. Meanwhile, the regular disclosure of the firm's liabilities would follow from PA4. Both
      results would provide evidence of improved governance at JIRAMA. The relevance of RI4 is rated
      moderately satisfactory.
     RI5 (institutionalized least-cost planning and competitive procurement of generation investments in
      the power sector) was strictly not a results indicator and should have been replaced by “number of
      projects awarded concessions that were in the PDMC” as RI5a, “number of projects awarded
      concessions that were competitively bid” as RI5b, and “number of projects awarded concessions
      that are ready for contracting” as RI5c. In all cases, the target would be seven projects. Restated
      in this manner, the results indicators would be adequate to measure the impact of PA5
      (adopting least-cost planning and competitive procurement in the award of concessions and PPAs
      for private power projects). Projects in PDMC's list were to have been prepared and selected using
      least-cost planning principles. Additionally, requiring competitive procurement and award
      readiness would further reflect the integrity and efficiency of project selection and concession
      awards. The relevance of RI5 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     RI6 was not fully adequate to measure the impact of PA6 (targeting commercial loss reductions in
      JIRAMA's regional performance contracts and regularizing metering audits of key customers). A
      decline in total systems losses – the sum of technical and commercial losses – would reflect the
      extent to which the governance of the electricity sector would have been enhanced through both
      upgrades in the infrastructure (the transmission and distribution network) and improvements in the
      operations (performance contracting and metering) of JIRAMA. Evidently, while meter audits and
      performance contracts would be important interventions, they could not be the sole drivers of any
      reduction in total systems losses. A narrower results indicator, such as revenue gains from
      restoring improper connections, would have been more appropriate. The relevance of RI6 is rated
      moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the quality and transparency of fiscal decision-making


               Rationale
                    RI1: The percentage of government loan guarantees and on-lending agreements that were subject to
                      a credit risk assessment and published was 100 percent, achieving the target. Only one application for
                      a loan guarantee was received by the government during the duration of this operation. The
                      government conducted a credit risk assessment of the guarantee application and published the
                      assessment, although it did not include details about the government's exposure to the risk. There
                      were no applications received for on-lending. The percentage of government loan guarantees and on-
                      lending agreements that complied with the guarantee limit was 100 percent, achieving the
                      target. The sole loan guarantee that was awarded complied with the guarantee limit. The achievement
                      is rated substantial.
                     RI2a: The Consolidated SOE Contingent Liabilities Register was established but was still not
                      operational by closing, partially achieving the target that the Register be established and updated
                      annually. The Register was produced with contributions from the SOE Oversight Unit, the Department
                      of Budget, the Public Debt Directorate, and the PPP Unit. While not completed, the process to have
                      the Register operational was fairly advanced by closing, according to the ICR. The achievement of the
                      target for RI2a is rated modest. RI2b: The risk of debt distress was assessed as "moderate.” The
                      risk rating was determined by the Debt Sustainability Analysis produced by the International Monetary
                      Fund (IMF) and the Bank in June 2018, which projected that public and publicly-guaranteed external
                      debt would fall from 26.7 percent of GDP in 2016 to an estimated 25.5 percent of GDP in 2018 (the
                      debt of JIRAMA which was directly guaranteed by the government was included in the calculation and
                      assessment). The analysis and rating were included as a supplement to the IMF Staff Report
                      Republic of Madagascar - Request for Disbursement under the Rapid Credit Facility of July 17,
                      2020. While the risk of debt distress was indeed assessed to be “moderate,” this indicator could not be
                      the result of the prior actions to improve debt reporting (see Section 4). The achievement of the target
                      for RI2b is rated negligible.
                     RI3: There was a fiscal report of content liabilities, reflecting some degree of improvement from the
                      baseline where there was no report of contingent liabilities. According to the ICR, the majority of SOEs
                      submitted their financial statements to the MEF, albeit with notable exceptions: JIRAMA submitted its
                      financial statements for 2018 and 2019 only in May 2021, five months after the closing date. The
                      MEF conducted a quantitative analysis of the contingent liabilities reported by the SOEs. Although it



                                                                                                               Page 12 of 20
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



                             disclosed information about the SOE liabilities in various periodicals, the MEF did not publish its
                             analysis as a separate report. The achievement is rated modest.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      To improve the governance of the electricity sector

                      Rationale
                           RI4: JIRAMA's Financial Recovery Plan was not approved by the JIRAMA Board by closing, failing to
                             achieve the target that the plan be approved by the Board. JIRAMA's financial statements for 2018
                             and 2019 were published on the website of the MEF in May 2021, after a long delay and past the
                             closing date, and lacked the auditor’s opinion, not achieving the target that the financial statements
                             be independently audited and published with the auditor's opinion. The achievement is rated
                             negligible.
                            RI5: Seven projects of over 5 MW each were awarded PPAs beginning in July 2018. However, it could
                             not be determined that the results target was met, namely that any private power generation project
                             awarded concessions and PPAs after July 2018 be: (a) part of the PDMC, (b) competitively procured,
                             and (c) ready for contract award. Neither the MEWH nor JIRAMA provided data about the original
                             signing dates of the contracts to determine that they pertained to new projects or were merely contract
                             renewals involving additions to existing thermal capacity. If these projects were entirely new, proof of
                             compliance with the PDMC, the competitive procurement provision, and the readiness for contract
                             award was not provided to the Bank, according to the ICR. For example, one contract extension
                             adding 20 MW of solar power capacity was signed in July 2020 but was not considered part of the
                             achievement for this operation because the original contract (that preceding this contract extension)
                             was signed before July 2018. The achievement is rated negligible.
                            RI6: Total system losses were cut from 33 percent in the baseline to 27.38 percent by
                             closing, exceeding the target that total system losses do not exceed 29 percent. However, it could not
                             be determined that the total system loss reductions would have been entirely or largely due to the
                             metering audits and the performance contracting supported by this operation (see Section 4). Hence,
                             the achievement is rated substantial.



                      Rating

                      Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

                                                                                                                        Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)




Achievement of the objective to strengthen the quality and transparency of fiscal decision-making is rated
moderately unsatisfactory. Achievement of the objective to improve the governance of the electricity sector is
rated unsatisfactory. The overall efficacy of this operation is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of the prior actions is rated moderately satisfactory. Achievement of the program objectives is
rated moderately unsatisfactory. The outcome of this operation is rated moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Economy Risk. Elite capture of state institutions, as highlighted by the World Bank’s Madagascar
CPE of 2022, continues to pose substantial risks to the achievement of the objectives of this operation. The
selection of energy projects based on least cost planning principles, the introduction of competitive
procurement in energy projects, the credit risk assessment of government lending, and the capping
of government loan guarantees would be particularly susceptible to risks of elite capture, vested interests,
and rent seeking.

Governance Risk. The decline in the quality of governance in Madagascar, as documented by the CPE,
exerts substantial risks to the objective to improve the quality and transparency of fiscal policy making and
public financial management. As the experience with this operation has since shown, publishing financial
statements and obtaining independent auditors’ opinions for the two years covered by this operation have
been problematic both at JIRMA and at other SOEs. Carrying the transparency objective forward can be
expected to be similarly difficult.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)




Analytical Foundations. The design of this operation was underpinned by analytical work produced by
the Bank, the government, and consultants providing advisory services and technical assistance
to Madagascar under projects financed by the Bank.

      The Debt Management Performance Assessment (World Bank, 2017), the Public Expenditure and
       Financial Accountability (Government of Madagascar, 2018), and the Advisory Services and
       Analytics for the Management of SOEs in Madagascar informed PA1, PA2, and PA3. According to
       the Program Document (pages 27-29): (a) the Debt Management Performance Assessment found
       the management of guarantees to be weak, with no objective criteria for assessment; (b) the Debt
       Management Performance Assessment and the Public Debt and Financial Accountability found
       the disclosure of debt to Parliament to be limited and lacking information on risks related to SOEs;
       and (c) the Public Debt and Financial Accountability and the Advisory Services and Analytics for the
       Management of SOEs in Madagascar concluded that the non-disclosure of financial statements
       hampered efforts to improve corporate governance at SOEs.
      The La Situation Economique et Financière du Secteur Electrique du Madagascar: Eléments Clé
       d’une Feuille de Route vers la Reduction du Déficit Budgétaire (World Bank), the Elaboration du
       Plan de Développement de l’Electricité au Moindre Cout (Artelia, the French consulting firm), and
       the Technical Assistance for the Electricity Sector Operations and Governance Project (P151785
       and P164318) informed PA4, PA5, and PA6. According to the Program Document (pages 27-29):
       (a) La Situation Economique et Financière du Secteur Electrique du Madagascar: Eléments Clé
       d’une Feuille de Route vers la Reduction du Déficit Budgétaire documented financial difficulties at
       JIRAMA, including large arrears to suppliers and insufficient financial transparency, and (b)
       Elaboration du Plan de Développement de l’Electricité au Moindre Cout laid out the elements of
       PA5.

Linkages with Other Bank Operations.

      This operation complemented other Bank operations aiming to strengthen fiscal management in
       Madagascar, including the Donor Coordination for Results Advisory Services and Analytics
       (P164136) that supported the improvement of public investment management practices, and the
       Madagascar Support to the Governance of State-Owned Enterprises Technical Assistance
       (P160306) that aimed to inform and facilitate policy making on SOE reforms.
      This operation was also well integrated with other Bank projects in Madagascar's energy sector,
       including the Electricity Sector Operations and Governance Project (P151785 and P164318) that
       aimed to improve the operational performance of JIRAMA and the reliability of electricity supply, the
       Least-Cost Electricity Access Development Project (P163870) that aimed to increase access to
       electricity services for households and enterprises, the Support for the Development
       of Hydropower IPP Development (P153220) that assisted with the preparation and tendering of
       small hydropower projects, and the Scaling Solar Guarantee Project (P166925) that aimed to
       increase solar power generation.

Donor Coordination. The Bank and Madagascar's other development partners agreed that the reforms
supported by this operation were essential to the country's development goals, according to the
ICR. Consultations among the Bank, the other donors, and the government were conducted
through the Cadre de Partenariat, the forum for collaboration among Madagascar's development partners,
co-chaired by the European Union and the MEF, and including the Bank, the African Development Bank,
and the French Agency for Development. Other non-Cadre donors also participated in policy dialogue with

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



the government, including the IMF, the United Nations Development Programme, and the U.S. Agency for
International Development. Importantly, the Bank collaborated with the IMF to ensure the alignment of the
fiscal reforms supported by this operation with those supported by the three-year arrangement under the
Extended Credit Facility approved by the IMF in 2016. Among other priorities, the IMF program aimed to
improve revenue generation and spending prioritization and strengthen public financial management. The
Debt Sustainability Analysis of June 2018, to be prepared by the IMF and the Bank and slated as part of
the Third Review of the Extended Credit Facility, would provide an assessment of the country's "risk of
external debt distress"; the rating would become the actual value for Results Indicator 2b.

Shortcomings. The Bank correctly assessed the overall operational risk to be substantial. However, the
Bank was unable to pin down the root causes of the substantial operational risk: elite capture and poor
governance, as documented in the CPE.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Implementation. Four task team leaders headed the Bank team over 2019-2020, and the team included a
counsel, financial management specialist, procurement specialist, and 13 other team members. The team
conducted meetings with the MEF to track the progress of reforms under the first pillar, with the MEWH and
JIRAMA on reforms under the second pillar, and with the Economic Council (of high-level government officials
overseeing this reform program) on the overall reform agenda. In addition, the team conducted joint monitoring
meetings with the supervision teams of related Bank projects in Madagascar and with representatives of
the Cadre de Partenariat.

Data gathered from the implementation of fiscal reforms were included in the MEF's semi-annual Public
Financial Management Monitoring Report prepared following the MEF's Stratégie de Modernisation de la
Gestion des Finances Publiques. Meanwhile, implementation of the energy reforms benefitted from procedures
established for the Electricity Sector Operations and Governance Project (P151785 and P164318), also
implemented by the JIRAMA. However, the ICR (page 24) reported that collecting detailed data and documents
from the MEWH and JIRAMA proved more difficult than collecting the same from the MEF.

Effort at Adaptation. The Bank confronted two problems at implementation and sought to assist the
government to address the issues.

      There was little progress with Board approval of JIRAMA's Financial Recovery Plan and the publication
       of JIRAMA's audited financial statements for 2018 and 2019. To help address the problem, the
       Bank: (a) extended the service contract with the consulting firm Castalia to update JIRAMA's Business
       Plan and financial model, and (b) engaged two management firms to support JIRAMA to implement its
       program commitments. Notwithstanding the assistance, the JIRAMA Board was unable to approve the
       utility’s Financial Recovery Plan by the operation's closing date. The financial statements were
       published but without the auditor’s opinion (see Section 5 - Objective 2)

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



      There was also a lack of information on new PPA contracts and their status relative to the PDMC and a
       lack of clarity on competitive procurement processes. To help address the problem, the Bank supported:
       (a) the update of the PDMC, and (b) the preparation of a decree on contract award procedures in the
       electricity sector. The decree would clarify contract award procedures (including for unsolicited bids and
       ambiguities with the application of the PPP Law), establish the legal basis for JIRAMA to sign PPAs
       (including for the Sahofika, Volobe, Scaling Solar Projects), and resolve inconsistencies in conditions
       that were set for participation in government tenders. Notwithstanding the assistance, the MEWH and
       JIRAMA were unable to furnish information about seven PPAs awarded for private power generation
       that would have determined the eligibility of these PPAs to be counted as achievements under the
       program (see Section 5 - Objective 2).

Shortcomings. To the extent that the core binding constraints to program implementation were elite capture
and weak governance (see Section 7), the Bank’s “technical” adaptations proved inadequate to the challenge.




Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The Bank performance at design is rated moderately satisfactory. The Bank performance during
implementation is also rated moderately unsatisfactory. Overall Bank performance is rated moderately
unsatisfactory


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not cite any actual social and poverty impacts, reiterating the outlook expressed at appraisal that
there were not likely to be significant gains in poverty reduction in the short run (page 20).



b. Environmental



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



The ICR did not cite any actual environmental impacts.



c. Gender

The ICR did not cite any actual gender impacts.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing
operations and includes sections on the relevance of prior actions and the relevance of results indicators.

Conciseness. The account of the project's performance is well informed and concisely presented.

Results Orientation. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of
the results targets.

Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank's performance at
design and at implementation. Strengths and weaknesses with the Bank's assessment at appraisal of
operational risks are clearly delineated.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program is candid. While the government fulfilled
all prior actions, the program failed to deliver on two results that would have advanced the governance of the
electricity sector, with uncertain prospects about the financial recovery of JIRAMA and about the compliance by
new power projects with least-cost planning principles and competitive procurement mandates.

Lessons. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to reform programs that are difficult to implement, in
part because of stakeholder risks and weaknesses in the institutional and technical capacity of implementing
agencies. The ICR also offers a useful lesson on the choice and definition of results indicators for a
transparency objective.



a. Rating

Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                     Disagreement/Comments
                                  Moderately             Moderately
 Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                     Technical solutions in the design
                                                                                     stage and technical adaptations
                                                                                     during implementation were
                                  Moderately             Moderately
 Bank Performance                                                                    inadequate to address the core
                                  Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                     development constraints posed
                                                                                     by elite capture and weak
                                                                                     governance.
 Relevance of Results
                                  ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 26-27), with some adaptation.

Targeted advisory services and technical assistance, including those provided though other operations
if not by other donors, are crucial to the efficacy of a reform program. In this operation, each of the prior
actions benefitted from analytic work and technical support extended under related ASA and TA operations.
Decrees setting the institutional framework for the assessment and award of government loans, loan
guarantees, and on-lending arrangements were designed with technical assistance from the Bank. Capacity
building at the Department of the Budget to enable it to produce fiscal risk assessments was aided by technical
assistance provided by the IMF. Actions to achieve the results targets following these and other prior actions
were similarly facilitated by other technical assistance and advisory services.

Requiring the publication of results indicators enhances the transparency of development policy
operations. In this operation, four of the six results indicators were precisely written to include the publication of
the achievement of the results targets as part of the results indicator themselves. For example, RI1 was defined
as "the percentage of government loan guarantees and on-lending agreements which are: (a) subject to a credit
risk assessment and published; and (b) comply with the guarantee limit." The same disclosure and publication
clause was made part of RI2, RI3, and RI4. The benefit of embedding the disclosure requirement in a results
indicator itself is that it enhances the transparency of the output or outcome, the associated prior action, and the
development policy operation. The underlying assumption, evidently, is that all implementing entities are able to
supply the data for the results indicators. Otherwise, more binding reporting requirements may have to be
inserted in financing agreements.

Tranche disbursements of development policy loans or grants, conditional on progress with results
targets, may make for a better arrangement for difficult reform programs. In this operation, although the
government fulfilled all three prior actions for the objective to support the governance of the electricity sector, it
failed to deliver on two results targets: improved corporate governance for JIRAMA and institutionalized least-
cost planning and competitive procurement of generation investments in the power sector. Since the results
targets consisted of multiple parts, the attainment of which could have been staged sequentially, conditioning

                                                                                                        Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Fiscal Sustainability and Energy DPO (P166752)



the disbursement of the grant proceeds on the achievement of partial targets on a set schedule would have
helped prevent the stalling and backtracking of reforms. Where monitoring and evaluation systems are weak
and transparency objectives are paramount, tranche disbursements may even be made conditional on the
release and publication of official program data.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                               Page 20 of 20
