     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022967

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P114963                                   6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Caribbean                                 Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51170,IDA-51180,IDA-51190,IDA- 01-Feb-2017                                                32,524,129.04
 65820,IDA-65830,IDA-65840,IDA-H7720

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 22-May-2012                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            34,557,400.67                                              0.00

 Actual                                        32,524,129.04                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman          Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project in Grenada, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and Grenadines, was the first phase of the Caribbean
   Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (CARCIP) program. This program aimed at
   building regional digital infrastructure and facilitating the development of an Information
   Technology/Information Technology Enabled Services (IT/ ITES) in the region. Dominican Republic was



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



   expected to join this phase at appraisal. However, the program was implemented separately in the Dominican
   Republic.

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreements of Grenada, Saint Lucia and
   Saint Vincente and the Grenadines (Schedule 1, page 4) and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page
   8):

   " To increase access to regional broadband networks and advance the development of an Information
   Communication Technology (ICT) - enabled services in the Caribbean Region".

   For this review, the PDO is parsed as follows:

   PDO 1. To increase access to regional broadband networks in the Caribbean region. and

   PDO 2. To advance the development of ICT enabled services in the Caribbean Region.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-May-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 9 - 10).

   1. Regional Connectivity Infrastructure. The appraisal and actual cost was US$ 12.6 million. There were
   two sub-components: (i) investments in regional physical connectivity infrastructure, including in submarine
   cable infrastructure, terrestrial broadband optical fiber networks and terrestrial or submarine cross-border
   links and national and regional Internet Exchange Points (IXPs); and (ii) enabling policies and regulations
   for a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement for managing the infrastructure.

   2. ICT - led innovation. The appraisal and actual cost was US$7.5 million. This component planned to
   support activities aimed at fostering growth of the regional IT/ ITES industries. Activities included, IT/ITES
   skill development for citizens, and business incubation program for businesses, and policies and regulations
   for supporting regional integration of the IT/ ITES industries. The targets for the indicators of this component
   were revised downwards substantially during implementation.

   3. Implementation support. The appraisal and actual cost was US$1.9 million. This component supported
   project implementation, institutional capacity building and support for monitoring and evaluation (M&E).


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost. The estimated program cost at appraisal was US$98.0 million. According to the
  clarifications provided by the project team, the actual cost was approximately US$118.0 million (this
  included the Bank contribution and private capital mobilization of US$85.2 million).

  Project Cost. The total actual project cost was US$32.35 million, higher than the appraisal cost of US$25.0
  million.

  Financing. The total Bank financing at appraisal for this operation was US$25.0 million (this included
  national and regional IDA credits of US$6 million for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, US$10.0 million for
  Grenada, US$6.0 million for Saint Lucia, and a regional grant of US$3.0 million to the Caribbean
  Telecommunications Union (CTU). Additional Financing (AF) of US$11.9 million was approved on March 5,
  2020. With this the Bank financing for the project was US$36.9 million. The total amount disbursed was
  US$32.5 million. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the difference between the Bank
  financing and amount disbursed was due to exchange rate fluctuations during implementation.

  Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
  contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 22, 2012, became effective on December 11, 2012, and was
  scheduled to close on February 1, 2017. However, the project closed four years and five months behind
  schedule on June 30, 2021.

  Changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings during implementation. AF was approved on March 2020.
  The main changes made during implementation are listed in sequential order as follows.

  The following main changes were made through the first restructuring on May 24, 2016.

        The closing date was extended from February 1, 2017, to December 11, 2018, for completing the
         activities associated with construction of the regional broadband infrastructure, the submarine cable
         and the ICT skills development component which were delayed in the initial years.
        Several targets of component two activities were revised downwards to reflect realistic targets
         relative to the level of available funding.
        Funds were reallocated under the regional CTU grant to new activities, utilizing funds previously
         allocated to activities to be implemented by the Caribbean Knowledge and Learning network.
        The unutilized funds from the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) were reallocated among other
         disbursement categories.

  The main change made through the second restructuring on June 21, 2018 , is as follows.

        The closing date for the IDA credit was extended by 18 months from August 1, 2018 to February 1,
         2020, due to the delays in completing the regional broadband network and delays in finalizing the
         regional PPP arrangement.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



   The main change made through the third restructuring on January 17, 2020, is as follows.

   The closing date was extended from February 1, 2020, to December 31, 2020 to allow for supervision of the
   regional network.

   AF was approved in March 2020. The AF sought to finance the completion of the ongoing and planned
   activities which had a financing gap due to the following reasons.

         A ten percent exchange loss between the SDR and US$ since approval due to exchange rate
          changes.
         Budget constraints faced by the countries for counterpart funding for the regional broadband
          network.
         Cost increases due to the increase in the final number of buildings to be connected to the regional
          broadband network.
         A scale-up of the training and incubation program in Grenada and Saint Vincente and the
          Grenadines.

   The main change made through the fourth restructuring on December 19, 2020.

   The closing date for Grenada was extended by six months from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2021, due
   to the COVID - 19 restrictions on shipping of goods and entry of technical experts. However, the credits for
   Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines closed on December 31, 2020.

   Split rating. Though the PDO was not changed, targets for PDO 2 were substantially revised downwards
   with the first Level 2 restructuring. Therefore, this review is based on a split rating of objectives, when
   US$20.0 million (27%) of the financing was disbursed before restructuring and the balance US$80.0 (63%)
   disbursed after restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and regional context. Grenada, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are small remote
countries in the Caribbean region. Their size made it difficult for them to realize scale economies and
remoteness raised their trade-related transactions costs. The countries are in the Atlantic Hurricane Belt
and vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters. Developing digital infrastructure and IT/ ITES for
integrating the region to the global economy and addressing the challenges of isolation, natural disaster
risks, and high cost of doing business was important to the regional strategy.

Sector context. Although the region was serviced by an external submarine network and international
bandwidth usage grew by 75% in 2010 in the region, when this project was prepared, demand for
bandwidth outstripped supply. National level challenges in the form of interconnection disputes between the
regional service operators contributed to the slow growth of broadband access and their high prices (in
2010, the average rate of internet users was 41% and that of fixed broadband internet subscribers was
13.3%, far below than in other developed countries). The high price of fixed broadband services limited their


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



affordability for businesses and consumers. These factors limited the options of the regional countries to
diversify their economies through information-based services.

Regional strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the regional digital development strategy 2010-14,
developed by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). The key objectives of the strategy were to establish a
modern regulatory and open telecommunications infrastructure with affordable networks, increase the
region's trained ICT workforce and enable production of regional digital goods and services for guiding
businesses and governments to use ICT for sustainable growth through partnerships.

Bank Strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Bank's Regional
Partnership Strategy (RPS) for the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) for 2010 - 2014,
articulated the need for enhancing regional connectivity between the islands, facilitating private sector
investment, introducing a cooperative approach for developing the regional IT sector and exploiting the
economies of scale in deploying services for citizens and businesses. The PDOs continue to be relevant to
the areas highlighted in the Bank's Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the RPS for OECS
countries for 2015-2019. The strategic area one of the RPS highlighted the need for fostering conditions for
growth and competitiveness and articulated the need for enhancing the resilience of the countries to natural
disasters and public health emergencies.

Bank experience. This project was the first phase of the CARCIP program. The project included, regional
physical connectivity infrastructure investments and institutional strengthening activities for enhancing the
effectiveness of the regional institutional ICT framework. These activities were likely to contribute to the
intended outcomes of increasing the number of internet users and increase employment in the IT/ ITES
industry and increase the number of businesses receiving support.

When the CARCIP project became effective, the Bank had several ongoing projects aimed at addressing
the gaps for supporting the region's ICT strategy, such as: (i) The Telecom and ICT Development (TICT)
project for OECS countries; (ii) The E - Government for Regional Integration Network project (EGRIN) for
OECS countries; and (iii) The Caribbean Knowledge and Learning Network (CKLN) project. The CARCIP
project aimed at establishing synergies with the ongoing projects to attain real regional integration. For
instance, the CKLN and the CARCIP projects were complementary, in that while the CKLN' project focused
on international connectivity through a Research and Educational Network, the CARCIP project aimed at
regional infrastructure investments required for the countries to interconnect with the CKLN for global and
regional interconnectivity.

The PDOs were highly relevant to the OECS countries regional strategy and to the Bank's regional strategy
for OECS counties. This project together with other ongoing projects was likely to contribute to the higher
level outcome of global and regional interconnectivity of the OECS countries. Therefore, the relevance of
the PDO was rated high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1. To increase access to regional broadband networks in the Caribbean region.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. Investments in regional broadband infrastructure and the enabling environment for such
               networks were aimed at addressing the development challenge of the low penetration of high-speed
               broadband infrastructure in the regional countries. The outputs of these activities were likely to increase the
               number of households, businesses and government institutions connected with the fiber optic network, and to
               the long-term development outcome of aiding regional growth. The causal links between the project activities,
               their outputs and outcomes were logical, and the outcomes were monitorable. The theory of change explicitly
               assumes strong regional and national level ownership and willingness of the private sector to develop new
               innovative products and services.

               Outputs (ICR pages 15 - 17, and pages 32 -42).

                     The submarine cable between Grenada and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was activated as
                        targeted. This was a first for several outer islands and the submarine cable provided the islands direct
                        access to international bandwidth. The fiber-optic networks with network lengths of 330 Kilometers
                        (Km) in Grenada, 450 km in Saint Lucia and 290 km in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines were rolled
                        out as targeted.
                       769 buildings/facilities were connected to the networks in the three countries, exceeding the original
                        and revised targets of 235 and 744 respectively. This included 233 buildings/facilities in Saint Vicente
                        and Grenadines (original and revised targets 74 and 274); 352 in Saint Lucia (original and revised
                        targets 95 and 350), and 184 in Grenada (original and revised targets 66 and 120).
                       The project implemented a regional Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) arrangement through pooling
                        the procurement of broadband networks for the countries in one contract. This approach contributed to
                        realizing scale economies and generating a project size intended to attract major domestic and
                        regional telecommunications players. The deployment of the broadband network was overseen by the
                        individual Project Management Units (PMUs), as opposed to relying on an external management
                        consultancy for enhancing local capacity.
                       The pooled procurement included a component to support setting an Internet Exchange Point (IXP) at
                        Saint Vincent and the Grenadines which did not have an IXP, and integrating the Digicel network to
                        the existing IXPs in Saint Lucia and Grenada where the internet service providers had already set up
                        peering arrangements independent of Bank support. Regional workshops were conducted by the CTU
                        as targeted to help the operators in the countries to understand the benefits of IXPs and on using the
                        infrastructure.
                       Eight policies for regional open access were implemented, exceeding the target of two. The policies
                        covered regional coordination, harmonizing policies and strategies at the regional level, and
                        knowledge transfer between countries.
                       The CTU provided support for implementing the regulatory framework to the Organization of Eastern
                        Caribbean States (OECS) for further increasing regional competition in the areas of: (i) The legal and
                        regulatory framework for open access and broadband infrastructure; (ii) Electronic communications
                        law; (iii) Consumer protection legislation; and (iv) Wholesale access law. The CTU also conducted


                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



       workshops on subjects such as harmonizing regional regulations and emerging telecommunication
       regulatory issues, and provided support for implementing standardized skills and harmonizing
       certification programs that were accredited internationally.

Some activities had not been completed as targeted in the project countries at closure: (i) additional Wi-Fi
hotspot to further improve last mile access had not been installed in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and
Saint Lucia due to procurement delays; (ii) the activity associated with designing and commissioning a data
center in Grenada had also not been completed. According to the clarifications provided by the team, this
activity in Grenada has been rolled over to a follow-on project.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase the number of people in the three countries with
access to regional broadband networks.

      68,286 beneficiaries in the three countries had access to regional broadband networks, exceeding the
       target of 66,500. The beneficiaries included the government, schools and other public service
       facilities, and the private sector. The infrastructure aided in digital transformation of businesses. For
       instance, the roll-out of middle-mile broadband networks under PPP, aided in further deployment of
       last mile networks (not funded by the project) which enabled the participating countries to reach 95%
       3G coverage and 90% of 4G coverage.
      The number of beneficiaries in the three countries disaggregated by gender was as follows:
              o Saint Vincent and the Grenadines: 20,586 (original and revised targets 15,000 and 5,000).
                53.70% of the beneficiaries were women (target 50%).
              o Saint Lucia: 22,500 (original and revised targets 30,500 and 9,000). 45% of the beneficiaries
                were women, short of the target of 50%.
              o Grenada: 25,200 (original and revised targets 21,000 and 7,000. 54% of the beneficiaries were
                women (target 50%).

Given that the intended outcome was achieved and most of the activities were completed, efficacy of this
objective is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The targets for PDO 1 were not revised downwards with the first restructuring of the project.

Revised Rationale
The outputs and outcome referred above are relevant after the first restructuring of the project.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To advance the development of ICT enabled services in the Caribbean Region.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as supporting businesses in the IT/ITES industries and
training people on ICT skills were aimed at addressing the development challenges of inadequate support to
entrepreneurship in the ICT sector and lack of ICT skills in the countries. The outputs of the activities were
likely to increase the number of businesses incubated under the training program, and increase the number of
people enrolled the IT/ITES skills training program. These outputs were likely to aid in the long-term
development outcome of increasing external competitiveness. The causal links between activities, outputs
and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were monitorable. The theory of change explicitly
assumes that: (i) the private sector is willing to roll-out fiber optic networks; and (ii) citizens of the three
countries are willing to develop ICT skills.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 18 - 20 , pages 33 - 35 and pages 38 - 40).

      3,518 people in the three countries were trained in ICT skills, far short of the original target of
       51,600. The number of people trained in Grenada 724 (original target 19,000); Saint Lucia 1,210
       (target 16,300); and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 1,584 (target 16,300).
      799 people were certified after training, far short of the original target of 18,600. The number of people
       certified in Grenada 161 (target 11,000); Saint Lucia 288 (target 4,700); and Saint Vincent and the
       Grenadines 350 (target 2,900).
      102 businesses received support in the countries, far short of the original target of 281. The number of
       businesses supported in Grenada 53 (target 100); in Saint Lucia 25 (target 125); and in Saint Vicente
       and Grenadines 24 (target 56).
      61% of the surveyed beneficiaries of the Caribbean Regional Communications Infrastructure Program
       were satisfied with the program, exceeding the original and revised targets of 50%. 95% of the
       surveyed beneficiaries in Grenada, 88% of the beneficiaries in Saint Lucia and 85% of the
       beneficiaries in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reported satisfaction with the program.

Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to lead to the outcome of increasing the number of people employed in the
IT/ITES industries.

      2,924 people were employed in the ICT sector in the three countries when the project closed, well
       short of the original target of 11,000. The number of people in Grenada were 204 (target 3,000); Saint
       Lucia 2,500 (target 4,000); and Saint Vincente and Grenadines 220 (target 4,000).

Given that the outcomes were far short of the original target, efficacy of this objective is modest before the
project restructuring.




                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)




                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To advance the development of ICT enabled services in the Caribbean Region.
                            The PDO remained unchanged, although the targets were substantially revised downwards.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Outputs.

                                  3,518 people were trained in ICT skills, exceeding the revised target of 3,400. The number of people
                                   trained in Grenada 724 (target 300); Saint Lucia 1,210 (target 250); and Saint Vincent and the
                                   Grenadines 1,584 (target 1,600).
                                  799 people were certified after training in ICT skills, achieving the revised target 790. The number of
                                   people certified in Grenada 161 (short of the revised target 290); Saint Lucia 288 (revised target 290);
                                   and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 350 (short of the revised target 250).
                                  102 businesses received support in the countries, exceeding the revised target of 80. The number of
                                   businesses supported in Grenada 53 (short of the revised target 60); in Saint Lucia 25 (target 20); and
                                   in Saint Vicente and Grenadines 24 (target 23).

                            Outcomes.

                                  2,924 were employed in the three countries when the project closed, exceeding the revised target of
                                   1,300. The number of people employed Grenada 204 (short of the revised target 420); Saint Lucia
                                   2,500 (target 400); Saint Vincente and Grenadines 220 (short of the revised target 500).

                            Given that the outcomes were realized for the most part, efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial after
                            project restructuring.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of PDO 1 is substantial as the outcomes were realized. Efficacy of PDO 2 is modest given that the
                            outcomes were far short of the original target.




                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Efficacy of PDO 1 is substantial as the outcomes were realized. Efficacy of PDO 2 is substantial after
         restructuring as the revised targets were realized.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis of the CARCIP was conducted at appraisal and at closure. The
analysis focused on activities which accounted for 91% of the appraisal estimate and actual cost. The economic
benefits were assumed to come from contributions to regional economic growth.

The benefit-cost ratio was US$10.08 (that is, for every US$1 invested through the project, economic benefits of
US$10.08 would be accrued over the project's lifetime). At appraisal, the overall Net Present Value (NPV) was
US$2.09 billion, with an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 60%. However, the actual NPV when the
project closed was US$11.74 million and the ex-post EIRR was between 5.5% and 9.2% for the three countries.
The reason for the difference between the ex-ante EIRR and the actual EIRR was that the economic analysis at
appraisal included the benefits to regional growth from the expected joining of the Dominican Republic (a much
larger country) in the first phase of the CARCIP program. However, the Dominican Republic did not join the first
phase.

Administrative and Operational Issues. The actual cost of deploying a regional broadband network and
training and business incubation grants were substantially underestimated. This led to a financing gap and
necessitated AF for the project. The delays in implementing the regional broadband infrastructure and finalizing
the PPP arrangement) contributed to the extension of the project closing date. According to the clarifications
provided by the team, the project lost US$7.19 million in foregone economic benefits due to the implementation
delays and that necessitated other cost increases such as supervision costs.

In sum, overall efficiency is rated as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                          Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    91.00
Appraisal                                                 60.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    91.00
ICR Estimate                                              7.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets. With a high relevance of objectives, modest efficacy and efficiency, the
overall outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (3).

Under the revised outcome targets. With a high relevance of objectives, substantial efficacy and modest
efficiency, the overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory (4).

Taking these ratings into account and weighing by the amount disbursed before (US$8.97 million out of a total
US$32.5 million) and after project restructuring (0.276*3+0.724*4 = 3.724), overall outcome is Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/ ownership. The risk to development outcome is low. Developing the ICT sector
remains critical to the regional countries, as evidenced by ongoing Bank-financed ICT regional projects (the
Caribbean Digital Transformation project, Grenada's Digital Government for Resilience Project, and the
OECS E-Government Regional Integration Project). The ICR (paragraph 97) notes that this project facilitated
the implementation of other government projects such as the DigiGov Project in Saint Lucia and the GiNET
project in Grenada. Further, some activities that were unable to be funded under this project were to be
covered under the Bank-financed Digital Transformation Project. The team clarified that the activity related to
the data center in Grenada has been rolled over to a follow on project. These factors indicate that
government commitment to developing the ICT sector remains a priority to the regional countries.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons from the previous Bank-financed regional programs
  globally, such as the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program in East and Southern Africa, the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



  Central Africa Backbone project, the West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Program and
  the Pacific Islands Connectivity program (PAD, paragraph 15). Lessons incorporated at design included:
  (i) focusing on regional and country priorities for securing ownership; (ii) tailoring approach to the needs
  of each participating country; (iii) combining investments in regional ICT infrastructure with activities
  aimed to improve the policy and regulatory environments for the ICT sector.

  The Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU) - a regional institution established to facilitate the
  development of the ICT sector in Caribbean countries - was responsible for overall coordination. The
  Project Management Units (PMUs) in the three countries were responsible for day-to-day
  implementation. The PMUs were familiar with Bank procedures having executed Bank-financed projects
  (PAD, paragraph 17). The implementation arrangements could have been strengthened since the
  countries still lacked sufficient capacity.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal including high risk, with the weak implementation capacity at the
  regional level and in the three countries. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included identifying
  national and regional champions and hiring a coordinator and fiduciary specialists in CTU. With mitigation
  measures, the project risk was rated as moderate. However, the mitigation measures proved to
  insufficient, as evidenced by the serious delays during implementation. The arrangements made at
  appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate, but there should have been more
  attention to the lengthy and cumbersome processes for potential beneficiaries of the business incubation
  grants. The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that some recipients waited up to two years for a grant award.

  There were significant shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry. Component one activity (regional connectivity
  infrastructure) was not fully ready for implementation. This resulted in substantial delays and necessitated
  repeated extension of the closing date. The preparatory phase underestimated the time it would take to
  execute the regional broadband network. Further, the preparation team had not undertaken an
  assessment of the legal and regulatory framework for the PPP at appraisal and this led to substantial
  delays in finalizing the PPP arrangements. The costs associated with deploying a regional broadband
  network and funding training and business incubation grants were substantially underestimated. The
  results framework had a number of flaws (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Nineteen Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were filed over the project lifetime, implying twice a year
 supervision missions. The ICR (paragraph 93) notes that the key task team members and staff from the
 CTU monitored progress and provided support to the PMUs in the three countries. The continuity of
 leadership was maintained with one administrative task team leader (TTL) during preparation and one
 during implementation. According to the clarifications provided by the team, there were three co TTLs
 during implementation. The ICR notes that the transitions were well-managed. The project was proactive in
 restructuring the project in the face of realities on the ground (although the supervision team could have
 done more to intervene in the slow processing of business incubation grants). The supervision team



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



 corrected the deficiencies in the M&E framework (discussed in section 9) and the support provided by the
 team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

 Bank performance at quality-at-entry was moderately unsatisfactory and quality of supervision was
 satisfactory. Since overall outcome was in the satisfactory range, overall Bank performance is rated as
 moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PMUs in the three countries were responsible for collecting data and reporting progress. The CTU was
 responsible at the regional level for collating the data from the three countries (PAD, paragraph 46). The
 two key outcomes - the number of people connected to the regional broadband network and the number of
 people employed in the IT/ITES industries in the three countries - were appropriate and attributable to the
 project.

 However, there were some M&E framework shortcomings. One, the PDO level indicators in the PAD
 lacked adequate detail in terms of methodology for measuring progress, and two, the outcome targets for
 the number of people employed in IT/ITES industries was unrealistic relative to the funding envelope.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was adjusted and the indicator for monitoring the number of people employed in
  the IT/ITES industries was revised downwards. The methodology for collecting data for monitoring
  progress was clarified with the restructuring of the project.

  The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that the project lacked routine reporting for the activities under the skills
  training activity once implementation commenced, due to the heavy reliance on part-time consultants.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for restructuring the project and informing decision making by the government
  and the Bank. The ICR notes that during implementation both Saint Lucia and Grenada lacked capacity
  for monitoring the business support program. This was rectified by the Bank through targeted outreach




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



  to the business support program based on M&E data. The team clarified that the Bank additional
  financing supported M&E in all three countries, especially completion surveys and reports.

  In sum, M&E is rated modest overall, in view of the shortcomings of the M&E design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank Safeguard
   policies. Four safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.01); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Safeguards, Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (paragraph
   58) noted that the potential adverse social and environmental impacts were expected to be minor. As the
   exact location of the backbone networks and regional links were not known at appraisal, a site-specific
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was not conducted. However, a regional ESIA was
   prepared and publicly-disclosed to address issues pertaining to environmental safeguards and safeguards
   on natural habitats and physical cultural resources (PAD, paragraph 59).

   The ICR (paragraph 85) notes that the compliance with environmental was satisfactory during
   implementation. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment was completed to assess the
   environmental risk from offshore activities before works began in 2019. The PMUs in the three countries
   regularly updated the Environmental and Social Management Framework and had adequate social
   specialists. According to the clarifications provided by the team, there were no issues with the safeguards
   on natural habitats and physical cultural resources.

   Involuntary Resettlement. As the specific program areas were not known, a regional Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 59). The ICR
   (paragraph 85) notes that there were no resettlement activities under the project. The Grievance Redress
   Mechanism (GRM) was implemented satisfactorily with no breaches in compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment at appraisal. The
   PMUs in the participating countries had experience in implementing previous Bank-financed projects. The
   assessment concluded that the financial management risk was moderate (paragraph 54).

   The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that the project's financial management was moderately satisfactory during
   implementation. The project complied with the financial covenants. Although there were some minor issues

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



   during the project lifetime (such as lapses in review and reconciliation for two months due to staff
   absence), none of them had an adverse impact on financial reporting. The interim financial reports and the
   annual audits were submitted on time. According to the clarifications provided by the team, Saint Lucia's
   audit reports were unqualified, Grenada's final audit was unqualified, and although Saint Vicente and
   Grenadines audit reports were qualified for two years (2016 and 2017), they were unqualified for the
   remaining years.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the national PMUs and the CTU at
   appraisal. The national PMUs were well-staffed with procurement experts with experience in executing
   Bank-financed projects. However, the CTU did not have experience with Bank projects. The project design
   hence had provisions for strengthening the CTU through hiring an external procurement specialist.

   The ICR (paragraph 84) notes that procurement performance was moderately satisfactory. Despite
   challenges during implementation, high-value contracts were completed by the closing date, with very
   small disbursements pending in the three countries. The ICR does not report any case of mis
   procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any unintended impact from the project.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from implementing this project, with some adaptation of
language.

1. An assessment of the technical and institutional challenges that are likely to be
encountered in regional projects can help in reducing delays during implementation,
especially in countries with low capacities. The experience of this project showed that while

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)



there are potential cost savings associated with a pooled procurement approach, the risk is high that
economic benefits may be foregone in trying to harmonize legal and regulatory frameworks during
implementation.

2. Developing a regional approach to digital development may require long-term engagement
and extended project timelines. While the argument to adopt a regional approach has merits in
small states, the experience of this project showed that in low capacity environments, engagement
may require technical assistance, technical and implementation capacity building and financing to
continue operations over a prolonged time period.

3. Identifying a strong regional champion can be particularly helpful in projects of a regional
nature. The experience of this project showed that while the regional grant to the Caribbean
Telecommunications Union (CTU) was small in terms of the financial amount, it was still critical to
enable regional coordination and discussions at the regional and at the local levels.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change provided in the text clearly articulates the causal links
between the project activities, outputs and the intended outcomes. The quality of evidence provided is
adequate to assess project performance. The ICR candidly acknowledges the difficulties encountered with a
pooled procurement approach and appropriately does a split rating of objectives, given the rather substantial
reduction in targets following the project restructuring.

There was few shortcomings: (i) the ICR (table 3 page 21) reports incorrect outcome rating after restructuring.
After restructuring, outcome should have been moderately satisfactory (high relevance of objectives, substantial
efficacy and modest efficiency) instead of satisfactory as reported in the ICR; and (ii) the ICR provides little
details on whether there were issues with the safeguards on physical cultural resources and natural habitats
and on whether the audits were unqualified. The clarifications were however subsequently provided by the
team.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
6R (APL1A) Communic. Infrast. Prog. (P114963)




                                                                             Page 17 of 17
