     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022961

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P131592                                    SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16552                                   31-Dec-2019                                          4,179,325.64

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Aug-2014                                31-Aug-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            7,900,000.00                                    7,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             7,900,000.00                                    4,179,325.64

 Actual                                         4,179,325.64                                    4,179,325.64




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally               Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Supported Extended Biogas Project (SREP) as articulated
   in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 19) was identical to the one in the Grant Agreement
   (page 5) and aimed to:

   "promote large off-grid biogas energy generation in Nepal."



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)




   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two outcomes under the same
   objective as follows:

   Outcome 1: To promote the generation of off-grid biogas for thermal application from large-scale biogas
   projects.

   Outcome 2: To promote the generation of off-grid biogas-based electricity.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following two components:

   1. Market Development Enabling Environment -Technical Assistance (appraisal cost: US$1.0 million,
   amount after restructuring: US$1.50 million, actual cost: US$1.26 million). This component included
   three main activities as follows:

   (a) Identification and Pre-Feasibility Studies. Launch of a transparent, web portal (bilingual in Nepali and
   English) for applications from existing companies to identify and invest in large biogas sub-projects. Sub-
   projects should focus on harnessing organic waste. Applicants must agree to follow SREP principles, which
   permits the import of technology, requires leveraging funds from other sources, and also includes
   compliance with the Environmental and Social Framework. The published Government of Nepal (GoN)
   subsidy policy would apply to sub-projects to “buy-down” the initial capital cost required, with levels of
   subsidy varying depending on the nature of the sub-project. Regardless of the type of sub-project sponsor,
   all sub-projects would be evaluated to ensure that the sub-project would perform effectively and sustainably.
   (b) Detailed Feasibility Studies. Nepali companies’ would request for TA support to carry out the detailed
   feasibility study would be supported on a cost-sharing TA basis.
   (c) Post Construction Third Party Verification. The Alternative Energy Promotion Center (AEPC) would
   appoint a technical review committee (TRC) to meet monthly and evaluate sub-projects received. Minutes of
   the meetings would be published on AEPC’s website. Separate TA support would be provided to AEPC for
   periodic evaluation of lessons learned from the ongoing large biogas program.

   2. Financing of Investments (appraisal cost: US$6.90 million, amount after restructuring: US$6.23
   million, actual cost: US$2.79). AEPC would use government funds as per its published subsidy policy, to
   provide a capital cost buy-down and thereby to achieve financial closure for competitively selected large
   biogas investments led by the private sector. The plants would likely to be sustainable as the private sector
   undertakes design, construction, financing, and operation and maintenance. SREP funds would be drawn

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



  down by AEPC after the plant is commissioned and operational and would serve to reimburse AEPC for a
  portion of the capital cost buy-down it has already provided. By this method, SREP would only financing
  plants that work. SREP funds would be provided as a Subsidy Payment, which would be a partial
  reimbursement of the eligible subsidy under GoN’s Feb 2013 Subsidy Policy.

  Revised Components
  A new Component 3 (Project Management Support, amount after restructuring: US$0.17 million,
  actual cost: US$0.13 million) was added to clarify that capacity building and support to AEPC on all
  aspects of project management and implementation including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) would be
  covered through the first restructuring in 2016. Additional fund allocation to support capacity development
  and AEPC’s Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was made through the second restructuring in August 2019
  and the fourth restructuring in April 2020.

  Component 2 (Financing of Investments), Subcomponent 2(b): subsidy payment for the partial financing of
  selected demonstration sub-projects was added.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project cost was estimated to be US$35.50 million. This amount was revised downwards
  to US$14.80 million. The actual cost according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$7.75 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through a Grant worth US$7.90 million from the Scaling Up
  Renewable Energy Program in Low Income Countries (SREP) Multi-donor Trust Fund. The actual amount
  disbursed was US$4.18 million or about 53% of the estimated amount (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to contribute US$27.60 million of counterpart funds.
  This was revised downwards to US$6.90 million. The actual amount according to the ICR Data Sheet (page
  2) was US$3.57 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on August 27, 2014 and became effective three months later on
  November 24, 2014. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on January 19, 2018, which was about
  three years and two months after effectiveness. The PAD did not include a specific date for the MTR.
  However, since the project was designed as a five year operation, conducting the MTR after three years
  into implementation was reasonable given that the project was extended for twenty moths. The project was
  expected to close on December 31, 2019. The closing date was extended for twenty months to close on
  August 31, 2021. The ICR did not report an explicit reason for the twenty months extension.

  The project was restructured four times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring, as follows:

  1. On July 13, 2016, when the amount disbursed was US$0.33 million, in order to modify the Results
  Framework, change in components and cost and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

  2. On August 28, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$1.20 million, in order to modify the Results
  Framework, change in components and cost, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, change in
  disbursements arrangements, and change in Legal Covenants.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



   3. On November 14, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$1.94 million, in order to extend the project’s
   closing date from December 31, 2019 to August 31, 2021.

   4. On April 7, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$2.02 million, in order to modify the Results
   Framework, change in components and cost, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, and
   change in disbursements arrangements.



   Rationale for Changes and the implication on the Original Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO
   indicators were unchanged, the target values for PDO Indicators 1 and 2 (off-grid biogas and electricity
   generated) were revised thrice through restructurings. These revisions were relevant to reflect the total
   biogas generated for thermal application in Year five of implementation for PDO1 and to correct an
   overestimation of the end target for PDO2. Through restructurings, a new component (Management
   Support) was added to support capacity development and strengthen the PIU capacity. Changes also
   included streamlining the approval process of biogas projects to expedite disbursement through the
   introduction of milestone-based disbursements to resolve the gap between physical progress of sub-project
   construction and actual disbursement. Streamlining of the approval process facilitated the sub-project
   progress and contributed to increase the number of sub-projects operated by the project (ICR, paragraph
   21). Overall, the changes introduced were relevant and strengthened the causal links between the financed
   activities and outcomes, which would contribute to the achievement of PDO and longer-term outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Nepal's total electricity installed capacity was 706 MW (mainly through hydropower)
which was supplemented by purchases from India. However, the country was facing an energy crisis of
unprecedented proportions as the installed capacity plus supplements from India were inadequate to meet
demand. This results in forced load shedding for prolonged periods with attendant economic
consequences. Nepal had very good potential for expanding biogas production. Biogas can be used on-site
for cooking, for industrial thermal heating processes (e.g. steam production), and also to produce electricity
in retro-fitted generators that can use both diesel and biogas. Recovery of Biogas for productive uses also
contributes to climate change mitigation (PAD, paragraph 6).

Previous Bank experience. The World Bank is investing in Biogas technologies as part of the climate
finance on the mitigation and adaptation side. In developing countries such as the Burkina Faso,
Philippines, Nepal and Rwanda, the Bank supported the development of biogas projects, which are crucial
to the collection of waste that can be transformed into renewable energy sources.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS, FY2014–2018). Specifically, the pillar of “Increasing Economic Growth and
Competitiveness”, and in particular the Outcome of “Improved access to, supply of, and reliability of growth-
enhancing infrastructure and services in strategic sectors.” The project also aimed to pilot and demonstrate



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



the economic, social, and environmental viability of low carbon development pathways which was a stated
impact objective for SREP.

At completion, the PDO remained in line with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2019–
2023). Specifically, Focus Area 2 "Private Sector-Led Jobs and Growth". The PDO was also in line
with Objective 2.1 “Improved power generation capacity and access to electricity” under Focus Area 2. The
PDO encompassed increased off-grid biogas-based electricity generation, which directly contributes to
power supply through renewable energy solutions. The project also involved private sector engagement
and helped lower investment risk, through facilitating investment in the large biogas sector by providing
capital cost buy-down of sub-projects in combination with AEPC’s subsidy policy. The importance of private
sector engagement in the sector was emphasized under Objective 2.1, and further contributed to Objective
2.4 “Improved regulatory environment for competitiveness” through enhancing the investment climate in the
large biogas sector in the country, and Objective 2.5 “Improved income opportunities” through creating job
opportunities to construct and operate biogas plants for developers and service providers.

The PDO was also in line with the SREP objective to “pilot and demonstrate, as a response to the
challenges of climate change, the economic, social and environmental viability of low carbon development
pathways in the energy sector by creating new economic opportunities and increasing energy access
through the use of renewable energy."

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with National Rural and
Renewable Energy Program (NRREP). Specifically, the NRREP component for "Business Development for
Renewable Energy and Productive Energy Use."

At completion, the PDO remained in line with Nepal’s National 15th Periodic Plan (FY2019/20–2023/24),
which aimed to install 500 large biogas plants and 0.2 million units of small biogas digesters that can
reduce the annual import of 40,000 MT (Metric Ton) of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the PDO was aligned with the CPF Objective
2.5 “Improved income opportunities” and the SREP objective of “creating new economic opportunities,” this
aspect was not "adequately incorporated into the PDO or PDO outcome indicators, which focused only on
the amount of biogas energy generation (ICR, paragraph 25)." The ICR (paragraph 25) correctly pointed
out that "commercial viability and sustainability of the operation is key for ensuring longer-term impact,
capturing the creation and development of a market as a result of the project’s intervention in the PDO or
PDO outcome indicators should have enabled further alignment with the CPF and the SREP objective."
Furthermore, the PDO and the PDO outcome indicators failed to reflect or capture the gender co-benefits
aspect, which was emphasized in both the CPF and the SREP. Capturing the gender co-benefits would
have reflected more alignment with the CPF and SREP impact objective. Finally, the PDO formulation is at
input level (to promote biogas generation). The two expected outcomes identified are at a higher level in the
results chain than the PDO formulation itself. Therefore, the PDO formulation does not capture the full
range of expected project results.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. This rating
reflects minor shortcoming related to the market development and gender co-benefits aspects, which were
not reflected in the PDO.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To promote large off-grid biogas energy generation in Nepal.

                Rationale
                Original Theory of Change (ToC). The reconstructed ToC in the ICR has a better formulated PDO
                (expected result at PDO level) than the PDO formulation of the project. To achieve the stated objective, the
                project would finance selected large biogas investments led by the private sector and provide technical
                assistance to develop biogas markets. In addition, while it was not captured in the activities under the
                components, Intermediate Results Indicator (IRI) 2 envisaged trainings provided to companies to evaluate
                and appraise large sub-projects upon request. These activities were expected to create and operate off-grid
                commercial and municipal generation plants using off-grid biogas, and increase the capacity of the private
                sector to commission large biogas sub-projects. This was expected to promote large off-grid biogas energy
                generation in Nepal. In the longer term, the project would contribute to (a) increased energy access and
                energy use from renewable energy sources, (b) reduction in GHG emissions through displacement of fossil
                fuels, and (c) creation of a new market and economic opportunities in the large biogas sector, in line with the
                CPS and SREP objective.

                Revised ToC. The revised ToC was identical to the original one, except that it included a project
                management support activity under a new component to emphasize capacity building and support to AEPC
                on all aspects of project management and implementation, including M&E. These activities were expected to
                strengthen the capacity of the public and private sectors to commission large biogas sub-projects. Also, the
                revised ToC reflected that financing was made available for demonstration sub-projects by AEPC, and the
                approval process of sub-projects financed was streamlined to facilitate sub-project progress and contributed
                to increase the number of sub-projects operated by the project. These changes strengthened the causal links
                toward outcomes.

                Critical Assumption that underpinned the achievement of the stated Objective:

                1. Availability of a pre-existing sub-projects pipeline.

                2. Companies are expected to retain contents of training courses and lessons learnt.

                3. Sub-projects are expected to remain commercially viable post completion.

                The activities in the original ToC and revised ToC were connected to the stated outcomes in a plausible
                causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



Outputs

The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise:

Component 1 (TA)

      640 large biogas proposals (570 commercial and 60 municipal) were submitted for investment
       evaluation (original target: 400, revised target: 350, both targets exceeded).
      40 companies were trained to evaluate and appraise large biogas sub-projects (target: 8, exceeded).
       While this target was exceeded, the ICR (paragraph 31) noted that "knowledge retention from the
       trainings were found to be insufficient due to the frequent human resources turnover in the sector,
       which resulted in the lack of adequate knowledge of technical designs and operation and maintenance
       (O&M), even at the Project closing."

Component 2 (Financing of Investments)

      193 commercial off-grid generation plants were created and operated by the project (target: 340, not
       achieved). This under achievement was attributed to significant implementation delay of the project
       (ICR, paragraph 30).
      One municipal off-grid generation plants was created and operated by the project (target: 10, not
       achieved).

Outcome

1. To promote the generation of off-grid biogas for thermal application from large-scale (over 12 m3)
biogas projects. By project completion, and as a result of the project’s financial and the TA support, a total of
17,777,395 m3 of biogas was generated by thermal application sub-projects which represented about
111% of the final target of 16,050,186 m3 (baseline was zero as there were no large-scale biogas plants at
appraisal, ICR paragraph 28). This result demonstrated that the project was successful in introducing and
promoting novel biogas technologies in the country.

2. To promote the generation of off-grid biogas-based electricity. By project completion, a total of 4.94
Giga Watt hour (GWh) of electricity was generated from off-grid sources by sub-projects financed and
supported by the project, which represented about 110% of the final revised target of 4.5 GWh, but was
significantly lower than the original target of 30 GWh (the baseline was zero as there was no electricity
generation from biogas at appraisal, ICR paragraph 29). This amount represented about 110% of the final
target of 4.5 GWh and exceeded the last two revised targets (2.23 GWh and 4.5 GWh), but fell short of the
original and the first revised targets (30 GWh and 5.73 GWh). According to the ICR (Annex 7), the original
target value (30 GWh) for PDO Indicator 2 was overestimated. While the increase in total biogas-based
electricity generation as a result of the project’s intervention did not reach the level that was expected at
appraisal, the ICR noted that the improvement in the electricity supply situation in the country decreased the
interest among developers to implement biogas plants for electricity generation. Hence, the target for biogas
electricity generation was reduced. Also, 193 commercial sub-projects were commissioned against the target
of 340 and 1 municipal sub-project was commissioned against the target of 10. The ICR (paragraph 30) noted
that an additional 11 large sub-projects were under construction.

A notable achievement by the project was the creation of a large biogas market in the country. This did not
exist prior to the project intervention when biogas generation was for captive use only, at the household

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



                            scale. A 2019 market assessment showed that the number of projected large biogas plants was 346, and the
                            expected total biogas generation and electricity generation were estimated as 30,056,582 m3 per year and
                            2.07 GW per year (ICR, paragraph 32).

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its target on biogas generation (PDO outcome
                            1) and exceeded its revised target on electricity generation (PDO outcome 2). However, the project target on
                            the number of sub-projects operated (Intermediate Outcome indicator 1 ) and on increased capacity
                            (intermediate outcome indicator 2) were not achieved. As noted above the project had a positive impact on
                            market creation. This suggests that key outcomes in biogas and electricity generation and the number of
                            large biogas plants are expected to be further achieved. Therefore, the efficacy with which the PDO was
                            achieved is rated Substantial despite some shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project exceeded its target on biogas generation (PDO outcome 1)
                            and exceeded its revised target on electricity generation (PDO outcome 2). However, the project the target on
                            the number of sub-projects operated (Intermediate Outcome indicator 1) and on increased capacity
                            (intermediate outcome indicator 2) were not achieved. As noted above the project had a positive impact on
                            market creation. This suggests that key outcomes in biogas and electricity generation and the number of
                            large biogas plants are expected to be further achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex ante

                               The results of the economic analysis of ten biogas sub-projects ready for financing indicated benefit cost
                                ratios of over 2.0 and economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) close to 30%.
                               Carbon cash flows were not taken into account.

   ex post


                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



      Economic analysis of 200 thermal application sub-projects (190 already commissioned and 10 under
       construction) had a net present value (NPV) US$51.2 million and the estimated EIRR was 58%. The
       NPV of the five electricity generation sub-projects (four already commissioned and one under
       construction) was US$26.4 million and the EIRR was 165%. Combining both thermal and electricity
       generation sub-projects, the NPV was US$77.6 million and the EIRR was 83%.
      GHG emission reduction. Substituting biogas for Liquified Propane Gas (LPG) would reduce carbon
       dioxide emissions by approximately 3,600 MT per year, while using biogas instead of diesel to generate
       electricity would reduce emissions by a further 1,600 MT per year for a total reduction of approximately
       5,200 MT annually. The present value of these savings using the ‘Low’ shadow price of carbon would be
       US$2.5 million, while the value using the ‘High’ shadow price would be US$4.9 million.
      Implementation Efficiency. Sub-project construction was slow and experienced delays which resulted in
       many of the project impacts not being included in the ex post assessment. The implementation of sub-
       projects was further disrupted with the COVID-19 restrictions which put activities on hold for 12 months
       (ICR, paragraph 36). The project experienced frequent turnover of Task Team Leadership, and was
       restructured three times to modify design and the indicator targets. For a small operation, such events
       increased supervision costs to reach11% of the total disbursed amount, which suggested inefficiency
       (ICR, paragraph 36). Finally, the project disbursed only 53% of the approved amount.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex post EIRR at 83% was solidly above the ex ante rate at 30%.
However, efficiency suffered from three notable shortcomings: first, the project suffered from implementation
delays and was extended by twenty months, second, at 11% of total cost, supervision costs were relatively high,
and third, the project disbursed only 53% of the estimated amount at appraisal despite the twenty months
extension. Therefore, efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                               30.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                            83.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project exceeded its
target on biogas generation (PDO outcome 1) and exceeded its revised target on electricity generation (PDO
outcome 2). However, the target on the number of sub-projects operated (Intermediate Outcome indicator 1)

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



and on increased capacity (intermediate outcome indicator 2) were both not achieved. Efficiency was rated
Modest. While the ex post EIRR at 83% was solidly above the ex ante rate at 30%, efficiency suffered notable
shortcomings including significant implementation delays, relatively high supervision costs (11% of total
disbursed amount), and low disbursement (only 53% of the estimated Grant amount was disbursed despite a
twenty months extension).

Based on the ratings for the three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy, and Efficiency), the overall
Outcome rating of the project is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed two main risks that could potentially impact the development outcome of this project:

1. The risk related to the continued operation and commercial viability of the biogas sub-
projects. The longer-term outcomes and impacts of the project are contingent on continued production of
electricity and biogas as well as maintaining the biogas market in Nepal after graduation of the Bank’s
support and subsidy by the GoN. According to the ICR (paragraph 72) "several sub-project developers
expressed concerns with their ability to continue maintaining and operating the sub-projects on their own,
given their insufficient understanding of technical designs and O&M mechanism, and their limited ability to
procure requisite expertise, manpower, technology, and spare parts in the local Nepalese market in an
efficient and cost-effective manner." There are concerns with regards to full commercial viability of sub-
projects and sustainability of the operation. While the project’s support in combination with AEPC’s
subsidy contributed to the market creation and development toward the commercialization in the sector, cost-
sharing support was transitional until the private sector became familiar with the technology and risk
perceptions were reduced. Therefore, until full and sufficient market development is realized, further support
by the Bank and/or AEPC is required. According to the ICR (paragraph 72) further support on the large
biogas sector through another project is currently planned by the Bank.

2. The risk related to the need for regulatory clarity and policy change to better support the biogas
market in Nepal. Biogas applications in Nepal are expected to expand beyond thermal and electricity
generation into transportation use. Using biogas as a transport fuel could constitute an important client
market for biogas producers and help improve the country’s energy autonomy. However, regulatory issues
related to this application are not clear in Nepal. Therefore, an improved regulatory framework is needed
to create a better enabling environment for biogas uses. This will consequently improve the sustainability of
the development outcomes achieved by this operation (ICR, paragraph 73).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Government of Nepal sought to promote private investment in large biogas plants, by providing initial
  limited TA and cost-sharing grant support from the public sector, with support from external partners
  (PAD, paragraph 7). While the PDO of the project was in line with SREP goals and the Bank's country
  partnership goals, it was poorly formulated (see section 3 for more details). The project design aimed
  to introduce large biogas plants, which were successful in neighboring countries but not in Nepal, despite
  good potential. The design featured a transitional cost-sharing investment support and technical
  assistance (TA) support, using the World Bank-administered US$7.9 million tranche of SREP grant.

  The design aimed to enhance incentives, and manage risks of poor design or inferior workmanship
  during construction. In turn, this was expected to conserve SREP resources to be used only for
  functioning plants, and not for poorly designed or nonfunctioning plants (ICR, paragraph 5). A notable
  design shortcoming was the lack of capacity building and trainings to the PIU and stakeholders as these
  were not properly included as activities. This shortcoming had a cascading effect on the project as
  implementation suffered delays, the project required restructurings, the full achievement of the targeted
  number of sub-projects commissioned was hindered, and the private sector suffered from sustainability
  issues (ICR, paragraph 45). Also, the sub-projects approval process was redundant, and the original
  disbursement mechanism was not aligned with physical progress for larger sub-projects, which led to
  slow disbursement. These shortcomings were later addressed through restructuring.

  Six main risks were identified at appraisal relating mainly to stakeholders capacity, governance and
  project related risks. The PAD included a number of mitigation measures that were logical. While the risk
  related to limited stakeholder capacity was identified at appraisal and the need for training was noted,
  such support was not appropriately included either in the activities under components or outcome
  indicators (ICR, paragraph 68).

  M&E design suffered from shortcomings related to the Results Framework (RF). Specifically, the RF
  lacked critical indicators, suffered a disconnect in terms of the logical sequence between the intermediate
  results indicators (IRIs) and the PDO indicators, combined with inaccurate and /or overestimation
  of targets (see section 9a for details).

  Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This
  rating reflected significant shortcomings related to a poorly formulated PDO, weaknesses in the design of
  components and activities including not incorporating sufficient risk mitigation measures, M&E design
  weaknesses, and an inefficient mechanism for disbursement of project funds.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 This project experienced external challenges during implementation. These included a severe earthquake
 in April 2015 followed by a fuel crisis, and finally COVID-19 restrictions in 2020. These external events
 delayed the implementation of sub-projects and slowed down disbursements. In addition, Nepal has a
 challenging mountainous geography that made supervision of individual sub-projects difficult. The Bank

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



 conducted 11 supervision missions. According to the ICR (paragraph 69) the "team generally demonstrated
 expected levels of supervision and quality reporting through implementation." The team worked
 to address design issues and facilitate implementation toward achievement of the PDO. Most importantly,
 the team addressed design shortcomings through restructurings to incorporate additional support on TA
 and capacity development. Also, critical delays in disbursement were addressed by redesigning the
 disbursement mechanism. In addition, the Bank team’s presence in Nepal helped establish a good working
 relationship with APEC, which facilitated addressing the disbursement issue.

 However, there were a number of shortcomings. Social safeguards was rated satisfactory throughout
 implementation despite that it suffered from delayed and insufficient compliance. Also, the frequent
 turnover of TTLs delayed redesigning the project and according to the ICR (paragraph 69) "the project lost
 some of its momentum, such as with regard to gender co-benefits monitoring." Finally, the Bank’s decision
 could have been more flexible on the project extension when there was a request by the client-and given
 the COVID-19 related disruptions. However, the Bank decided not to extend the project, as it was running
 for about seven years and had been extended for 20 months. While a more flexible consideration could
 have been given to further support sub-projects and provide extensive TA utilizing the unused funds, Bank
 support to Nepal would continue through the SREP-funded Private Sector-led Mini-grid Energy Access
 Project (P149239). This project would accommodate the support for biogas sub-projects. The ICR
 (paragraph 70) noted that this alternative approach was acceptable to the client.

 Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating reflects moderate shortcomings.
 While supervision worked to improve the design, this was done with delay, and there were gaps in the
 safeguard compliance and reporting. Finally, the project implementation could have benefited from a more
 flexible Bank decision on project extension.

 Summary of Bank Performance Assessment. Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This
 rating reflected significant shortcomings related to weaknesses in the design of components and activities
 including not incorporating sufficient risk mitigation measures, M&E design weaknesses, and an
 inefficient mechanism for disbursement of project funds. Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This
 rating reflected moderate shortcomings. While supervision worked to improve the design, this was done
 with delay, and there were gaps in the safeguard compliance and reporting.

 Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment and ratings, Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
          an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and
          the results indicators as reported in the PAD. Overall, the ToC in the ICR reflected the relation
          between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes. While the PDO was poorly
          formulated, the reconstructed ToC included a better formulation of Objectives. However, the original
          ToC lacked dedicated PIU and stakeholders capacity building activities. This was later addressed
          during implementation by the addition of a new component.
         The PDO was assessed through two PDO outcome indicators: 1. Off-grid biogas generated for
          thermal application; and 2. Off-grid biogas electricity generated. While the two indicators were
          directly linked to the PDO, the target for the first indicator mistakenly reflected total installed
          capacity by Year five rather than total biogas generated for thermal application in Year five, and the
          target for the second indicator was overestimated.
         The Results Framework (RF) included four intermediate results indicators (IRIs). These indicators
          while connected to the PDO suffered from some design issues, for example, while the small (12
          m3) biogas sub-projects and large (100 m3) biogas sub-projects were counted the same in the RF,
          despite the huge difference in terms of the impact of the sub-projects and the effort to develop the
          sub-projects. This resulted in a situation where the project achieved its PDO targets but fell short on
          its intermediate outcome indicators. Also, the targets for IRIs 3 and 4 were not set during
          preparation and were set during the restructuring. The RF also lacked indicators to assess capacity
          development of the AEPC and the private sector, for example, the number of developers or
          municipalities trained for novel biogas technologies and O&M, or the number of AEPC PIU staffs
          trained to review sub-project proposals were not captured as IRIs (ICR, paragraph 55).
         The original design M&E framework did not allow an ex post quantification of the logical sequence
          toward the development impact. The RF design should have reflected that the achievement of IRIs
          (quantifying outputs and/or intermediary outcomes) combine toward achieving the PDO outcomes,
          which would allow an ex post quantification of the logical sequence toward the development impact.
          The RF also did not capture human capital elements to further understand the project’s longer-term
          effects, since the aim was to support the ability of the Nepalese stakeholders, including the
          Government and private sector, to commission larger biogas projects on their own in future (ICR,
          paragraph 55).
         Overall, M&E design suffered from shortcomings related to the Results Framework (RF).
          Specifically, the RF lacked critical indicators to assess improvement in capacity, suffered a
          disconnect in terms of the logical sequence between the IRIs and PDO indicators, combined with
          inaccurate and /or overestimation of targets.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation was handled by AEPC. According to the ICR (paragraph 57), AEPC had
         insufficient M&E capacity and insufficient funds to support M&E activities. This delayed M&E
         implementation.
        The lack of M&E funds and limited AEPC capacity continued until it was addressed by the
         Bank through the restructuring in July 2016. However, an M&E expert was only recruited in 2017,
         three years into effectiveness (ICR, paragraph 59).
        The AEPC provided periodical reporting on the RF indicators. A database management system
         was established in Excel format to manage the data and monitor the progress. M&E was carried

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



         out in each stage of the sub-project cycle based on the information available in the testing and
         commissioning reports, feasibility study reports, and post-completion verification reports, as well
         as the consolidated information in the meter reading report and the monitoring reports.
        Verification of the M&E data by third-party financial and technical consulting firms was only done
         at a later stage of implementation. This was to ensure the output amount and quality and end-use
         applications matched what was reported through AEPC.
        Periodic evaluation on lessons learned from sub-project pipeline reviews was not recorded (ICR,
         paragraph 55).
        Restructuring and revision of targets. The targets for both PDO indicators were revised three
         times. Also, the target value for IRI 1 (number of large biogas proposals submitted for investment
         evaluation) was revised downward from 400 to 350 to reflect the latest cost calculations. The
         target values of IRIs 3 and IRI 4 (number of off-grid biogas and/or electricity generation plants
         created and made operational by the project) were newly set as 340 (commercial) and 10
         (municipal), as they were not set in the original RF. Revision of targets was necessary to reflect
         the situation on the ground, for example, the target for PDO outcome 2 was reduced from 30
         GWh at appraisal to 4.50 GWh by 2020. This reduction reflected the improvement in electricity
         supply in the country over final couple of years of the project. Consequently, interest among
         developers to implement the biogas plants for electricity generation was reduced.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 61) M&E data was used to ensure optimal impact through
           restructurings to some extent. Data was also used to justify restructurings of the project to better
           reflect the impact. For example, target values for PDO indicators were revised, reflecting the shift
           in developers’ interest from electricity generation to thermal application sub-projects, and the
           change in average sub-project size.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design suffered from notable shortcomings that were
  partially corrected during restructuring. M&E implementation suffered from delays due to lack of funds
  and limited capacity. M&E utilization was limited for a project that aimed to promote new technologies.
  Overall, it was not possible to capture the capacity element, timely verify the accuracy of the data
  collected, capture the causal links in the ToC, and assess the longer-term impact of the project (ICR,
  paragraph 62). Therefore, the overall quality for M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Environmental risk rating of the project was Category B (Partial assessment). The project triggered a
   total of six safeguard policies, five environmental and two social safeguard policies as follows: (a)
   Environmental Safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),
   Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11),(b) Social Safeguards: Involuntary

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The activities proposed were expected
  to be small and would not cause any significant adverse social impact on the community from land
  acquisition and resettlement. The potential positive environmental impacts from Waste-to-Energy activities
  to be supported under the project included better reuse of waste, cleanliness and better waste
  management. The adverse environmental impacts envisaged includes foul odor, air pollution, risks of
  disease spread, contamination of water bodies, occupational and community health & safety risks in and
  around the facility, land pollution, and GHG emission (PAD, paragraph 26). To mitigate any adverse
  impacts, a social management framework (SMF) and an Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
  were prepared. The SMF included a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a framework for Vulnerable
  Community Development (VCDF), gender development (GDF) and community consultation and disclosure
  (CCDF). These documents were disclosed in country on December 13, 2013 and in Bank’s InfoShop on
  December 16, 2013.

  Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The environmental safeguard rating of the project was
  downgraded in 2018 from satisfactory to moderately satisfactory. Biogas sub-projects below 100 m3 per
  day of biogas production were considered Category C, and those above 100 m3 per day being considered
  Category B. Category B sub-projects were required to have an Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessment (ESIA) and SREP clearance, and Category C sub-projects were required to have an
  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ICR (paragraph 63) noted that some issues were
  raised with regards to the quality of safeguard documents and monitoring performance. Also, at the later
  stage of implementation there were concerns regarding the planning of plants in areas at risk of flooding;
  health and safety concerns regarding the transport of biomass feedstock. There was an explosion during
  the transportation of compressed biogas that resulted in material property damage.

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. Social safeguards rating was maintained as satisfactory throughout
  implementation despite delays and insufficient compliance (ICR, paragraph 69). The grievance redress
  mechanism (GRM) was prepared and disseminated to all sub-projects, but with a delay in its establishment
  (it was established only in 2018). The ICR (paragraph 64) noted that the "actual functioning and
  accessibility of the GRM, as well as efficiency in uptake and resolution of complaints, remained
  weak." Although a grievance was received in October 2018 with regard to a supposed miscommunication
  between the developer and a construction company regarding the subsidy, and fully addressed and closed
  in November 2018.

  The ICR did not include an explicit statement on compliance for any of the triggered safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). FM was strengthened by hiring the FM consultant in March 2015. FM
  reports were generally submitted on time. However, there were issues relating to slow disbursement rate
  owing to slow implementation progress, delays in submission of the Project’s external audit reports, delays
  in conducting internal audits, and the frequent turnover of FM consultants (ICR, paragraph 66). The ICR
  (paragraph 66) reported that compliance with two Grant Agreement FM-related legal covenants was
  delayed. The ICR did not comment on the status of the final audit reports.

  Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 65) procurement activities were "compliant with the World
  Bank rules." There were delays in the recruitment of a procurement specialist and procurement of non-

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



   consultant services. Also, the client’s capacity was lacking to keep Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement (STEP) updated and process procurements on time (ICR, paragraph 65). This situation was
   remedied and as implementation progressed the client capacity improved and STEP was properly updated
   on time.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
    The Project produced around 88,000 MT of organic fertilizer per year and substituted 0.6 million LPG
   cylinders per year, both of which had to be imported from India prior to the project. Agri-based industries in
   Nepal benefitted from the project's biogas production to generate electricity and meet the captive energy
   demand of their respective businesses. Lastly, the GoN initiated approaching and leveraging funding from
   other donor partners to scale up implementation of the large biogas plants in the country (ICR,
   paragraph42).



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    Efficiency was rated Modest.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following two are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. For an innovative pilot project that aims to introduce a new technology in the country
involving the private sector, the Bank’s support combined with the government’s subsidy
mechanism are useful for initial market creation through cost buy-down and risk-
sharing. Projects aiming to create a market for a new technology need to incorporate critical
elements into the project’s design and supervision arrangements to ensure a transition towards
commercial market viability after the project period. For an innovative pilot project that aims to
introduce a new technology in the country involving the private sector, the Bank’s support
combined with the government’s subsidy mechanism are useful for initial market creation through

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



cost buy-down and risk-sharing. This increases interest from private developers on a new
technology and help create a market. However, it takes time to fully develop a new market where the
requisite expertise and technologies can be obtained locally in a cost-effective manner. Therefore,
the Bank’s extended support is needed for market development beyond the project’s completion and
the graduation from the subsidy to ensure that the sub-projects will continue to be commercially
viable. In particular, a longer implementation period, flexible project design, and/or hands-on
supervision ideally with the Bank team’s in-field presence are helpful arrangements to proactively
respond to the changing needs in the sector over the project period until the market is sufficiently
developed.

2. If M&E design does not include a Results Framework (RF) with indicators that capture the
causal links toward the PDO outcomes, accurate assessment of project outcomes will be
challenging. For an operation supporting sub-projects whose amount of energy output, construction
period, and capital outlay significantly vary depending on their size, such differences should be well
considered when designing the RF, indicators, and disbursement arrangements. One of the main
rationales for developing the RF is that it enables quantifying the value of the funds invested in
activities and how they translate into development impacts across a ToC. Given this, an intermediate
indicator that only counts the number of sub-projects developed under the operation and does not
take into account the sub-projects’ outputs is not sufficient to capture the causal link toward the PDO
outcomes or longer-term impacts. Future operations will need to either prepare separate
intermediary indicators by project size or better model the causal link across the ToC. Furthermore,
the disbursement arrangement should reflect the difference in nature between larger and small sub-
projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that the M&E system was problematic. That said, enough data
was generated to track the progress of activities and the achievement of the PDO.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on
outcomes. However, improvement in capacity was not assessed due to the absence of indicators to directly
measure this element.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the
project actually achieved on the ground.



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)



Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify most of the
assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was adequate. The efficiency analysis provided good justification on
the validity of the project investments.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. Reporting on safeguards did include an explicit statement on compliance.
The ICR did not report on the status of the final audit report nor did it state an explicit reason for the twenty
months extension. Finally, the ICR Data Sheet (page ii) noted a fifth project restructuring on June 11, 2020,
when the amount disbursed was US$2.25 million. However, the ICR did not report a reason(s) for this
restructuring nor was it discussed in the main text. In a further communication, the project team explained
that there were only four restructurings during implementation and the fifth project restructuring reported in the
data sheet was a system glitch. The team also explained that there are no requirements either in the Bank’s
Guidance on ICR or FM manual to report status of the final audit report in ICR.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with minor shortcomings.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
