     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023047

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P128909                                   LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13)

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52440,TF-14432,TF-A4116               30-May-2018                                         30,617,700.14

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2013                               30-Nov-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                   21,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            31,000,000.00                                   20,967,159.26

 Actual                                        30,617,700.14                                   20,967,159.26




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




 P162477_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P162477                                   Health Systems Strengthening Project ( P162477 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



 23-Feb-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                                    0.00                                                 0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to improve the quality of maternal health, child health, and infectious
   disease services in selected secondary-level health facilities (Financing Agreement, p. 6).

   Another objective to support the emergency response needed to contain and control the Ebola outbreak was
   added on August 8, 2014, at which time no disbursements had yet occurred.

   On January 30, 2017, the PDO was revised in conjunction with additional financing to include the quality of
   primary services in support of the country’s Reproductive Maternal Neonatal Child and Adolescent Health
   (RMNCAH) Investment Case, while concurrently dropping PDO reference to infectious disease services. The
   Ebola response objective was also dropped with the end of the Ebola outbreak. The final revised PDO was
   stated as follows: to improve the quality of primary and secondary health care services, with focus on
   maternal, neonatal and child health (ICR, p. 19 and p. 40). In addition, there were downward revisions for
   some outcome targets in 2017 and 2019.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



I. Strengthening the institutional capacity to improve the quality of selected health interventions at
PBF health facilities (Appraisal: US$10 million; Actual: US$19.7 million). The component was re-
named in January 2017 as Support to quality service delivery systems.

Subcomponent 1.1: Performance-based financing (PBF)

The sub-component included performance-based contracts between the Ministry of Health and Social
Welfare (MOHSW) and target hospitals; use of performance incentives and provision of health facilities with
sufficient autonomy to manage funds; and verification of results through ex-ante (before payment) and ex-
post verification.

Subcomponent 1.2: Management and capacity building

This sub-component aimed to provide intensive technical support to build the institutional capacity required
to manage the PBF approach. Specifically, it would support technical assistance, capacity development,
and independent verification.

The component was expanded in 2017 to include primary health care (PHC) services that would support the
implementation of the RMNCAH Investment Case. According to the ICR (p. 21), the decision to include
PHC was driven by two factors: development partners scaled back their overall support at the PHC level;
and the performance of PHC service delivery was poor, particularly in remote and rural counties.

II. Improving health worker competencies to address key health-related concerns at selected health
facilities (Appraisal: US$4.2 million; Actual: US$2.7 million). The component was re-named in January
2017 as: Support to strengthening fit-for-purpose health workforce.

Sub-Component 2.1: Graduate Medical Residency Program (GMRP)

This sub-component was to support the design and implementation of a nationally accredited GMRP in
critical specialty areas (obstetrics, surgery, pediatrics, and internal medicine, with a cross-cutting focus on
anesthesiology). Residents would be selected from the existing pool of medical school graduates. The
project would assist in identifying, recruiting, and funding relevant faculty to mentor and train residents at
target facilities, and in residents’ rotation. The project would leverage the teaching capacity developed
under GMRP also to train existing mid-level cadres (see below).

Sub-Component 2.2: In-service training programs to mid-level health cadres

The sub-component would focus on mid-level cadres such as midwives, nurses, and physician assistants in
target hospitals and their satellite centers.

III. Project management (Appraisal: US$0.8 million; Actual: US$2 million)

This component would support MOHSW operational costs for managing the project.



The following new component was added on August 4, 2014:



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



  IV. Support to the emergency response to the Ebola epidemic. The component was revised in 2017 as
  Support to strengthening critical services and support systems (Appraised in 2014 at US$6 million;
  Revised in 2017 at US$6.6 million; Actual US$6.6 million). This component was to provide funding for
  critical services to support the Ebola outbreak response; functions and infrastructure that promote the
  quality of RMNCAH services, including health workforces; and civil registration, vital statistics, and
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (Task Team clarifications, July 7, 2022).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing: The original cost was estimated at US$15 million, consisting of an IDA Credit of
  US$10 million and a Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF) Grant of US$5 million funded by the
  Kingdom of Norway and the United Kingdom. Additional Financing of US$16 million from the Global
  Financing Facility (GFF) was provided, bringing the total estimated project cost to US$31 million. There
  were no direct financial contributions from the Borrower. The actual cost was US$30.6 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on May 30, 2013 and became effective on June 16, 2014. A Mid-Term
  Review was carried out on December 3, 2018. The project closed on November 30, 2021, 3.5 years beyond
  the originally planned closing of May 30, 2018.

  Restructurings: The project underwent five restructurings as follows:

      1. Level-1 restructuring on August 4, 2014: The PDO was revised to include the emergency response
           to the Ebola outbreak.
      2.   Level-1 restructuring on January 30, 2017: The project received additional financing of US$16
           million from GFF in support of the RMNCAH Investment Case. The PDO was revised to include
           primary health care and neonatal care, and to drop infectious disease services and the support to
           Ebola response that ended by 2016. The indicator on maternal and child death audits carried out
           routinely by target PBF hospitals according to national guidelines was revised to delink maternal
           death audits from neonatal death audits, and the outcome target was reduced from 100 percent to
           80 percent (ICR, p. 17). A new indicator on neonatal death audits was introduced with an outcome
           target set at 80 percent.
      3.   Level-2 restructuring for extending the HRITF grant until May 17, 2019 to allow full disbursement in
           view of previous delays caused by the Ebola crisis.
      4.    Level-2 restructuring on April 1, 2019 revised the results framework. Maternal death audits and
           neonatal death audits previously qualified as “according to national guidelines” had a "revised
           language" for added specificity, and were re-qualified as “according to national maternal death audit
           guidelines” and “according to national neonatal death audit guidelines." The end target for maternal
           death audits was reduced from 80 percent to 65 percent; and the end target for neonatal death
           audits was reduced from 80 percent to 45 percent. The Restructuring Paper (RES34880) stated that
           end target changes reflected realistic estimates based on the current progress to date.
      5.   Level-2 restructuring on May 21, 2020 extended the closing date to November 30, 2021.



  Scope of the Operation and selection of facilities:



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



   A total of eight hospitals (Redemption, Phebe, CB Dunbar, Tellewoyan, Jackson F. Doe, FJ Grante, St.
   Francis, and Chief Jallah Lone) participated in the secondary care PBF. According to the PAD (p. 7),
   facilities were selected because of a relatively low quality of care outcomes, and because they were
   strategically located in both semi-urban and semi-rural areas, thereby ensuring that project benefits would
   spill-over to a large catchment population, estimated at about 30 percent of the population of Liberia.

   Three rural and remote counties (out of 15 counties in the country) with poor RMNCAH indicators
   (Gbarpolu, Rivercess, and Sinoe) participated in the primary care PBF scheme.

   Five counties participated in the Community Health Assistant Program (see Objective 2): Sinoe, Gbarpolu,
   Grand Gedeh, Grand Kru, and Grand Cape Mount.

   The project also supported the piloting of an Adolescent Health Program in one county (Grand Bassa
   County).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives were responsive to Liberia’s health challenges. The health system was being rebuilt after
the civil war during which many health professionals left the country (PAD, p. 1). Liberia faced significant
challenges in improving maternal and child health outcomes. Post-conflict conditions placed Liberia at the
bottom of global rankings for maternal and child health. The maternal mortality ratio (MMR) remained high
at 770 maternal deaths per 100,000 births (2010). Also, with the majority of external funding being allocated
to primary care, the ability to improve the quality of care at the secondary level was limited, and the
government considered that the alleviation of this gap was a key next step for rebuilding Liberia’s health
system (PAD, p. 2).

At appraisal, the objectives were consistent with the government’s two-pronged approach to improve health
outcomes by strengthening the health system and by expanding access to basic and secondary health care
of acceptable quality. According to the PAD (p. 5), the objectives were consistent with the Country
Assistance Strategy 2013-2017 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.

At closing, the objectives were fully consistent with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period
FY19-FY24, specifically Pillar 2 on Building Human Capital to Seize New Economic Opportunities and its
Objective 6 on improved early childhood and maternal health. The CPF noted that actions under Objective
6 would focus on improving maternal, child, and adolescent health care to promote more equitable and
affordable access to quality health services, and that they would assist Liberia in establishing effective
health sector financing mechanisms by scaling up the PBF currently being piloted in several counties. The
CPF noted that a new IDA-supported Health Project would be prepared jointly by the health and
governance teams to ensure addressing the challenges of maternal and child health in a holistic manner.
Two project indicators -- mothers' postpartum contact with a healthcare provider, and fully immunized
children -- were CPF indicators. Also, Community Health Assistants mobilized and deployed in several
counties constituted a supplementary progress indicator for the CPF.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of maternal health and child health services in selected secondary-level health facilities

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change held that the application of the PBF modality, provision of PBF incentives, technical
                             assistance, training incentives for residents and faculty to improve skills, increasing the number of specialized
                             physicians, and enhancing in-service training would plausibly contribute to improving the quality of maternal
                             health and child health in related facilities.

                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             The project measured quality scores at the hospital level on a quarterly basis. Scores were based on the
                             Hospital Quarterly Quality Assessment Tool that included (i) management and structural criteria: General
                             Management and Human Resources for Health; and (ii) process aspects of health care quality: Obstructed
                             Labor, Postpartum Hemorrhage Prevention and Treatment, Maternal Sepsis Prevention and
                             Treatment, Eclampsia, Newborn Asphyxia Hospital Management, Newborn Sepsis Hospital
                             Management, Premature Newborn Hospital Management, Routine Maternal and Newborn Care, Pediatric
                             Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment, Pediatric Malaria Hospitalization, Pediatric
                             Pneumonia, Pediatric Diarrhea/Gastroenteritis, Pediatric Severe Acute Malnutrition Inpatient Treatment, and
                             Safe Surgery.

                             Physicians who completed the post-graduate medical residency program reached 57 physicians, exceeding
                             the target of 40 physicians.

                             The number of doctors receiving in-service training in obstetrics, pediatrics, surgery, and internal medicine
                             under the project reached 51 doctors in 2021, exceeding the target of 50 doctors.

                             The proportion of PBF hospitals reporting discussion of grievances that were received reached 69 percent,
                             exceeding the target of 50 percent.

                             Outcomes

                             The following outcomes were measured. All baselines were recorded as zero in the context of new activities
                             and/or to reflect the incremental contribution of the operation:




                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



The average Quality of Care Score of target PBF hospitals reached 84.1 percent in 2021, exceeding the
target of 65 percent.

Maternal death audits reached 69 percent in 2021, short of the original target of 100 percent for maternal and
child death audits.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the quality of maternal health and child health services in selected secondary-level health facilities
(under 2017 revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
The theory of change, outputs, and quality score outcomes were the same as under the Original Objective 1,
above, and:

        Maternal death audits reached 69 percent in 2021, short of the revised target of 80 percent.
        Neonatal death audits reached 68.4 percent in 2021, short of the target of 80 percent.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
Improve the quality of maternal health and child health services in selected secondary-level health facilities
(under 2019 revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
The theory of change, outputs, and quality score outcomes were the same as under the original and revised
Objective 1, above, and:

        Maternal death audits reached 69 percent in 2021, exceeding the revised target of 65 percent.
        Neonatal death audits reached 68.4 percent in 2021, exceeding the revised target of 45 percent.



Revised Rating
High



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of primary health care services, with focus on maternal, neonatal, and child health
(new objective introduced in 2017)

Rationale
The scope of primary health care was not specified in the PDO statement, but was clarified by the ICR based
on project activities as being focused on three remote counties (and five counties for the Community
Assistants Program).

The theory of change held that the provision of PBF at the primary health care level in support of RMNCAH,
utilization of existing County Health Teams, and strengthening of the Community Health Assistants Program
would plausibly contribute to improving the quality of primary health care services, with a focus on maternal,
neonatal, and child health.

Outputs

The project developed a PBF modality for PHC-level services. Contracting was undertaken with the County
Health Teams rather than with respective health facilities in the three targeted counties because of the
scarcity of banking facilities in remote areas that would have created significant challenges to peripheral
facilities in accessing their funds without the support of the County Health Teams (ICR, p. 38).

PHC-level quality scores were monitored and were based on the Joint Integrated Support and Supervision
quality checklist for primary health care facilities: Administration, Ante-Natal Care, Expanded Programme on
Immunization, Family Planning, HIV, Tuberculosis, Integrated Management of Childhood
Illness, Malaria, Mental Health, Labor, Obstetric Complications, Postpartum Care, and Infection Prevention
and Control (ICR, p. 30).

The project supported the Community Health Assistants Program to use community health focal points to
provide an integrated package of basic community health services in five counties, with UNICEF technical
support. The project trained and deployed a total of 416 Community Health Assistants and 42 Community
Health Service supervisors (ICR, p. 31).

The project supported civil registration of births. It also supported a pilot of an Adolescent Health Program in
Grand Bassa County. This pilot included operational and consultant costs to carry out demand-driven
prioritized adolescent health activities focusing on reduction of teenage pregnancy. Interventions included
programs for in-school and out-of-school youth and community engagement and were designed to increase
awareness of and impact of gender-sensitive decisions on adolescents’ well-being.

Intermediate results

The number of deliveries attended by skilled health personnel reached 671,358 deliveries, exceeding the
target of 500,000 deliveries.

The number of new users of modern contraceptive methods increased from a baseline of 123,165 in 2013 to
1.1 million in 2021, exceeding the target of 700,000 new users.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



The number of children immunized (fully immunized per schedule of the Expanded Programme on
Immunization) under the operation reached 769,693 in 2021, exceeding the target of 600,000 children.

Under the Community Health Assistants Program, the number of children treated with Oral Rehydration
Solutions and Zinc increased from 4,123 in 2018 to 6,562 children in 2019, and the number of children
screened for malnutrition increased from 35,544 in 2018 to 41,233 children in 2019 (ICR, p. 74).

The number of births registered within one year of birth occurrence under the operation reached 263,945
registrations in 2021, far exceeding the target of 15,000 registered births.

Outcomes

The average quality score for the primary care PBF for the three target counties combined was 71 percent in
2021, compared to a baseline of 36 percent in 2018 (Rivercress had a score of 77 percent from a baseline of
36 percent; Sinoe reached 70 percent from a baseline of 37 percent; and Gbarpolu County reached 68
percent from a baseline of 36 percent [ICR, p. 29]).

The proportion of mothers who had a postpartum visit within 24 hours of delivering reached 86.4 percent,
exceeding the target of 80 percent.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the quality of infectious disease services in selected secondary-level health facilities
(dropped in 2017)

Rationale
The project did not establish a theory of change for this objective. There was no specific reference in the
description of project components of how the project would support the prevention and control of infectious
diseases (ICR, p. 37).

According to the ICR (p. 28), the context of infectious diseases under the project was to support the
prevention of hospital-acquired infections that were prevalent after surgeries. The project provided
routine infection prevention and control materials. No specific information was provided on related outputs or
monitoring of progress, and there were no indicators at the intermediate or outcome levels to assess the
achievement of the objective (ICR, p. 27).



Rating
Negligible



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)




                              OBJECTIVE 4
                              Objective
                              Support the emergency response needed to contain and control the Ebola outbreak
                              (dropped in 2017, as the outbreak was declared to be over in June 2016)

                              Rationale
                              The ICR (p. 28) summarized in general terms the main outputs that were observed during the Ebola Virus
                              Disease (EVD) outbreak. The project provided infection prevention and control materials, and supported
                              additional staff (including international staff) and hazard payment to existing staff. In an effort to ensure health
                              services delivery during the outbreak, EVD response workers provided health services across the whole
                              health spectrum and helped sustain the provision of essential services, beyond the provision of EVD services,
                              as human resource capacity in the country was already weak before the EVD outbreak. Some pre-existing
                              health workers became ill or died because of EVD, while others were too afraid to report to work. MOHSW
                              contracted UNICEF with project funds to supply infection prevention and control materials and medicines for
                              distribution to emergency treatment units and health facilities. The United Nations Office for Project Services
                              was also contracted to procure ten ambulances for emergency transportation of patients, and the delivered
                              ambulances were managed by County Health Teams.

                              The ICR reported the following output as the objective’s outcome, based on the project’s results framework:
                              “Doctors, clinicians and other MOH-approved staff who received hazard payment for the provision of EVD-
                              related services reached 28,537 persons," The value of this indicator in assessing the extent of outcome
                              achievement was weak. In view of insufficient information on the project’s pursuit of this objective, and on its
                              progress and assessment, the achievement of this objective is rated modest.



                              Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project almost fully achieved the objective to improve the quality of maternal and child health services in
                            selected secondary-level health facilities, barely achieved the objective to improve the quality of infectious
                            disease services in selected secondary-level health facilities, and partly achieved the objective to support the
                            emergency response needed to contain and control the Ebola outbreak. The aggregation of achievements for
                            the three objectives is consistent with a modest efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                       Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale

                                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



         The objective to improve the quality of secondary health care services with a focus on maternal, neonatal,
         and child health under the revised outcome targets was almost fully achieved, and the objective to improve
         primary health care services with a focus on maternal, neonatal, and child health was fully achieved,
         consistent with a substantial efficacy rating.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Both objectives, to improve the quality of secondary health care services with a focus on maternal, neonatal,
         and child health under the revised outcome targets, and to improve primary health care services with focus on
         maternal, neonatal, and child health, were fully achieved, consistent with a high efficacy rating. The number of
         people who received essential health, nutrition, and population services under the whole operation reached
         1.44 million people in in 2021, exceeding the target of 1 million people.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         High



 5. Efficiency
The PAD’s economic and financial analysis did not undertake traditional measures of efficiency, but instead
provided generic arguments in support of the investment. It highlighted the fact that the project would focus on
improving services, clinical practices, and competencies through interventions that are known to be cost-
effective (PAD, p. 23). The analysis noted that the project would generate economic benefits in the form of
averted deaths (in particular maternal and infant deaths) and improved patients’ welfare, such as shortened
recovery periods. It also noted that the PBF mechanism can be used as a platform to help improve the efficiency
of targeted facilities, as performance-based incentives have the potential to transform managers and staff into
strategic problem solvers focused on improving quality, utilization, and efficiency of care (PAD, p. 25).

The ICR’s analysis focused on lives saved to measure benefits. It had reasonable assumptions that were based
on global literature, notably for estimating the number of maternal lives saved and the impact of maternal death
audits; estimating lives saved among neonates and under-5 children; and estimating the impact of the quality-of-
care improvement on deaths averted. The project could potentially save 917 maternal lives, 2,370 neonatal
lives, and 8,492 under-five children's lives, and avert 2,187 stillbirths. The Net Present Value (NPV) of project
benefits at a 10 percent discount rate was estimated at US$259.8 million with a benefit-cost ratio of 15.3 for
every dollar invested, yielding an overall NPV return of US$229 million. The benefit-cost ratio indicated that, for
every dollar invested, the likely return would be US$15.




                                                                                                           Page 11 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



A sensitivity analysis used a larger variation in discount rates that did not considerably reduce the benefit-cost
ratio, indicating that even in larger uncertainties where inflation or other instability occurs, the project’s NPV and
benefit-cost ratio could still be positive with a solid return on investment (ICR, p. 68).

In terms of operational efficiency, development partner coordination was strong and efficient (ICR, p. 39).
However, there were shortcomings in project implementation that contributed to reducing efficiency. Project
effectiveness was delayed by one year due to a lengthy government approval process, particularly for obtaining
a legal opinion. The Ebola outbreak and the COVID-19 pandemic caused disruptions in project activities and
health services. Verification arrangements for PBF results were reduced from a monthly to a quarterly basis and
with reduced verifier down time. Two hospitals effectively pursued virtual verification. The ICR did not offer
information on the verification costs under PBF, but the Task Team clarified on July 7, 2022 that verification
expenditures amounted to 28 percent of the PBF budget. Service providers experienced delays in getting PBF
payments processed (ICR, p. 40). Human resource challenges were also faced due to staff turnover. Closing
date extensions aggregated at 3.5 years, although one year was related to additional financing. The project
disbursed virtually all of its allocated funds, attaining a disbursement rate of 99 percent.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

- Relevance of objectives across the entire project is rated high, as there was full alignment between the
objectives and the CPF at closing.

- Efficiency, also rated across the entire project, is rated substantial.

- Efficacy: (i) Under the original objectives, efficacy is rated modest, as the project partly achieved its
aggregated objectives. (ii) Under the first revision, efficacy is rated substantial, as the project almost fully
achieved its objectives. (iii) Under the second revision (outcome targets), efficacy is rated high, as the project
fully achieved its objectives.




                                                                                                         Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, when a project’s objectives are revised, the final outcome is determined by
the weight of Bank disbursements under each set of objectives (22.2 percent, 20.3 percent. and 57.5 percent):

      Under the original objectives, the outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory (rating value: 3) with a
       weight value of 0.67 (3 x 22.2%).
      After the first revision of 2017, the outcome is rated satisfactory (rating value: 5) with a weight value of
       1.02 (5 x 20.3%).
      After the second revision (outcome targets) in 2019, the outcome is rated highly satisfactory (rating
       value: 6) with a weight value of 3.45 (6 x 57.5%).

These add up to 5.14 (rounded to 5), which corresponds to an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.

The following table illustrates split rating calculations:

                                                                                           Objectives after 2nd
                                                                 Objectives after 1st
Rating Dimension                    Original Objectives                                    revision (outcome
                                                                 revision
                                                                                           targets)
Relevance of Objectives                                           High
Efficacy
Objective 1: Improve quality of
                                         Substantial                Substantial                High
MCH services at 2ary level
Objective 2: Improve quality
                                           ---                        High                     High
of MCH services at 1ary level
Objective 3: Improve quality of
                                         Negligible                      ---                    ---
infectious disease services
Objective 4: Support emergency
                                         Modest                          ---                    ---
response to Ebola
Overall Efficacy                         Modest                    Substantial                 High
Efficiency                                                      Substantial
                                Moderately
Outcome Rating                                                      Satisfactory              Highly    Satisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                 3                                   5                       6
Amount disbursed (US$ million)      6.78                                6.22                    17.6
Disbursement %                      22.2                                20.3                    57.5
Weight Value                   3 x 22.2% = 0.67                  5 x 20.3% = 1.02          6 x 57.5% = 3.45
Total weights                                                5.14 (rounded to 5)
Overall Outcome Rating                                         Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



According to the ICR (44), the risk that development outcomes may not be maintained is related to overall
sustainability aspects. Although the PBF approach for improving the quality of maternal and child
health services has won substantial stakeholder support in the country, PBF is not formally institutionalized
as a modus operandi for delivering health services. Nevertheless, the ICR reported that an ongoing Bank-
financed health sector project (Institutional Foundations to Improve Services for Health) is committed to
continuing some of the PBF interventions of this project. Also, institutional strengthening generated by this
project was substantial. Hospital managers were adequately trained on how to carry out their functions using
the PBF approach and how PBF incentives were earned through hospital performance. This also benefited
overall capacity of hospitals to manage other non-PBF functions. In the remote counties where the primary
care PBF was implemented, County Health Teams were trained in both PBF and other mainstream areas,
such as business planning, financial management, procurement, pharmacy and supplies management, and
human resources management. This strengthened their capacities in overall management of health services
in their respective counties.

Another risk is related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic that is likely to continue to affect sector
functioning in the near term. Other virus variants are likely to emerge, and a large number of people remain
unvaccinated.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The preparation process effectively engaged development partners, notably the United States Agency for
  International Development (USAID), United Kingdom Department for International Development,
  UNICEF, and the European Union. USAID assisted MOHSW in PBF operations in six counties. Project
  design was informed by the experience of other countries. Lessons learned were considered, including
  for the merits of independent verification, training that promotes both competencies and motivation, and
  gradual scale-up (PAD, p. 15) that was adequately planned under the project by piloting PBF in one
  hospital before rolling out to other hospitals.

  A Project Management Unit at MOHSW was to have direct responsibility and oversight for project
  coordination and management. The unit was to coordinate with the Department of Administration,
  Department of Health Services, and the Post-Graduate Medical Council for project activities, including
  training, procurement, and linkages with target hospitals (PAD, pp. 16-17).

  Key risks were well identified, with specification of risk management measures that included extensive
  technical assistance (PAD, p. 69). The PAD also noted the fragility and vulnerability of the overall country
  context. Assessments were carried out to ensure compliance with World Bank fiduciary, environmental,
  and social requirements.

  M&E arrangements for both monitoring and verification of results by an Independent Verification Agency
  were adequate. There was a gap, however, in designing and measuring the intended quality
  improvement in infectious disease services in the targeted facilities. The ICR (p. 37) reported that there
  was no specific reference in the description of project components on how the project would support the
  prevention and control of infectious diseases, that there were no specific indicators that addressed


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



  infectious diseases despite their inclusion in the PDO statement, and that this was an oversight at
  appraisal.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation support missions and supervision were carried out regularly. Fiduciary and technical
 specialists, including staff dealing with financial management, procurement, and environment and social
 safeguards, were part of supervision missions to ensure that relevant areas were adequately addressed.
 Reporting was candid, including 15 Implementation Status and Results Reports that enabled Bank
 management to provide needed advice and support to the supervision team. The Task Team was pro-
 active in dealing with evolving issues and facilitated five restructurings (two level-1 and three level-2
 restructurings). The ICR (p. 40) also reported that the Bank’s Country Management Unit was highly
 supportive during the project implementation period.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original objectives were clearly specified and reflected by measurable indicators, except for the
 objective to improve the quality of infectious disease services that lacked a theory of change, description of
 activities, and indicators. Some areas of the results framework lacked clarity. The revised PDO that
 introduced improvement in primary health care services did not specify its scope. The latter was clarified by
 the ICR (see Section 4).

 Data were to be collected from the routine Health Management Information System, the Graduate Medical
 Residency Program, quality checklists at health facilities, and the Project Management Unit (subsequently
 re-named as Project Implementation Unit). M&E arrangements for tracking progress and verifying results
 were well defined. In addition, according to the PAD (p. 19), an impact evaluation was planned to estimate
 the causal impact of project interventions on key outcomes.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was regular, and the project periodically revised, clarified, and improved the results
  framework during project restructurings, including by adding new indicators, dropping others, and
  delinking combined indicators such as death audits. Two outcome targets were reduced (see
  restructurings in Section 2a). In addition to data generated by routine information systems and PBF data,
  the project used maternal and neonatal death audits and birth registrations.

  The ICR noted that the counterfactual analysis under the impact evaluation that would have compared
  performance between PBF and non-PBF hospitals was initiated (baselines were collected in a 2015
  survey) but could not be completed largely because of disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic
  (Task Team clarification, July 7, 2022). The ICR (p. 33) stated that plans are in place to have relevant
  data collected, with results expected by August 2022. The ICR stated that the Independent Verification
  Agency in its end-of-project report and report on Implementation Research for PBF in the country showed
  positive findings, but no specific comparative information was provided.



c. M&E Utilization
  Quantitative and qualitative data were used to fulfill regular monitoring needs and to process PBF
  payments. M&E findings were used to update the results framework and to make related decisions, as
  findings helped facilities identify areas for improvement and gauge efforts needed to meet the targets
  that were set in their operational plans.

  The ICR (p. 41) also reported that M&E findings were used for national and county-level planning, and
  for donor planning.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category B - Partial Assessment, triggering World
   Bank safeguard policy OP 4.01, as an increase in health care waste generated by health facilities was
   anticipated. In terms of social aspects, the project did not trigger any safeguard policies. The project was
   also required to comply with environmental assessment requirements under the Liberia National
   Environment Act (1995) and with other national regulations. An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) that included an Environmental Management Plan was updated during project
   preparation, building on a previous plan that had been developed for another Bank-assisted project. The
   updated ESMF was disclosed on February 25, 2013, prior to project appraisal on March 01, 2013.

   An Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist was hired and assigned at the Project Implementation
   Unit to lead ESMF implementation. An environmental specialist coordinated compliance activities with the
   Division of Environmental and Occupation Health at MOHSW. The ICR (p. 42) reported that the project was


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



   compliant with the ESMF throughout the project implementation period. A satisfactory overall safeguards
   rating was recorded in the Bank’s Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   During project preparation, overall financial management risk was assessed as moderate. During
   implementation, the project complied with agreed financial arrangements and with the requirement of
   submitting quarterly interim unaudited financial reports. External audits (undertaken by a private firm and
   subsequently by the General Auditing Commission) were carried out regularly and in accordance with
   International Standards on Auditing. There were no qualified external audits (ICR, p. 43).

   In terms of procurement, an assessment conducted in October 2011 concluded that MOHSW had the
   capacity to manage procurement under the project. However, during implementation, many challenges
   were encountered, largely due to low capacity in preparing specifications, terms of reference, and
   documentation, and the project organized multiple capacity building procurement clinics. There were also
   challenges related to limited markets in the country and long supply chains at the level of international
   suppliers. Nevertheless, procurement was undertaken in compliance with Bank guidelines and with the
   provisions stipulated in the Legal Agreement. According to the ICR (p. 43), no mis-procurement or
   ineligible expenditures were reported under the project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                There is no actual disagreement
                                                                                on the sub-ratings. Both the ICR
                                                                                and this ICR Review rated
                                                                                Quality-at-Entry as moderately
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   satisfactory and the Quality of
                                                                                Supervision as satisfactory. The
                                                                                aggregation of both sub-ratings
                                                                                is consistent with a moderately
                                                                                satisfactory rating for overall

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)



                                                                                   Bank Performance. The ICR
                                                                                   incorrectly used the project’s
                                                                                   Outcome rating as a tie-breaker
                                                                                   (that would be applicable only
                                                                                   when the two elements of Bank
                                                                                   Performance are in opposite
                                                                                   directions of the borderline).
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 44 - 47) offered several useful lessons and recommendations, including the following
lessons slightly adjusted by this IEG Review:

Piloting performance-based financing programs facilitates subsequent roll-out. The project
started as a PBF pilot at Redemption Hospital before being rolled out in phases until it encompassed
eight hospitals. Piloting allowed learning-by-doing before scaling up. This lesson confirms similar
findings from other countries such as Cambodia, Haiti, Burundi, Afghanistan, and Rwanda.

Virtual verification can be applied in pandemic circumstances. The project adjusted to the
COVID-19 environment and increased the use of virtual meetings. The Independent Verification
Agency piloted virtual verifications at sites that had good internet connectivity, suggesting that virtual
verification can be used in other PBF operations and may contribute to reducing verification costs.

Performance-based financing empowers participating health facilities and the community.
The project PBF empowered hospitals, County Health Teams, and the community to take more
granular responsibility in overseeing their respective health facilities. Stakeholders had a greater
obligation to increase accountability for outcomes. This was further facilitated by capacity building at
MOHSW to enable it to guide and support lower sectoral levels.

A medical residency program can act not only as a training program, but also as a strategy to
increase specialized service delivery in related facilities. Medical doctors in the postgraduate
residency program provided specialized care at facilities where medical residencies took place.
Hence, an increase in specialized services was realized in a relatively short period of time in the
selected health facilities. Furthermore, hospitals entered into agreements through Memorandums of
Understanding with the trained specialists to remain in place for a specified period of time. While
some commitments were not honored, this arrangement contributed to sustaining a reasonable level
of specialized skills at a given facility.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Health Systems Strengthening (FY13) (P128909)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough overview of the project experience. It was results-oriented, and its narrative
supported the outcome rating and available evidence. The latter was strong for maternal and child health
related outcomes but poor for infectious diseases and Ebola emergency response. The ICR provided a candid
critique of the project and aptly identified important gaps in the design and M&E related to improving the quality
of infectious disease services. It offered useful lessons directly derived from project experience. The ICR was
internally consistent and followed guidelines, except for a lengthy and repetitive main text of 47 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
