     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022964

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P091092                                  DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09)

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of            Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1020,IDA-H4350,TF-92105             31-Mar-2014                                       310,714,596.56

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2008                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         190,000,000.00                                      78,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          313,200,082.53                                      65,087.25

 Actual                                      310,714,596.56                                      65,087.25




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Fernando Manibog           Peter Nigel Freeman         Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is "to increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas
   and to improve the efficiency of the Project Implementing Entity." (Schedule 1, page 6 of the Financing
   Agreement dated January 19, 2009) The Project Implementing Entity is the state water utility company of the
   Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), or REGIDESO, which henceforth will be referred to directly as such.




                                                                                               Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



   The project objective was modified on February 3, 2016 when the Bank's Board approved Additional
   Financing [AF]. The revised PDO was "to increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban
   areas, and to improve the operational performances and viability of the Project Implementing Entity."

   For the purposes of this assessment and the split methodology for deriving the overall outcome rating (see
   Section 5 on Efficacy), the project PDO will be assessed as two sub-objectives, original and revised:

   Objective 1: "To increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas", later revised as "To increase
   access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas".

   Objective 2: "To improve the efficiency of REGIDESO", later revised as "To improve the operational
   performances and viability of REGIDESO."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  03-Feb-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project as appraised included the following two main components and sub-components:

   Component A: Improvement and expansion of water supply services in major urban centers
   (US$101.6 million estimated at appraisal; US$257.85 million with Additional Financing; US$215.85
   million actual cost)

   This component intended to carry out investment and rehabilitation programs in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and
   Matadi to improve water production capacity, the secondary and tertiary distribution networks, and individual
   connections and collective distribution systems (standposts).

   Component B: Support to sector reform, capacity building and improved governance (US$88.4
   million estimated at appraisal; US$98.15 with Additional Financing; US$98.15 million actual cost)

   This component was designed to support the sustainability of the Component A investments (and those of
   other donors) by helping achieve operational and financial viability of REGIDESO. It was also intended to
   enable REGIDESO to extend water provision and initiate rehabilitation in other cities that are not covered by
   the project, using cash from profitable centers. This component comprises the following sub- components:

   B.1: Management Contract


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



This sub-component was intended to support payments to a Private Operator (PO) under a management
contract, and technical and financial auditors to measure the PO’s performance, whose main goal was to
restore the sound financial footing and improve the commercial operations of REGIDESO.

B.2: Repair, Replacement and Rehabilitation Fund

The Fund was intended to finance minor equipment and works needed to achieve the performance
indicators under the Management Contract, such as meters, replacing or repairing connections, data
processing equipment, etc.

B.3: Severance Program

This sub-component was to help the Government to implement necessary staff reductions through
negotiated retrenchment packages based on fair and adequate compensation, and included termination
grants, commercial bank fees, an audit of the severance program, and surveys of the program’s impact,
including the outcomes of reinsertion measures to assist separated staff in finding alternative employment
or engaging in substitute commercial activities.

B.4: Communication Program

This sub-component was intended promote understanding of the reforms among stakeholders, improve bill
collection, strengthen good governance, and promote a strategy for sanitation, hygiene, and behavorial
changes to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS in selected cities.

B.5: Capacity Building for the Ministries of Energy, REGIDESO, and COPIREP

This sub-component was intended to build the capacity of: (i) the Ministry of Energy, also in charge of the
water sector, for sector planning; (ii) the Ministry of Portfolio and Steering Committee for the Reform of
State-Owned Enterprises (COPIREP) in planning, regulation, and management contract monitoring; and (iii)
REGIDESO in technical, commercial, and financial matters.

B.6: Improved Governance in the Water Sector

Improvements in REGIDESO’s internal governance covered by the PO’s management contract; this sub-
component was to focus on improving REGIDESO’s relationship with users and government agencies. The
activities included: (i) client satisfaction surveys; (ii) a workshop to promote good governance among
parliamentarians; and (iii) a web site to publish contract awards under the project.

B.7: Implementation of an Action Plan to Reduce and Control Water Consumption by Public Institutions

Public agencies, which accounted for about 43 percent of REGIDESO’s total billings, have had large unpaid
bills and a collection ratio of less than 3 percent. The sub-component’s activities were to: (i) strengthen
REGIDESO’s capacity and provide information technology (IT) to streamline billing; (ii) conduct awareness
campaigns; and (iii) install and maintain meters, and rehabilitate the internal installations of key public
users.

B.8: Sanitation Strategies and Programs in Lubumbashi and Matadi



                                                                                               Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



  This sub-component included the identification of technical options and institutional arrangements for the
  effective delivery of services in the beneficiary cities, and studies to develop sanitation strategies and
  programs.

  B.9: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Supervision of Works and Audits

  This sub-component was intended to finance M&E and supervision activities, environmental and social
  impact studies, engineering studies, technical audits for works, and financial audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The original project cost as appraised was US$190 million. Additional Financing of US$166
  million increased the project cost to US$356 million. The actual disbursement was US$310.7 million.

  Financing. The project was financed by two IDA grants, specifically the original project (P091092, US$190
  million) and the Additional Financing (AF) (P155266, US$166 million). Respectively, the actual
  disbursements were US$190.5 million for the original grant and US$120.1 million for the AF, for a total
  disbursement of US$310.7 million. A Trust Fund grant for project preparation (TF-921050 was also
  provided amounting to $78,000, of which $65,087 was expended.

  Borrower Contribution. There was no Borrower contribution.

  Dates. The project took 12 and a half years to implement. It was approved on December 18, 2008 (the ICR
  erroneously indicates an Effectiveness Date six months earlier, on June 13, 2008). The midterm review
  was conducted on November 19, 2012. The original closing date was March 31, 2014 but the project's
  actual closing date was over seven later on June 30, 2021.

  The project had seven restructurings:

  July 17, 2012: The indicator value for "people in urban areas provided with access to improved water
  sources" was shifted from "percentage" to "number", in line with prevailing practice in wording sector
  indicators. The management contract was scaled down to a services contract. The scope of the Staff
  Restructuring Plan was also reduced. The number of intermediate indicators (18) was scaled down; 9
  indicators that were deemed redundant were dropped. The Results Framework was changed; funds were
  reallocated among disbursement categories; and the procurement plan was modified., The closing date was
  extended by 21 months to December 31, 2015.

  October 16, 2015: The closing date was extended by 4 months to April 30, 2016.

  February 3, 2016: This restructuring changed the PDO (discussed in Section 2 above) and provided
  Additional Financing (AF) to scale up the expansion of water supply services (Objective 1). In line with the
  additional activities, the target for the outcome indicator (i.e., "the number of people provided with access to
  sustainable water services supply" was increased from 1,205,000 to 2,600,000 people, The performance
  improvements expected from REGIDESO were also clarified. In addition, the word "urban" was removed
  from the indicator "people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources" to enable the
  inclusion of peri-urban areas in the targeted cities. The 2016 restructuring also revised the project's scope
  by adding the city of Kindu to benefit from water facilities Component A. Consequently, there was changes


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



   in the Results Framework, the components and costs, disbursement arrangements, safeguards policies
   triggered, procurement, and implementation schedule. The project closing date was extended by 36 months
   to December 31, 2018.

   December 31, 2018: This restructuring reduced the project's scope by removing activities for the city of
   Kindu, which was added earlier under the February 2016 restructuring; hence, some targets for
   intermediate outcomes targets were also reduced, without changing the final outcome target for Objective 1.
   The Results Framework was modified. The project closing date was extended piecemeal by 12 months to
   December 31, 2019.

   June 25, 2019: The closing date was extended to June 30, 2020.

   June 5, 2020: The closing date was extended to December 31, 2021.

   December 23, 2020: The closing date was extended to June 30, 2021.

   The last three restructurings of six months each were "because the preparation of the new project took
   longer than anticipated". (ICR, page 11)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Background. When the project was appraised in 2007, the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) was a post-conflict country whose per capita GDP of US$139 ranked it among the poorest in
the world. In 2004, around 94 percent of the population was living on less than US$1.90 per day. The
country’s infrastructure suffered from much physical damage and lacked maintenance during the conflict
period. Seriously weakened governance had worsened the already poor quality of services and further
reduced access by the poorest. The water supply and sanitation (WSS) sector was especially affected by
the conflict. At appraisal, only 22 percent of the total population had access to safe drinking water. Meeting
the MDG target of 71 percent—i.e., to give access to an additional 45 million people—was a major
challenge. In urban areas, water service delivery was inefficient, with the coverage rate falling from 68
percent to 35 percent between 1990 to 2006, due to the conflict, lack of investments, poor maintenance, aid
suspension, and population growth.

Institutionally, there were serious technical weaknesses, managerial inefficiencies, and commercial failures
in the national water utility, REGIDESO, which was unable to deliver sustainable water supply. At appraisal,
water services had ceased to function in more than 30 of the 94 urban centers served by REGIDESO. Of
the centers served, including the capital Kinshasa, many neighborhoods experienced lengthy service
interruptions. REGIDESO’s failure to deliver led to the installation of independent water networks in many
peri-urban communities of major cities, but the overall urban water supply coverage continued to decline
nonetheless. Although REGIDESO had been one of the best-performing African water utilities in the 1980s,
half of its connections subsequently became inactive, water sales significantly decreased, and all of its key
performance indicators deteriorated, particularly the non-revenue water (NRW), collection rate, and staff
productivity. Accumulated arrears from public institutions totaled 67 months of water consumption and
accounted for 43 percent of REGIDESO’s turnover. The collection rate—49 percent of billed amounts—was

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



the worst in Sub Saharan Africa. REGIDESO employed 4,803 individuals and was clearly overstaffed when
benchmarked with other water utilities in the region.

Relevance to the Government’s Strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were directly relevant to the prevailing
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and the Governments Priority Action Plan of August 2007, which
emphasized the need to implement water sector reforms in order to improve the rate of access to water
supply. REGIDESO’s reform was to be pursued within the DRC’s broader public enterprise reform agenda
that followed the 2006 Presidential elections and the start of a new Government in March 2007. The legal
framework that was promulgated in July 2008 called for the disengagement from public enterprises and
greater private sector participation, which were both pursued in the project under review.

At closing, the PDOs remained fully consistent with the PRSP (2011-2015), in which the third Pillar called
for a focus on "improving access to potable water, hygiene, and sanitation." This focus area
covered drinking water in urban areas and provides two operational recommendations fully in line with the
Project's two components: first, "increase access to drinking water in urban centers…through vast programs
of rehabilitation and extension of infrastructure and the construction of new systems” and second, reform
the potable water sub-sector in urban areas, which “should include the transformation and recovery of
REGIDESO, following the decentralization and disengagement laws of the State." (ICR, paragraph 26)

Relevance to the Bank’s Strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were fully consistent with two of the strategic
priorities of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) dated December 18, 2007, which were derived from the
PRSP. These priorities were “to promote good governance and consolidate peace” and “to help improve the
provision of social services and reduce vulnerability.” A decade later, the latest available Systematic
Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2018) continued to identify the lack of water sector reform as the major
bottleneck to water access. Water sector issues had worsened, notably the low water supply coverage in
urban areas, the public arrears on water bills, the uncontrolled increase in the salaries of the bloated
REGIDESO staff, hence the seriously debilitated financial viability of the water utility, and the weak overall
governance that continued to prevent institutional reform. These persistent sector issues highlight the
importance and relevance of the PDOs.

The PDOs remained relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) dated January 24, 2022 (which
was not yet available when the ICR was prepared). The water supply and sanitation sector was covered
under CPF Focus Area 2, namely to “Strengthen systems for improved service delivery and human capital
development” within which Objective 2.2 was to “Improve access to basic infrastructure services”, including
water, among others. Improved governance, which was directly relevant to the water sector, was a
common theme across the three CPF Focus Areas.

Previous Bank Involvement. In support of “CAS Outcome 1.3. Enhancing governance and increasing the
operational performance of SOEs”, IDA commitments have totaled US$2.1 billion across six operations,
one of which is the Urban Water Supply Project (P091092) under review (the other projects were in the
transport and electricity sectors). Moreover, in support of “CAS Outcome 3.1: Increased access to clean
water and sanitation”, IDA commitments have totaled US$494 million. The World Bank Group financed four
projects: the Emergency Social Action Project (P086874), the Emergency Urban and Social Rehabilitation
Project (P104497), the Urban Water Supply Project (P091092), and the Eastern Recovery Project
(P145196). This CAS outcome was to be measured in terms of: (i) the percentage of the population in the
targeted areas with access to potable water; and (ii) the number of people provided with access to
improved water sources. (Source: Country Partnership Framework, January 24, 2022)



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



               The PDOs were directly relevant to the past and current strategies of the Bank and the
               Government. However, one shortcoming was the activity related to the management contract, for which
               there was little institutional readiness in the DRC. The management contract activity proved over-ambitious
               and, after much delay, was replaced with a performance contract. While recognizing this shortcoming in
               one activity, which was not appropriately pitched to the post-conflict context at the DRC at the time of
               preparation and appraisal, the relevance of the project’s objectives is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             Since a theory of change (TOC) was not required for the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), the ICR
                             constructed an ex-post TOC based on the PDOs, which did not change during the Additional Financing, and
                             the PAD’s description of the project activities and the results indicators. The ICR’s TOC is well-articulated and
                             shows tight logical connections that sufficiently and convincingly demonstrate the project’s causal chain
                             toward the achievement of the PDOs. Whereas many TOCs in PADs and ICRs start with “Inputs” that lead to
                             “Outputs”, the ICR’s TOC start with “Issues” that need to be resolved, followed by “Activities” (not “Inputs”)
                             that directly address those sector issues, as the first two columns. This makes the causality chain much
                             clearer between the final outcomes (that signal PDO achievement) and the initiating sector bottlenecks that
                             serve as the justification for the project’s interventions. This causal link is less evident if the first column is
                             “inputs”. The list of “Issues” (first column in the ICR’s Figure 1) is comprehensive in covering physical,
                             commercial, financial and institutional bottlenecks in the water and sanitation sector. Moreover, whereas
                             many TOCs in PADs and ICRs jump from outputs to (final) outcomes, the ICR’s TOC also delineates the
                             intermediate outcomes that occur between production of outputs and achievement of PDO outcomes.

                             Overall, while the TOC is robust and easy to comprehend, its one significant shortcoming is the lack of
                             realism in its Critical Assumptions. All of the five assumptions (for the TOC to operate efficiently as intended)
                             were present only to a limited or negligible extent in the post-conflict DRC at the time of appraisal. Most
                             notably, there was a lack of the assumed Government commitment to resolving the mounting arrears of public
                             institutions. Other assumptions that underpin the efficient operation of the TOC—i.e., that REGIDESO has
                             adequate engineering and management expertise, that customers will be able and willing to pay for services,
                             that staff will voluntarily separate from REGIDESO—were not founded in reality, leading to the project’s
                             eventual failure in achieving its objectives. In particular, the more rigorous control and the timely payment of
                             the water bills of public agencies was one of the key reform pillars and the single most important pre-condition

                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



that could lead to the restoration of REGIDESO's financial viability, but this failed to materialize. Since the
TOC was prepared ex post, it raises the question why those assumptions were made in 2021 (the ICR’s
completion date), when it was already known during the project’s unusually long implementation period of
more than 12 years that those assumptions were unfounded. A more useful approach would be to identify
the prior actions needed to enable those critical assumptions to materialize (e.g., legislative and/or budgetary
actions by the government to enable or facilitate payment of public billing arrears), which would also help lay
the groundwork for designing a possible DPO as the ICR suggests as a future potential lending operation.

Finally, another shortcoming of the TOC is that there was no discussion whether the PDO outcomes could be
fully or only partially attributed to the project. This is important given the assistance coming from other donors
into DRC, a post-conflict FCV country at the time of appraisal.

The foregoing assessment of the TOC also applies to PDO2 below, since the rate and magnitude of
delivering water & sanitation services sustainably is closely linked to the efficiency, operational performance
and financial viability of REGIDESO.

Split Rating Approach

The split rating approach for evaluating the project’s efficacy is keyed to the July 2012, February 2016, and
December 2018 restructuring events, which divides the project implementation timeframe into four periods:

        From effectiveness in November 2009 to July 2012
        From July 2012 to December 2015
        From February 2016 to December 2018
        From January 2019 to June 2021, when the project closed

Each of these four periods has its own efficacy rating, which is assigned a numerical value as prescribed in
the ICR preparation guidelines. Those four numerical values are weighted by the amount disbursed during
each specific time period, Those four weighted values are added to derive the project's overall efficacy,

Assessment of the original project (prior to the first restructuring)

The project performed poorly from effectiveness up to the project’s first restructuring in 2012. Achievement of
the objective—for which greater access to water supply services was to be provided mainly through
household connections and stand posts—was to be signaled by only one indicator, namely, “people provided
with access to improved water sources.” The project was unable to demonstrate any progress in achieving
the intermediate indicators or this PDO indicator.

The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 1 during this first period is rated as negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
                                                                                                      Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



To increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas



Revised Rationale
At the July 2012 restructuring, the PDO was not changed but both the outcome and the outcome target were
changed. Instead of the percentage of people in targeted cities, the PDO outcome was changed to “the
number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources”. According to the ICR
(page 11), this was done "to align with the current practice and wording for sector indicators." That number
was set at 1,205,000. The project surpassed this target and achieved 1,653,000 people.

The outputs leading to the above outcome were also achieved: secondary and tertiary networks, community
water points, and new household connections.

The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 1 during this second period is rated high.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas

Revised Rationale
At the February 2016 restructuring, which corresponded to the approval of the Additional Financing, the PDO
was not changed but the outcome and the outcome target were changed. In order to allow investments in
peri-urban areas, the restrictive word “urban” was deleted from the PDO outcome, and was changed to “the
number people provide with access to improved water sources.” Compared to the target of 2,600,000 people
that was set, the project’s result was below target at 1,893,630 people (73 % achievement). The construction
of the Ozone water treatment plant was also delayed, which had a negative impact on water productivity (36
% achieved) and network construction (57 % achieved). New connections also achieved only 63 % of
targets. The only fully achieved target was the rehabilitation of 116,265 private connections (105 % achieved).

Since most of the targets were two-thirds achieved, and in one case was slightly exceeded, the project’s
efficacy in achieving PDO 1 during this third period is rated substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To increase sustainable access to water in selected urban areas

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




Revised Rationale
At the December 2018 restructuring, the PDO was not changed but an investment that was added during the
Additional Financing was cancelled. The Kindu works were significantly delayed, and the preparation of the
detailed design studies had just been finalized yet six more months were required for the bidding
process. Given the ten years of implementation that had already passed and the many closing date
extensions that had already been granted, the Government and the Bank decided to cancel the Kindu
works. This, in turn, necessitated a reduction of the scope of Component A and some output indicators.

By the project completion date, 3,071,430 people had access to safe drinking water, which was 118 % of the
target. New connections reached 88,881 households (121 % of the target), while 153,490 connections were
rehabilitated (139 % of target). In addition to new connections, 9,020 existing ones that had been inactive for
more than five years were reactivated, covering many poor and vulnerable households.

The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 1 during this fourth period prior to the closing date is rated high.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the efficiency of REGIDESO



Rationale
The TOC is the same as above.

From effectiveness up to the first restructuring, there was no improvement in REGIDESO’s operating cost
ratio. The bill collection rate for private connections did improve and achieved 92 % of the target, mainly due
to the completion of REGIDESO’s staff restructuring plan. However, while the number of employees per
1,000 of active connections decreased, overall progress on this indicator was only 37 % of the target.
Operational performance had not improved: water losses in the network remained significant and the
reduction in non-revenue water was a meager 6.7 % of the target set at appraisal, exacerbated in part by the
lack of additional water supplies due to the major delays in construction works under the project. Overall,
REGIDESO’s financial viability remained precarious.

The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 2 from effectiveness to the first restructuring in November 2009 is
negligible.



Rating
Negligible


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To Improve the efficiency of REGIDESO

Revised Rationale
At the July 2012 restructuring, there were no revisions in PDO 2, its outcomes, or its targets (the changes
concerned PDO 1). For PDO2, the progress in REGIDESO’s financial viability were still less than envisaged.
Its operating cost ratio reached 90 % of targets. Full availability of the existing water production was achieved
(131 % of the target). However, the reduction of non-revenue water was still low at 12.5 % of the target,
indicating that REGIDESO’s financial insolvency was being driven mainly by physical water losses rather than
commercial losses from unpaid bills.

The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 2 during this second period is rated modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve the operational performance and viability of REGIDESO

Revised Rationale
At the February 2016 restructuring, which corresponded to the approval of the Additional Financing, PDO 2
was changed. The word “efficiency” in the original wording was replaced by “operational performance and
viability.” This period corresponded with a significant deterioration of REGIDESO’s finances. Its operating
cost ratio plummeted to 60 %, which was lower than the original baseline. This dismal position was driven by
(i) a low collection rate for public and private customers, at 65 % and (-) 11.5 % of targets; (ii) a persistently
high percentage of inactive connections (36 % versus the target of 20 %); (iii) the production of additional
water reached only 36 % of the target; and (iv) negligible results in addressing non-revenue water losses.

The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 2 during this third period is rated negligible.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To improve the operational performance and viability of REGIDESO

Revised Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



                              From the January 2019 restructuring until project closing, REGIDESO’s financial situation just continued its
                              steep decline and, by the time of ICR preparation, was below the baselines. The collection rate of public and
                              private bills steadily declined. Despite the improvement in the ratio of staffing to number of connections,
                              REGIDESO’s human resources cost was not reduced due to: (i) the granting of costly benefits packages;
                              (ii) salary increases that exceeded the inflation rate, i.e., 3.4 % and 2.6 %, respectively; and (iii) increases in
                              the number of consultants who replaced departing staff. There was no progress in addressing non-revenue
                              water losses, which was the case throughout project implementation.

                              The project’s efficacy in achieving PDO 2 during this fourth and final period prior to project closing is rated
                              negligible.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on the sub-ratings presented above, the ratings for each of the four restructuring periods are as
                            follows:

                                   From effectiveness in November 2009 to July 2012 - Negligible



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                   Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Based on the sub-ratings presented above, the ratings for each of the four restructuring periods are as
                            follows:

                                   From July 2012 to December 2015 - Substantial



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale

                                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



         Based on the sub-ratings presented above, the ratings for each of the four restructuring periods are as
         follows:

                From February 2016 to December 2018 - Negligible



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating                         Primary Reason
         Negligible                                                 Low achievement
 OBJR3_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 3
         Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rationale
         Based on the sub-ratings presented above, the ratings for each of the four restructuring periods are as
         follows:

                From January 2019 to June 2021, when the project closed - Modest



         Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rating                         Primary Reason
         Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
The project’s efficiency in achieving the PDOs is modest at best, and not substantial as the ICR indicates.
Although there is some data that suggests efficiency in increasing water access (PDO1), there is negligible if not
zero evidence that the project had any demonstrable effectiveness in increasing the efficiency of REGIDESO
(the original PDO2) or its operational performance and viability (the revised PDO at the time of Additional
Financing).

Financial Efficiency. Based on evidence from the ICR itself (mainly Annex 4), the resources expended by the
project (i.e., US$88.4 million at appraisal and US$98.15 million actual cost at completion) had negligible or no
efficiency in achieving PDO2, as follows:

              REGIDESO was in a deficit situation throughout the project’s life. The slight improvement after Additional
               Financing (from an average per year of FC -33.6 million to FC -31.3 billon) was not adequate to allow
               REGIDESO’s financial viability to recover.
              By project closing, the collection rate for public arrears and private bills remained seriously low and even
               declined, causing major real shortfalls in REGIDESO’s revenue. Receivables from public agencies were
               an especially significant portion of REGIDESO’s overall deficits and largely accounted for its insolvency.
              REGIDESO’s staff costs remained high at project closing, despite the staff restructuring plan and
               reductions in total staff, thus continuing to drive REGIDESO’s high operating costs. Between 2015 to
               2019, a high 36.4% of REGIDESO’s total operating expenses were attributable to personnel
               costs. Although the number of staff per 1,000 connections decreased, the average annual cost per
               agent increased from US$ 20,155 in 2016 to US$ 20,550 in 2017.
              The ICR’s Annex 4, Graph 1 (covering 12 years from 2009 to 2020) shows that although there were
               slight improvements in the collection rate for private customers and in the percentage of unbilled water,

                                                                                                             Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



       the collection rate for public agencies declined precipitously, which represented strong contrary evidence
       to a substantial project efficiency rating.
      The project was unable to reduce non-revenue water. To the contrary, since 2012, the trend was toward
       a decrease in network efficiency

Based on sales revenue alone, the ICR calculated the project’s financial internal rate of return (FIRR) as 7.2 %
and the net present value (NPV) at US$17.5 million using a 6 % discount rate. The detailed assumptions
underlying the financial forecasts were not available in Annex 4 of the ICR.

Economic Efficiency. The ICR used the same methodology as in the PAD in updating the project’s economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) and NPV, with important updates related to the Additional Financing and the
impact of the much later completion date on the timing of project benefits. The EIRR calculation covered over
20 years and used the same discount rate of 12 % as in the PAD. The project’s benefit stream included the
incremental water consumption, cost savings from improved operational performance by REGIDESO, and the
“consumer surplus” that accrued to beneficiaries from having shifted to formal connections and standpipes,
away from non-potable water sources

The ICR reports an overall project EIRR of 28.7% and an NPV of US$ 70.9 million. When disaggregated across
the three urban areas (Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, and Matadi), the EIRR (37.2%) and NPV (US$58.5 million) is
markedly higher in Kinshasa, given the size and diversity of the project investments allocated to the
capital. This compares favorably with the PAD EIRR of 41 %. At lower discount rates of 10 % and 6%, the NPV
increases to US$ 98.5 million and US$ 189.1 million, respectively.

Moreover, survey results from a project funded by the French Development Agency (the PILAEP 2 project)
showed that the estimated time to collect 83 liters of water decreased from 142.7 minutes without the project to
just 30 minutes with the project.

In summary, as Annex 4, paragraph 27 of the ICR indicates: “The project brought high economic profitability to
millions of people living in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, and Matadi, and [the Government] throughout several sectors
(water, gender promotion, education, and health). However, the project was not able to improve the financial
management of REGIDESO to the extent envisioned.”

Administrative and Implementation Efficiency. The project’s implementation record has been characterized by a
large number of major delays that had serious consequences, including the necessity for repeated extensions of
the project closing date. From the very start, the project could not commence implementation because the
bidding documents for Kinshasa itself (under Component A) were delayed by 20 months, or almost two years;
the works for private connections were delayed as well due to procurement issues. The works at Kindu were
delayed because the detailed engineering studies were only nearing completion by the time of the original
closing date, hence the Kindu works had to be dropped from the project. There were delays in constructing the
Ozone water treatment plant, which had major negative impacts: only 36% and 57% of the water productivity
and network construction targets were achieved, respectively, hence the water access target of 2.6 million
people was also not achieved. These construction delays had a serious negative impact on REGIDESO’s
finances: the reduction of non-revenue water achieved only 6.7 percent of its target, due to large water losses in
the network and delays in construction works, which resulted in little or no additional water production. Even the
emergency procurement of chlorine for Kinshasa was seriously delayed in 2019; in any event, given
REGIDESO’s severe financial crisis, it did not have the funds to pay for the shipment. The Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were also delayed, resulting in a



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



delay in disbursements. The recruitment of the Administrative and Financial Officer to be responsible for
overseeing financial management was also delayed.

The ICR’s evidence demonstrates that the project’s efficiency in achieving PDO1 (increased water access) is
substantial, while that of PDO2 (improved efficiency, operational performance and viability of REGIDESO) is
negligible. The project’s administrative and implementation efficiency is modest. The project’s overall efficiency
is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          0
 Appraisal                                                   41.00
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          0
 ICR Estimate                                                28.70
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While there was some over-ambitiousness in some of the activities, the past and current relevance of the
project’s PDOs to the strategies of the government and the Bank is high. Taking into account the change in
PDO2 and the successive restructurings that changed the targeted outcomes, the assessment of the project’s
efficacy in achieving the two PDOs demonstrates a preponderance of negligible performance. The efficiency for
PDO1 is substantial; however, the negligible efficiency for the critically important PDO2 of reforming
REGIDESCO, together with the modest administrative and implementation efficiency, lead to an efficiency rating
of modest. Based on these sub-ratings, the overall project outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory.

To properly set this moderately unsatisfactory outcome in a larger context, it is worth noting the following (from
the 2022 Country Partnership Framework, paragraph 221): “Through DRC Urban Water Supply Project
(US$365 million) and other emergency projects (around US$500 million), 1,000 km of water pipes have been
laid, with 2.5 million people gaining access to basic water supply services. Meanwhile, the population of
Kinshasa has more than doubled—from six million to likely around 15 million—and the volume of investments
has therefore not been sufficient to keep up with demographic trends and demand/need.”

The derivation of the project's moderately unsatisfactory overall outcome rating based on the split-rating of its
efficacy is presented below:

Split ratings (for efficacy) to derive the overall project outcome rating


                                                                                                         Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




                                                                                        From January
                                            From                         From February
                                                         From July 2012                 2019 (targets
                                      effectiveness in                  2016 (PDO2 and
                                                          (targets were                were revised) to
                                      November 2009                       targets were
                                                            revised) to                    project
                                        to July 2012                       revised) to
                                                         December 2015                   completion
                                      (original targets)                December 2018
                                                                                        on June 2021

           Relevance of PDO                                              High
             Efficacy (PDO)              Negligible        Substantial           Negligible         Modest
               Efficiency                                             Modest
                                                          Moderately                              Moderately
            Outcome ratings            Unsatisfactory                           Unsatisfactory
                                                          Satisfactory                           Unsatisfactory
      Numerical value of outcome
                                             2                  4                     2                3
                ratings
      Disbursement (US$ million)           39.09             147.62                44.67            124.62
         Share of disbursement              11%               41%                   13%              35%
         Weighted value of the
                                            0.22              1.64                  0.26             1.05
            outcome rating
                                                                         3.17
         Final outcome rating
                                                           Moderately Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main threat to the long-term sustainability of the project's physical investments in water supply
infrastructure is the limited improvement in REGIDESO's performance, despite the substantial increase in the
number of people that have gained access to drinking water in the three main cities in DRC as a result of the
project. REGIDESO continues to face the major critical challenges of high labor costs and non-payment of
water bills incurred by official public institutions.

The Bank and the Government recognize this risk and remain committed to pursuing the water sector reform
activities that have been initiated under the project, building upon the more robust institutional framework that
offer new opportunities in the water sector. For instance, the design of the ongoing Kin Elenda project
(P171141) in Kinshasa took into account the lessons learned from REGIDESO's performance improvement
activities. A new Utilities of the Future approach is being used, which focuses initially on building
REGIDESO's ownership of, and compliance with a 100-day plan. Based on internal steps taken and
progress made, the project would finance the implementation activities. This step-wise approach is expected
to result in better reform ownership, performance improvements, and alignment of activities with agreed
outcomes and indicators.




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design was well grounded in the post-conflict issues that affected the DRC. The project
  was conceptualized as “a medium-term poverty reduction effort, with a strong focus on governance and
  shared growth. The CAS is derived from the PRSP, and actions proposed under the CAS are closely
  aligned with PRSP priorities.” (PAD, paragraph 22). The project’s urban focus also carefully took into
  account the peri-urban and rural focal areas that were already being pursued by other donors. The
  project’s design also reflected the lessons from the 2007 Country Portfolio Performance Review, and the
  experience with similar projects in neighboring countries, notably with respect to promoting Public-Private
  Partnerships. Through several project preparation missions, the Bank team ensured that the project’s
  design was adequately supported by technical analysis and detailed consultations with all engaged
  stakeholders at national and local levels, as well as other donors supporting DRC’s water and sanitation
  sector. More specifically, the PAD indicates that: "The identification of beneficiary cities under the project
  comes from a study entitled “Analysis of the Efficiency of REGIDESO and the Institutional Framework in
  the DRC Urban Water Sector”, carried out as part of project preparation. The interim reports of this study
  were widely disseminated for comment to all key stakeholders (in particular REGIDESO’s management
  and unions, the Ministries of Energy, Portfolio, Finance, and Budget) as well as to donors active in the
  water sector in the DRC. These interim reports were further presented and discussed at two workshops
  organized by COPIREP, the government agency in charge of public enterprise reform, in Kinshasa in July
  and December 2007." One positive result of these close consultations is the decision to conduct joint
  supervision missions and concurrent reviews of critical documents with the African Development Bank
  (AfDB), which was financing a complementary project.

  However, at the time of project preparation and appraisal, the Bank was unable to obtain concrete and
  sustained government actions to resolve the issue of non-payment of water consumption by official
  institutions. The sustainability of the project's outcomes depended on effectively addressing this issue,
  hence the extent to which this was feasible should have been addressed up front but was not. Indeed,
  this issue persisted and worsened during project implementation. Consequently, the scope and timetable
  for reforms proved lack realism, e.g., in the case of the management contract. The project design
  appears to have been over-ambitious in selecting a management contract approach that did not seem to
  be appropriately pitched to the low institutional capacities in a FCV country that was just emerging from a
  long period of conflict. In addition, there was a major need for strengthening procurement and contract
  management capacity before launching project implementation. Finally, there was also a large number of
  indicators, some of which overlapped, where as there was no means for tracking the sustainability of
  water access.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



 The Bank team conducted regular and in-depth supervision missions that included field visits and on-site
 physical inspection of project-financed facilities. As required, the team prepared Aide-Memoires and
 Implementation Supervision and Results Reports (ISRs) that included details on the progress (or lack
 thereof) of activities under the two Components. The supervision record shows that the Bank team has
 been candid in downgrading project performance during the periods when there was little or no
 implementation progress. The record also shows that the Bank team was proactive in taking timely action
 when major issues threatened to impede PDO achievement. A specific example was the in-depth review
 that the Bank team carried out related to the delays in the first bidding for works in Kinshasa, which was
 instrumental in contract launching and resumption of disbursement. The ICR indicates that “the Bank
 provided rapid and agile responses during the cholera outbreak and COVID-19 pandemic to allow
 REGIDESO to support the Government's response to each.” Given the long project implementation period,
 it was likely that there were changes in the TTLs and composition of the Bank project team. The ICR does
 not discuss whether those changes had any impact on project implementation and the dialogue with the
 government.

 A supervision issue that had a major negative impact was the series of four restructuring events during the
 project’s final years (corresponding to the Additional Financing period) that extended the closing date by six
 months each time. This hampered rather than facilitated the implementation of Component B (REGIDESO
 and sector reforms) since the REGIDESO and sector reforms required longer time periods to implement
 than the six-month extension provided. Instead of the “piecemeal” approach taken, the ICR argues that
 “Had a single two-year extension been granted, perhaps a more holistic approach might have been taken
 and some delays (e.g., linked to the construction of the Ozone WTP or the cancellation of works in Kindu)
 might have been achieved (sic).” (Note: the ICR probably meant “avoided”.)

 Given the major shortcomings in quality at entry--notably the failure to tangibly address the non-payment of
 bills by official institutions, which directly impeded the achievement of PDO 2 on the financial viability of
 REGIDESO--as well as the repetitive short extensions of the AF closing days which negatively impacted
 supervision effectiveness, the overall Bank performance rating is moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) included a Results Framework (RF) but did not have a theory of
 change, which was not yet required at the time of appraisal according to the ICR. The RF delineated the
 links between the individual project components/activities and their corresponding intermediate and final
 outcome indicators, and their respective baselines and targets, all leading towards achieving the PDOs of
 constructing the water supply infrastructure and implementing the water sector reform. The data sources
 and entities responsible for data collection were also enumerated. Despite the RF’s streamlining during the

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



 June 2012 restructuring, it still had a long list of indicators, particularly for Component B on sector
 reforms. Actions were difficult to prioritize given the long list of sometimes overlapping RF indicators.

 M&E design had major shortcomings. First, it should have included a more specific PDO indicator
 specifically aimed at defining and tracking the sustainability of water access. Second, the overlapping or
 identical indicators should have been further streamlined or deleted. For example, the "Proportion of bills
 owed by IO in total billing" provides the same type of information as "Proportion of volumes owed by IO in
 total volumes owed"). Similarly, some indicators are not well articulated and ask for information that is
 unlikely to change during implementation, such as the “Number of a water utility (sic) that the project is
 supporting". This indicator is cryptic, since the project only supported REGIDESO.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementing the M&E framework was straightforward. REGIDESO’s PIU was centrally responsible for
  the overall coordination, production, verification, quality assurance, and final validation of M&E activities
  and data, with inputs from REGIDESO centers and departments. COPIREP also provided data specific to
  the progress of water sector reforms.

  Although the M&E framework was revised and streamlined to reflect and better monitor changes in
  activities and scale-ups, many intermediate indicators still showed redundancy and overlap, which should
  have been resolved during the project restructurings. An important shortcoming during implementation is
  the failure to develop a comprehensive Water Sector Information System (SIS) to monitor and evaluate
  the water assets, and guarantee data retention by transferring that centralized database to REGIDESO
  after the project. The database in Kinshasa intended to manage and improve customer service was a
  positive first step toward an integrated SIS for all of REGIDESO’s assets.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were used to inform project management and formulate decisions, and were reported in
  Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs). This was evident during the preparations for the
  2016 and 2018 restructurings, when indicator targets were revised based on the tracking of the
  household connections program. The 2016 restructuring involved the scaling-up of targets, based on
  M&E data. The PIU also used the M&E data to prepare the project’s quarterly reports and used the
  information to identify problems and target the implementation bottlenecks in different cities. For
  example, weekly tracking in Kinshasa resulted in a more efficient household connection program; hence,
  the approach of using field supervisors was replicated in other cities. Nonetheless, the 2016
  restructuring should have added a PDO indicator to assess REGIDESO's operational performance. The
  absence of such an indicator had a negative impact in assessing the efficacy of reforms.

  While recognizing that the indicators could have been better rationalized during the project restructurings
  to eliminate redundancies and irrelevancies, the M&E system did provide an effective and reliable tool to
  monitor project performance and assist decision-making. Overall, M&E quality is rated substantial.




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project triggered the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies. During the Additional Financing for the project, two other
   policies were triggered: Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Projects on International Waterways
   (OP/BP.7.60), the latter in view of the planned ozone water treatment plant. The project was classified as
   Category B.

   To comply with safeguards, PIU prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
   and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which were disclosed in the selected project sites in
   accordance with the Bank’s disclosure policies. For civil works, CEP-O prepared Environmental and Social
   Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) and Resettlement
   Action Plans (RAP) when necessary. With respect to the International Waterways policy, compliance
   involved sending a notification dated July 7, 2015 from the DRC Government to the riparian countries
   through the Commission Internationale du Bassin Congo-Oubangui-Sangah (CICOS). Near project closing,
   the Contractor's Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were modified to include COVID-
   19 prevention and mitigation measures using Bank guidelines.

   When the project closed, compliance with all the safeguard policies was rated Satisfactory, except for the
   Involuntary Resettlement policy, which was rated Moderately Satisfactory, due to the delay in completing
   the ARAP and RAP in the three cities, which in turn delayed disbursement for Component A. Hence the
   overall rating at project closing was Moderately Satisfactory for safeguards compliance. Moreover, a RAP in
   Kinshasa was implemented without Bank approval, which was resolved through a Government report
   assessing economic loss that the Bank found satisfactory. Otherwise, implementation of all the planned
   actions was satisfactory; the environmental and social impacts of works were mitigated in line with the
   standards and guidelines in the project contracts.

   From the time of the Additional Financing, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was in place and
   functional in all project sites. PAPs and anyone with a project-related complaint or concern had access to
   the GRM. A call center with a free number and trained local complaint management committees were
   established in Kinshasa, to proactively resolve grievances. By project closing, 187 complaints were
   registered, all of which were processed; 162 were founded and 25 were unfounded.

   Since the project’s start-up, seven Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) incidents have been reported.
   The ICR reported that none were severe. All incidents were accounted for through the Environmental and
   Social Incident Response Toolkit (ESIRT), and were closed. The Bank team and the PIU checked
   contractors and consultants regularly to monitor the occurrence and appropriate resolution of any OHS
   incidents, as well as the preparation and implementation of Safeguards Corrective Action Plans.




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Although procurement was initially satisfactory and remained so until December 2017, it was
   downgraded to, and stayed Moderately Satisfactory until project closing. This resulted from procurement
   delays for key infrastructure (e.g., Kindu construction works, the ozone treatment plant) which led to
   significant implementation slowdowns and the need for several closing date extensions. During supervision
   missions, the Bank team identified issues in some selections that were reported under post review, which
   the PIU addressed by updating the project implementation manual (PIM) in line with the General
   Procurement Guidelines, with a view to more clearly defining the functions of the international procurement
   expert. This PIU action was satisfactory to the World Bank. The Bank team also noted issues during the
   Procurement Post Reviews (PPR), and its recommendations were implemented properly. A positive aspect
   is that the project has been set as an example of using STEP for procurement.

   Financial Management (FM). The project’s FM arrangements were rated as Satisfactory or Moderately
   Satisfactory throughout implementation. Nonetheless, in February 2017, the Bank’s supervision mission
   found that FM could be improved, and provided recommendations that the PIU addressed. In August 2018,
   however, the FM rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory when certain ineligible expenses
   were identified through an in-depth review. There were also delays in recruiting the administrative and
   financial officer (AFO). The rating was upgraded back to Moderately Satisfactory after the ineligible costs
   were reimbursed to the Bank and the AFO was recruited. The ICR (page 25) did not provide
   any information regarding financial audits.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately              Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   There were serious
                                                                                   shortcomings in Bank quality at
                               Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   entry and the piecemeal
                               Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   extensions seriously hampered
                                                                                   supervision effectiveness.
                                                                                   There was no indicator to
                                                                                   measure the sustainability of
Quality of M&E                 Substantial             Modest                      water access and many
                                                                                   indicators were overlapping or
                                                                                   repetitive.
Quality of ICR                 ---                     Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




12. Lessons

The following four lessons were derived from the project’s implementation experience. The first
lesson was formulated by IEG while the other three lessons were from the ICR, with some
modifications.

The scope and timetable for reforms need to be realistic and scaled to match the capacity of
implementing institutions, particularly in FCV countries. The management contract in the
original project design proved too ambitious, given the FCV conditions in the DRC. It did not attract
interest from the private sector and the tendering was unsuccessful. The project’s ambition was
lowered to that of a less-binding service contract, which ultimately proved insufficient to implement
meaningful reforms in the water sector.

The implementation of ambitious reforms requires an agile and adaptive approach as local
conditions change. After the failure of the management contract tendering, the project should have
been restructured to move toward more straightforward and realistically achievable objectives that
better reflect the change in strategy toward that of a service contract. The revision towards more
modest water sector reform goals should have focused on gradually building the Government’s trust
with the reform process in the short term, thus laying the groundwork for introducing more ambitious
reforms in the longer term.

To achieve systemic changes, Government support needs to be sustained and demonstrated
at the highest levels. The project’s poor performance takes root in the State’s lack of involvement
in resolving the major issue of non-payment of water consumption by official institutions and
beneficiaries, and the lack of public funding for the water sector, thus preventing the financial
recovery of REGIDESO. The project closed with REGIDESO facing serious financial losses linked to
non-payment of public arrears and persistent issues with its human resources. These two
challenges need to be addressed; otherwise, any significant performance improvements would not
be sustainable. However, these reforms require sustained championing and engagement from the
highest levels of Government. With the DRC’s FCV conditions, and weak support in the previous as
well as the new Government, the targeted changes were not attained. seen during the project, this
support was not sufficient to reach the level of change initially targeted. For the Bank’s part, an in-
depth understanding the political economy and local context at appraisal and throughout
implementation is essential factor in achieving targeted results.

The required procurement and contract management capacity need to be strengthened and
in place prior to project approval. Sound engineering design studies were lacking prior to the
Board approvals of the original project and the Additional Financing. This resulted in procurement
delays and poor contract management performance, which in turn led to major implementation
delays and repeated extensions of the project closing date. The engineering design studies and the
bidding documents should have been completed (by the project PIU) at the early stages of project
preparation, thus enabling the bidding process to start upon project approval. The project PIU also
need to be provided technical assistance and continued capacity building in contract management to
enable the timely completion of the civil works and avoid successive postponements that in turn lead
to numerous project closing date extensions.



                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well prepared, especially in its focus on providing quantitative evidence and its candor. The ICR
constructed an ex-post theory of change (not in the PAD), which was notable in presenting the underlying
sector issues before outlining the causal chains from inputs to final outcomes. It required much effort to
delineate the inputs, outputs and outcomes for each of the four periods that had to be separately assessed,
given the three major restructurings that changed the second PDO, the outcomes, and the outcome targets.
The ICR was consistent with the Bank guidelines for ICR preparation, notably in its application of the split rating
methodology.

However, the ICR did not discuss the project's administrative and implementation efficiency under the Efficiency
section. Moreover, there was a large number of errors in the text. There were numerous spelling mistakes and
wrong words used (in some cases the wrong verbs were used), which changed the meaning of the
sentences. There were also numerical errors. A few of many other examples are given below:

Paragraph 14: From the previous closing date of December 31, 2018, the ICR stated that an extension of "six
months" was granted, and the new closing date was December 31, 2019. The correct length of the extension is
twelve months, not six. Similarly, in June 2020, the extension of 6 months from June 30, 2020 would result in a
new closing date of December 31, 2020, not December 31, 2021 as the ICR indicates.

Paragraph 23 refers to December 2018 as "Two years after the Additional Financing...", thus implying that the
AF occurred in 2016. However, paragraph 21's subtitle refers to "the Additional Financing of October 2015."

Annex 3. For Component A, the actual cost (US$215.85 million) as a percentage of cost at
approval (US$101.6 million) is not 84%. Similarly, for Component C, the actual cost (US$98.15 million) as a
percentage of cost at approval (US$88.4 million) is not 100%. Respectively, the correct figures are 212% and
111%.

Although an effort should have been clearly made in proofreading the text to eliminate the high number of
errors, the overall quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09) (P091092)




                                                                               Page 24 of 24
