     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023015

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132617                                    Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                       Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2160,IDA-H8620                        31-Oct-2018                                           63,714,128.22

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2013                                31-Oct-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             65,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         63,953,290.56                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the financing agreement (p. 4), the project's objectives were: (i) to improve teaching and learning
   conditions in primary and upper secondary schools in selected areas; and (ii) to strengthen the system to
   facilitate evidence-based decision making in the education sector."

   At a June 2017 restructuring and additional financing (AF), the objectives were revised, dropping the second
   objective. The new objective was to improve teaching and learning conditions in primary schools nationwide
   and upper secondary schools in selected areas. The AF introduced activities intended to support nationwide

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



   payment of teachers at a time of fiscal crisis, in response to widespread teacher strikes and absenteeism over
   delayed or unpaid wages. The second objective was dropped to accommodate capacity constraints in the
   Ministry of National Education and Promotion of Civics (MENPC) and the urgent need to focus on stabilizing
   the education system.

   Because many of the outputs and some of the outcomes for improving primary and secondary schools were
   the same, the two levels of schooling are assessed here as a single objective. In addition, with the dropping of
   the second objective at the 2017 restructuring, a split rating is performed for this review. At the time of
   restructuring, US$6.37 million, or 9.96 percent of total financing, had been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project proposed using a "traditional" platform of school construction, teaching and learning material
   production and distribution, and teacher training within a limited geographic scope to introduce, pilot, and
   test systems innovations that could lead to greater efficiencies in the delivery of education. The PAD (p. 7)
   noted that multiple other donors were engaged in Chad's education sector, with their relationship structured
   according to a partnership framework signed in 2012. Interventions financed by UNICEF and UNESCO
   were covering some of the country's most poor and disadvantaged regions; the six regions covered by this
   project were chosen to complement those other efforts. The project was structured around three original
   components:

   1. Improving teaching and learning conditions in primary schools (appraisal: US$9.1 million; AF: US$
   11.5 million; actual: US$16.05 million) focused on infrastructure, teaching and learning materials, teacher
   training, efficiency gains, and national strategy development. It was to finance community-led construction
   of 70 classrooms and rehabilitation of five additional classrooms; printing, distribution, and training on
   405,000 textbooks and 10,000 teacher guides; improvements in the quality and efficiency of the in-service
   training system for community teachers (CTs); training of 1,620 CTs; and piloting of a new payment
   mechanism for CT subsidies through mobile phones.

   2. Improving teaching and learning in upper secondary schools (appraisal: US$2.0 million; AF: 0;
   actual: US$3.05 million) focused on teaching and learning materials (with a special focus on scientific
   disciplines), teacher training, cost-effectiveness of interventions, and development of a subsector strategy. It
   was to finance upgrading of the pedagogical and didactic skills of 300 upper secondary science teachers



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



   and 90 inspectors, science kits, and development of documentary resource centers (DRCs) for science
   teachers.

   3. Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (M&E) (appraisal: US$3.9 million; AF: US$3.5
   million; actual: US$5.6 million) focused on funding the activities of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), with
   particular emphasis on strengthening M&E and evidence-based management capacities of the Ministry of
   Basic Education and Literacy (MEFA) and the Ministry of Secondary Education and Professional Training
   (MEFPS) (during implementation, these entities evolved into the MENPC). It was to finance the design and
   upgrading of tools and institutional mechanisms for collecting, compiling, controlling, and using school-level
   data for human resource management, statistical, and overall planning purposes, and hands-on training.

   At the June 2017 restructuring and AF, a fourth component was added, additional funds were allocated to
   teacher training under the first component, a new subcomponent on support for de-worming of all primary
   school-age children was added to the first component, and activities and US$1.2 million in financing for CT
   subsidy support (supporting mobile phone-based payment mechanisms) were moved from the first
   component to the fourth component.

   4. Community teachers' subsidies payments (AF: US$35 million; actual: US$39.65 million). In response
   to a fiscal crisis in 2017 brought about by a sharp decrease in domestic revenues due to falling oil prices,
   the AF aimed to support the payment of CT subsidies to ensure a stable learning environment and
   adequate learning conditions that were being disrupted by teacher strikes and absenteeism throughout the
   country. It was to finance payment of CT subsidies for approximately 11,680 teachers across three
   school years, beginning in 2016-2017, and training of 3,000 lower-level CTs to become contractualized.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was designed as a five-year investment project financing grant of SDR 10 million (US$15 million
   equivalent). On June 23, 2017, an AF Grant of US$50 million was approved, primarily to support a new
   fourth component. No government contribution was envisaged or made. Total disbursement was US$64.35
   million, with US$0.65 million unused (ICR, p. 37).

   The project was approved on June 21, 2013 and became effective on January 8, 2014. It was initially
   expected to close on October 31, 2018. Following a mid-term review in March of 2017, the project was
   restructured in June 2017 and the closing date extended to October 31, 2020. A second restructuring took
   place in October 2020, again extending the closing date. The project closed on October 31, 2021, three
   years later than originally planned. Its restructurings were as follows:

         June 23, 2017: AF and revision of objectives and components as detailed above, with corresponding
          adjustment of the results framework and implementation arrangements.
         October 30, 2020: Extension of the closing date and other adjustments to accommodate the impact
          of the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



Rationale
The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context. Despite relative political stability, Chad is
considered a fragile state, having been exposed to security crises and affected by instability in the sub-
region that produced an influx of 300,000 refugees in the early 2010s. After becoming an oil-exporting state
in 2003, Chad experienced nominal GDP growth of 15 percent between 2000 and 2011, but this economic
performance was not accompanied by improvements in the poverty level or human development indicators.
It remains one of the poorest countries in the world, with more than half of its population living on less than
US$1.25/day in 2011. Public education expenditures increased by seven percent annually between 2001
and 2011, but funding of the sector remained low, with only 2.5 percent of GDP and 10.3 percent of the
state budget allocated to education over that decade. Infrastructure was deficient, with a high average
pupil-to-classroom ratio (61 in 2011-2012) and about 75 percent of schooling done in temporary shelters. A
new curriculum had been designed under a predecessor project, but teaching and learning materials
remained scarce. Payment to CTs, financed through a state subsidy system, were small and often late, a
situation that escalated to the point of causing widespread teacher strikes that catalyzed the AF in 2017.
Actual classroom time was low, and teacher absenteeism was high. Management of the sector faced many
challenges, including sub-optimal allocation of human and material resources to schools, highly centralized
financial and human resource management, and insufficient capacity and funding among decentralized
structures. M&E mechanisms were weak, with production of national education statistics routinely delayed
by more than a year. As a result of these shortcomings, the average net enrollment rate was only 51 - 65
percent in 2010-2011, and overall cumulative survival rates in the primary cycle were only 37 percent.
Gender and regional disparities were high. In national primary-level assessments conducted in 2004 and
2010, no average student scores reached the 50 percent threshold, and one in four students scored below
10 percent.

The original objectives were highly relevant to both government and Bank strategy. This project followed
two prior Bank-financed education projects in Chad: the Basic Education Project (1993-2001) and the
Education Sector Reform Project Phase I (2003-2012). Its objectives and scope followed logically from its
predecessors. The government's Interim Strategy for Education and Literacy, covering 2013 through 2015,
addressed issues of access but also prioritized conditions for delivery of quality education. It focused on
primary education, adult literacy, non-formal basic education, and capacity-building for planning,
management, and M&E at all levels. Planned expenditures in the context of this plan were US$592 million,
while indicatively earmarked government resources were estimated at US$469 million. This project, in
conjunction with financing from other partners, was intended to close the financing gap. The Bank's Interim
Strategy Note (2010-2012) identified improving livelihoods and access to key social services as one of
three main axes of engagement; support for basic education was integral to progress along this axis.

Adjustment of the objectives was necessary due to the fiscal crisis and the need to align the project's core
emphasis toward addressing the impact of recurring teacher strikes and widespread teacher absenteeism
on the teaching and learning environment. The revised objectives responded nimbly to the evolving country
context. The objectives also continued to be relevant to government strategy as expressed in the 2018-
2020 Intermediate Education Sector Plan for Chad, which aimed to address access and quality challenges,
and the 2017-2021 National Development Plan, which contains a fourth pillar on improving human capital
by strengthening education and ensuring that all children are able to read, write, and master basic
mathematics. They aligned with the third engagement theme of the Bank's 2016-2020 Country Partnership
Framework, on building human capital and reducing vulnerability, particularly its outcome to improve rural
access to and quality of education.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve teaching and learning conditions in primary and upper secondary schools in selected areas

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that provision of infrastructure, school furniture, and teaching and
                             learning materials, teacher training for CTs and upper secondary science teachers, training for school
                             principals and managers, improved payment mechanisms for CT subsidies, and provision of de-worming
                             drugs would lead to students being more prepared to learn, teachers being more effective, school inputs
                             being of better quality, and managers being better equipped to support learning. These intermediate results
                             would, in turn, lead to improved teaching and learning conditions in both primary and upper secondary
                             schools.



                             Outputs

                             70 classrooms were built or rehabilitated, meeting the target of 70 classrooms. These classrooms were
                             equipped with ramps allowing access for students and staff with physical disabilities. Five water wells were
                             built, meeting the target. A community-based approach was followed for these works, as this had been
                             demonstrated as a low-cost option in the predecessor project.

                             A CT mobile payment mechanism for paying subsidies to teachers was developed and implemented.
                             Implementation of a comprehensive survey of CTs led to the development of a CT database with assignment
                             of a unique identifier to each teacher; this facilitated efficient payment without duplication. A robust grievance
                             redress mechanism was established to field complaints from teachers who did not receive timely payments.
                             The number of CTs receiving their subsidy payment regularly was 10,913 in 2022, exceeding the original
                             target of 4,500 and essentially meeting the revised target of 11,000. The number receiving their subsidy
                             payment by mobile mechanism was 10,913 in 2022, exceeding the target of 7,000.

                             The project supported the development of a national textbook policy, procedures for textbook management,
                             and training modules for teachers on the new materials. It financed the development of curricula for
                             secondary schools in all subjects, not just science (as originally planned). 465,751 textbooks and teacher
                             guides were distributed, exceeding the target of 415,000 textbooks. Cost savings through efficient textbook
                             procurement allowed more books than planned to be bought and distributed. 31 DRCs were created and
                             equipped (15 physical and 16 virtual), exceeding the target of 30 centers, and 150 science kits were delivered
                             to schools. In-service training modules were developed for the Centers for In-Service Training and Primary

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



Education Pedagogical Inspectorate. 10,000 teachers, including 300 upper secondary science teachers in 23
schools, were trained on using new materials, meeting the target.

4,080 school directors and 90 inspectors were trained in school management and governance. Inspectors or
advisors visited schools in targeted regions an average of three times per year, meeting the target.

The planned de-worming program was initiated but not completed. According to the ICR (pp. 19 and 33-34),
the contracted vendor could not deliver the required quantity and quality of de-worming drugs.

485,751 students benefited from interventions to enhance learning, meeting the target. 233,160 of those
students were female, meeting the target.



Outcomes

The percentage of grade 3-6 students in project areas having textbooks in reading and math improved from
25 percent in 2013 to 52 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

10,965 additional teachers were made available as a result of project interventions, exceeding the original
target of 1,620 and the revised target of 9,000 teachers. Of these, 2,083 were female, exceeding the target of
1,800 female teachers. The number of contractualized CTs (those who had reached the highest level of
training and were eligible to apply to become civil servants) reached 3,000 in 2022, meeting the target of
3,000; of those, 17.3 percent were female, not reaching the target of 25 percent. As "the project had "no
specific activities related to gender" (ICR, p. 30), specific outcomes related to female teachers or students
should not have been expected.

The ICR (pp. 43-44) states that the number of days that the majority of schools throughout the country were
closed due to CT strikes related to non-payment of the CT subsidy declined from 90 in 2017 to 30 in 2022,
meeting the target of 30 days. However, it also states (p. 24) that, after the project began providing CT
subsidies, there were no strikes due to non-payment of subsidies. The project team later clarified that any
teacher strikes that occurred after the project began providing subsidies were general civil service strikes, and
that the project fully succeeded in eliminating strikes due to non-payment of CT subsidies.

The primary completion rate in project selected areas increased from 37 percent in 2011 to 63.94 percent in
2022, exceeding the original target of 40 percent and the revised target of 43 percent. The gender parity
index improved from 74 percent in 2013 to 78 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 77 percent.

There were 1.082 million total project beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of one million, but not
meeting the revised target of 1.5 million. Of these, 42.9 percent were female, exceeding the target of 30
percent. The revised target for total beneficiaries was not met because the planned de-worming program was
not completed.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve teaching and learning conditions in primary schools nationwide and upper secondary schools in
selected areas

Revised Rationale
The project scaled up the provision of CT subsidies nationwide following the 2017 restructuring. As noted
above, targets for payment of those subsidies and subsequent reduction in teacher strikes and absenteeism
were met. Achievement of the revised objective is therefore rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the system to facilitate evidence-based decision making in the education sector (objective
dropped in 2017)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that capacity building for the MENPC, school administrators, and
other stakeholders would facilitate the administration of surveys and studies of education service delivery,
teacher training, and teacher payment mechanisms, as well as the ability to use information gathered through
these studies to make evidence-based decisions about future programming and initiatives.



Outputs and Outcomes

The project supported several key studies whose results have been or are being used to support decision-
making and future programming in the education sector:

      The project conducted an assessment of the needs and capacities of teacher training institutions,
       providing an in-depth diagnostic of the challenges they faced. It found that these institutions were
       inadequately funded, leaving them with poor physical facilities and excessive reliance on development
       partner financing. Those findings have been integrated into a follow-on Bank-financed project
       (Improving Learning Outcomes project, US$150 million, 2022-2027).
      Pre-tests and post-tests for level I and II CT training were designed and validated, meeting the target.
       Through this process, the MENPC was able to develop a standardized item bank for the tests and
       create and M&E feedback loops for improving the quality and efficiency of in-service training. The
       National Curriculum Center reviewed the item bank for quality and relevance. Data from the testing is
       being used to establish a database of teacher profiles to improve teacher management.
      Although an impact evaluation of the CT payment scheme, with a proper control group, was not
       implemented, the project supported a comprehensive mobile phone payment satisfaction survey. It

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



                                     showed that 79.2 percent of CTs were satisfied with the system, and suggestions received through the
                                     survey are being used to refine the service.
                                    A 2021 service delivery indicator survey (using a representative sample of 531 schools from across
                                     the country) was conducted, with results being used to inform the government's new education sector
                                     strategy (2023-2032) and a study on the characteristics and performance of teacher training colleges.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            According to the ICR (pp. 27-28), test scores and progression rates of students who were most affected by
                            school closures (in terms of their timing of entry into the school system) were significantly lower than the
                            scores of those who started primary school after project implementation began. Although these results cannot
                            be fully attributed to the project, it is plausible that the prompt mobile payment of CT subsidies under the
                            project, in addition to its other interventions, brought teachers back to their teaching duties full-time and
                            therefore restored and enhanced the teaching and learning process.

                            Both of the original objectives were substantially achieved, leading to an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            After the 2017 restructuring, part of the first objective -- to improve teaching and learning conditions in primary
                            schools -- was scaled up nationwide, and the original second objective was dropped. With the payment of CT
                            subsidies in a full, timely, and efficient manner, teacher strikes and absenteeism declined, as planned,
                            representing substantial achievement related to teaching and learning conditions in primary schools across
                            the country. Results in upper secondary schools in selected areas were substantially achieved, as described
                            earlier. Achievement of the revised objective is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 6, pp. 60-67) calculated benefits based on improved
completion rates and learning outcomes. Based on national-level data, it assumed that an additional year of
schooling yields a seven percent increase in earnings, with those benefits even larger for females at eleven
percent. A 25-year time horizon and four percent discount rate were used, the latter based on the 2013 lending
interest rate in the country. Given a lack of outcome data at the secondary level, the analysis was restricted to
interventions under the first component. It found a net present value (NPV) of US$47.4 million, corresponding to
an internal rate of return (IRR) of 18.9 percent. This result represented a lower bound, given the inclusion of only
private outcomes and one component.

The ICR (Annex 4, pp. 60-70) repeated this analysis (based on the revised first and fourth components), finding
an NPV of US$202.4 million, an IRR of 25 percent, and a benefit-cost ratio of 4.14. The findings were robust,
with a pessimistic scenario under which only 20 percent of graduates were able to secure a paid job finding an
NPV of US$51.6 million and IRR of 11 percent.

Implementation efficiency was strong, with some minor shortcomings. Low-cost community-based approaches
were used for classroom construction and rehabilitation. Development of the CT database led to efficient
payment of subsidies to teachers through mobile platforms. Efficiencies in textbook procurement allowed more
books than initially planned to be procured and distributed. Some activities, such as the purchase of science kits
for secondary-level teachers, were delayed due to weak procurement performance, and implementation of CT
subsidy payments was delayed from 2018 to 2019 because of issues with the census and validation of CT,
selection of eligible beneficiaries, establishment of the payment platform, and recruitment of the mobile
companies involved. Implementation time and costs were expended on a drug procurement process for de-
worming medicines that was never completed. The COVID-19 pandemic delayed activities because of travel
restrictions and school closures, leading to a one-year extension of the project's closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      60.10
 Appraisal                                                  18.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      86.60
 ICR Estimate                                               25.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




Under the original objectives, the project's relevance was high, efficacy was substantial (based on substantial
achievement of both objectives), and efficiency was substantial. Outcome under the original objectives is
therefore rated Satisfactory.

Under the revised objectives, the project's relevance was high, efficacy was substantial (based on substantial
achievement of the one remaining objective after the second objective was removed), and efficiency was
substantial. Outcome under the revised objectives is therefore also rated Satisfactory.

With the outcome ratings under the original and revised objectives both Satisfactory, a detailed split rating
calculation is not necessary. Overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory, indicating that there were only minor
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional strengthening under the second objective was significant and multi-faceted. As a result, data
systems are comprehensive and robust, and the MENPC has the capacity to conduct studies and
evaluations to monitor the sector, particularly related to teachers. Although the project's payment of CT
subsidies was intended to be a temporary stopgap measure, the Bank's follow-on project also includes
activities to improve the payment of those subsidies through the provision of equitable operating grants to
public primary schools to strengthen the management and financing of CTs.

The primary risk to the project's outcome stems from possible political and economic instability in Chad.
Political volatility, vulnerability to terrorist attack, security risks, and limited governance remain significant
challenges. In April 2021, the president passed away from battlefield wounds. After a brief transition period
established by military authorities, a new transitional government, led by a prime minister, was established,
but the situation remains tenuous. Reliance on oil revenue, high overall debt stress, and limited liquidity
contribute to significant macroeconomic risk. The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted Chad's economy, causing a
contraction of GDP by one percent in 2020. Although there was a rebound to 1.76 percent growth in 2021,
continuing uncertainty about the pandemic's duration, government spending on the military and regional
security, and fiscal liquidity constraints create questions about budget space for the social sector moving
forward. In addition, there are more than 500,000 refugees (mostly from Sudan and the Central African
Republic) and 400,000 internally displaced persons in Chad, putting pressure on the education system. The
donor community has engaged in policy dialogue with the government to prioritize financing of the social
sector in general, and education in particular.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



  The project's objectives were clearly specified, relevant to country context and government strategy, and
  appropriate given previous Bank engagement in Chad's education sector. Implementation arrangements,
  including for M&E, were detailed and sound. Lessons learned from previous education projects in Chad
  included the need to focus on only a few well-focused components, given limited implementation capacity
  and a volatile, insecure country context; the importance of explicitly linking the results framework to the
  objectives and planned activities; the key role of close monitoring of project implementation; the vital role
  that can be played by support for policy initiatives that can exert long-lasting impact on the education
  system; and the need to address communication issues to facilitate ownership by stakeholders at all
  levels.

  Overall risk associated with the project was estimated to be substantial. It was recognized that weak
  capacity, resource constraints, high personnel turnover, and frequent restructuring of MEFA and MEFPS
  could affect implementation timelines; this was mitigated by the presence of a strong PCU, but it was
  recognized that strong implementation support was needed. There were also risks related to the possible
  misuse of funds as they were channeled to local levels, mitigated through training, technical support, and
  strong supervision and checks.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular and appropriately staffed. Both local and international Bank staff were
 consistent across the project's lifetime, facilitating smooth implementation and addressing of challenges as
 they arose. Restructuring was timely and appropriate, given the evolving context, but it meant that the
 project took on additional risk. Overall risk at the time of AF was rated high due to the government's
 unstable financial situation and resulting teacher strikes, and due to more complex project design
 associated with CT payments. The Bank team worked carefully with counterparts to mitigate risk and
 ensure timely implementation of planned activities. The project team also worked diligently with the
 MENPC to find alternate vendors to provide de-worming medication, including organizing a working
 session with the World Health Organization on the issue, but ultimately another supplier could not be
 identified.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)



a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were clearly specified, and links between most planned inputs, outputs, outcomes,
 and objectives were sound. Indicators included baselines and targets. Several outcome indicators were
 sex-disaggregated even though the project contained no activities specifically related to girls or women;
 although the results chain was adequate overall, there were some lapses in the clarity of the links
 connecting the project's interventions to gender-specific results.

 The PCU was responsible for regular monitoring and reporting. At appraisal, it was acknowledged that the
 M&E capacity of MEFA and MEFPS was limited. Production of national statistics using the education
 management information system (EMIS) was regularly delayed by more than a year; there was no national
 learning assessment system; and there was no culture of using statistics and M&E results to inform
 planning and operational decisions. Special attention was therefore paid to improving the efficiency of data
 collection systems, collecting specific data to inform evaluation of the impacts of financed interventions,
 and promoting the analysis and use of evidence to inform decision-making (including explicitly through
 interventions supporting surveys and studies under the third component). The project was to train key M&E
 personnel and hire a dedicated M&E specialist.




b. M&E Implementation
  Regular reporting on indicators in the results framework was done throughout the project's lifetime, and
  capacity development was implemented as planned. Planned surveys and studies were conducted, with
  results made available throughout MENPC and the donor community. EMIS systems were improved,
  including development of an overall framework to connect relevant education departments and agencies
  within the government, creation of Information Technology Master Plan tools, operationalization of those
  tools at central and decentralized levels, and training and capacity building on those tools. By project
  closing, almost 450 pedagogical facilitators and planners had been trained on the database features and
  data input. With the support of the Bank's Poverty Global Practice, the project also used the Interactive
  Beneficiary Monitoring system to track the payments of CTs.



c. M&E Utilization
  Results from project-supported surveys and studies were used to feed into implementation adjustments
  on CT payments, teacher training, and the status of educational service delivery nationwide. The data
  gathered on CT training and payment mechanisms were particularly impactful, facilitating the
  development of a robust and accurate database of CTs across with country, with a unique identifier for
  each CT, and improvement of teacher training activities. Results from a teacher survey on the mobile
  payment mechanism are being used to improve the system, in collaboration with mobile phone
  operators. Results of the teacher training survey and service delivery indicators study have been used to
  inform the development of the Bank-financed follow-on project, other donor-supported projects, and the
  government's next education sector plan. According to the ICR (p. 36), EMIS data are being used by the
  MENPC to advance education policy dialogue in the country.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered the Environmental
   Assessment (OP 4.01) safeguard policy due to potential impacts associated with classroom construction.
   Because excavations were to be carried out, the project also triggered the Physical Cultural Resources (OP
   4.11) policy. An updated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and
   disclosed on May 1, 2013, identifying the project's various potential environmental impacts and proposed
   mitigation measures. The ESMF also included procedures for addressing physical cultural resources
   management risks that could be encountered during implementation. A partnership protocol with the
   Directorate of Environmental Assessments and the Fight Against Pollution and Noise supported safeguards
   training and awareness raising. Safeguards remained the same at the 2017 restructuring and AF. According
   to the ICR (p. 36), safeguards were monitored consistently throughout implementation, and Implementation
   Status Reports had safeguard ratings of moderately satisfactory or satisfactory with one exception: a
   downgrade to moderately unsatisfactory in December 2016, when construction of some classrooms did not
   initially follow required screening procedures. The Bank worked with the government to restore compliance,
   and the shortcomings were rectified. The project team later confirmed that there were no notable issues
   with safeguards.

   A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was established in 2018 in relation to the CT subsidy payments.
   The GRM Committee received, reviewed, and addressed approximately 6,100 complaints from CTs across
   the country.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management arrangements were adequate and smooth. At the time of the AF, a new designated
   account was established for payment of CT subsidies, and the PCU added a financial management
   assistant specifically to support those payments. Performance was rated satisfactory or moderately
   satisfactory across the project's lifetime, with one exception: in March 2021, the rating was downgraded to
   moderately unsatisfactory because of shortcomings with integration of security parameters into
   management of the CT database, inadequate fixed assets management, and the need to recover funds
   that had been advanced to the de-worming medication supplier. With support from the Bank team, these
   shortcomings were rectified. Unaudited interim financial reports were on time and of acceptable quality,
   and opinions on required audits were clean and unqualified.

   The Bank's procurement team conducted regular procurement performance rating assessment missions,
   and project procurement was always rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory. Bank staff provided
   training to the PCU to ensure compliance with guidelines. The PCU's migration to the Bank's Systematic
   Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system took place in 2018. Procurement plans were
   regularly updated and submitted to the Bank as required, though submissions were sometimes late.


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 39-40) offers several insightful lessons, including:

Mobile payment systems can be a viable approach to providing timely payments to teachers
and other service providers even in fragile contexts, and especially when beneficiaries are
scattered across vast geographic areas. This project was instrumental in establishing a system
for mobile payments that included a database that has increased efficiency in payments without
duplication.

Development of digital platforms for education can start effectively with relatively small first
steps, such as the digitization of upper-secondary school materials through virtual libraries. The
experience gained through this project's development of digital materials for upper-secondary school
science education allowed the education ministry and school librarians to support on-line learning
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and is being used in the Bank-financed follow-on project to begin to
digitize in-service teacher training content at the primary level.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Education Sector Reform Project P2 (P132617)




The ICR is clear, candid, evidence-based, internally consistent, and focused on results. It contains a careful
and insightful analysis of the project's specific contribution to observed outcomes. Its lessons are drawn
effectively from the project's experience. However, it is extremely lengthy, with a main text of 40 pages.
Although it appropriately applies the split rating methodology, it does not implement that methodology correctly,
assessing the project in phases rather than against the project's original and revised objectives across the
project's entire lifetime.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
