     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022994

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P169913                                    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Georgia                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-90630,IBRD-91430                      31-Mar-2021                                         101,091,504.39

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2020                                31-Mar-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           49,600,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            98,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                       101,091,504.39                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 William F. Steel            Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective (PDO), as stated in the Program Document (PD, p. 3) and the ICR (p. i),
was:

To support the government’s program of reforms to sustain rapid growth and ensure greater inclusion, job
creation, and resilience by: i) strengthening economic management through improving the efficiency of public

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



resource use and ii) enhancing competitiveness through introducing evidence-based policymaking, promoting
more competitive markets, diversifying the financial sector, improving teacher deployment and remuneration
with a view toward ensuring a more qualified workforce over the long term, and strengthening investment
promotion.

The ICR (para. 13) stated the original PDO was: “to support the Government’s program of reforms to sustain
rapid growth, and ensure greater inclusion, job creation, and resilience.”



For the purposes of this ICRR, the objectives are taken as:

      Objective 1: Strengthening economic management through greater efficiency of public resource use.

      Objective 2: Enhancing competitiveness through regulatory and competition policies and development
       of markets for labor, finance and investment.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The pillars/policy areas correspond to the PDOs as follows:

      Pillar 1: Strengthening economic management through improving the efficiency of public resource use:
      Pillar 2: Enhancing competitiveness through regulatory and competition policies and development of
       markets for labor, finance and investment.

Eight specific policy areas are addressed through one prior action (PA) each; see Table 1.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The Georgia Economic Management and Competitiveness (EMC) Development Policy Operation (DPO) was a
stand-alone, single-tranche of USD 101,091,504 disbursed. The original commitment of EUR 45 million (USD
49.6 million) as of the program document (PD) in February 2020 and approved on March 26, 2020, was
augmented by another EUR 45 million (USD 48.9 million) in a supplemental DPO operation. Additional parallel
emergency financing of EUR 45 million came from the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) in June 2020
“to help the Government of Georgia (GoG) cover an unanticipated financing gap…due to the impact of the
COVID-19 outbreak” (ICR p. ii and para. 13). The operation closed as expected on March 31, 2021.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to country context




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



During the decade 2010-19, Georgia experienced robust economic growth (5.3 percent per annum) and
“significant reduction in the level of national poverty” (ICR, para. 2). “Robust private sector response to the
rapid and far-reaching reforms kept total factor productivity and gross capital formation high.” However,
despite generally sound macroeconomic management, “significant headwinds” to sustained high growth were
emerging in the form of growing macroeconomic imbalances, limited success in creating jobs, and stagnant
firm-level productivity (suggesting “misallocation of resources”, with “human capital among the biggest
constraints to doing business”; PD, para. 56), as well as threats posed by climate change (PD, para. 4; ICR,
paras. 3-4). These conditions and constraints—exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic—warranted World
Bank assistance to improve economic management (for more efficient use of public resources) and
competitiveness (for investment and employment growth) – which in turn would support the desired outcome
of sustaining rapid growth.

Relevance to CPF and country development strategy

The objectives of the operationwere reasonably well aligned with Georgia’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy (SDS), “which supported the development of the private sector as the engine of growth and
emphasized the role of the state in facilitating inclusion through better delivery of public services and
addressing market failures,” which identified effective public administration (along with macroeconomic
stability) as a precondition for success (PD, para. 31). The EMC DPO’s Pillar 2 was consistent with the SDS
Pillar 1: Improving private sector competitiveness, and actions to improve teacher deployment were indirectly
supportive of the SDS Pillar 2: Strengthening human capital. The rationale for focusing on teachers was that
“firms find the lack of adequate skills to be a binding constraint, reflecting the limitations of the education
system” (PD, para. 4), and improving teacher quality was a first step toward addressing the human capital
constraint. Strengthening regulation of investment funds was related to SDS Pillar 3: Improving access to
finance.

The operation was closely attuned to the Georgia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2019-2022, which
advocated the broad goal of “refining the growth model to enhance labor intensity and productivity by
deepening global integration, lowering constraints to firm growth, building a stronger human capital base, and
ensuring more effective delivery of public service” (PD, para. 4). The CPF highlighted the areas of: “(i)
enhancing inclusive growth and competitiveness; (ii) investing in human capital; and (iii) building resilience”
(PD, para. 68). The DPO objectives focused mainly on the first area, with some attention to human capital in
the education system. “Resilience” was included in the PDO for the EMC DPO, with relevant actions consisting
of draft legislation on telecommunications that would facilitate the deployment of high-speed internet
infrastructure and strengthen it with respect to climate-related risks (PD, para. 54), and improving public
investment management to better recognize the economic returns of investment projects for more climate
change resilient infrastructure (with further reforms planned for the upcoming GRID DPO).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions for Georgia Economic Management and Competitiveness Development
Policy Operation

 Prior Actions


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



Objective 1: Strengthening economic management through improving the efficiency of public
resource use
Strengthen public financial management
PA 1: (the government has introduced a mechanism to support public financial management [PFM]
improvements by municipalities, by providing additional financing for capital investment…conditional upon
improving identified areas of weakness) was based on Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
(PEFA) findings of “significant material issues, and systemic and control risks” at the local level, in particular,
“failure to timely submit annual financial statements for audit …and limited scrutiny of local councils over both
internal audit and external audit reports” (PD, para. 38). In fact, municipalities were not required to submit
their financial statements, and were only audited every three years via on-site visits by the State Audit Office
(SAO; TTL interview). The prior action was appropriate in order to address “the planned decentralization
agenda as well as the unequal opportunities stemming from uneven access to public services across the
country” (PD, para. 38). An incentive-based approach was adopted, with the Ministry of Finance (MOF)
offering supplementary capital investment funds for 27 municipalities, conditional on addressing specified
areas of weakness in support of the objective of improving the efficiency of public resource use. However, the
SAO was not informed about its intended role in reviewing these audits and providing guidance to the
municipalities, and was not adequately staffed “to audit them outside its usual cycle of operation” (ICR, para.
61). Hence, without complementary support to the SAO, there was a weak link in the chain to the intended
result. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

      Stronger public investment management


PA 2: (the Borrower has amended the PIM Guideline and established the Charter of the PIM Working Group)
responded to low PEFA scores for economic analysis, project selection, costing, and monitoring (estimated
by the IMF to make Georgia 21 percent less efficient than comparable countries; PD, para. 41) and sought to
ensure that “over time, a larger share of investment projects undergo improved pre-selection and appraisal
processes and better monitoring” (ICR, Diagram 1). The PIM Working Group was designed to enable the
Ministry of Finance (MOF) to better “guide sector agencies in project preparation and policy development”
and ensure compliance with PIM Guidelines (PD, para. 42). The action directly addressed the oversight
function needed to achieve the desired result of improving the efficiency of public investment expenditures.
Rating: Satisfactory.
Improve public procurement
PA 3: (the government has submitted to Parliament a draft amendment to the Law on State Procurement to
strengthen the independence and impartiality of the Dispute Resolution Council and has further restricted the
use of single-source procurement) addressed the findings of a study that the “share of single source
procurements remains high at around 19 percent of total procurement value, undermining competition” (PD,
para. 44). The Dispute Resolution Council provides a channel for complaints independent of the State
Procurement Agency, with a potential indirect effect on the efficiency of public resource use (though
implementation of the draft amendment was not assured). The decree restricting the use of single-source
procurement was directly related to promoting “competitive procurement methods [that] result in lower costs
and less failed tenders” (PD, para. 44). Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.
Objective 2: Enhancing competitiveness through regulatory and competition policies and
development of markets for labor, finance and investment
Introduce the regulatory impact assessment function
PA 4: (the government has begun to facilitate evidence-based policymaking by adopting a methodology for
regulatory impact assessments [RIAs] and assigning adequate responsibilities related to RIAs) was a

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



response to “rapid deregulation after the Rose revolution,” which had put Georgia out of alignment with the
EU and resulted in some arbitrariness and uncertainty about implementation of regulations. The action was
needed to bring Georgia in line with the EU Association Agreement and other regulatory regimes” (PD, para.
48; ICR, para. 22). In particular, it promoted “assessment of the environmental impact as well as the social
impact, including gender equality (e.g., social, economic, competition, health, environment, and fiscal impact)”
in preparing major policy proposals and new legislation. The link to the objective of enhancing
competitiveness was indirect, “through lower risk-premiums on investment decisions” and making “regulations
more clear, predictable and consistent” (PD, para. 48). Given “limited capacity,” the focus was initially to be
on laws related to “product and factors markets (for example, company law, labor law, competition law)…also
environment, food and product safety.” The PD (paras. 34 and 49) noted that the DPO only “provided the
convening framework for the RIA reform but relies on the EU, USAID, GIZ for the actual delivery on the
ground,” and that “efforts will need to continue over the medium term to expand the coverage of RIA and
improve the quality.” It was expected that “EU-funded technical assistance support will continue the efforts to
build the capacity and implement the RIA reform over the medium term,” but how this would translate into the
objective of greater competitiveness (and hence growth) was not well defined. Rating: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.
Enhance enforcement of competition policy
PA 5: (the Competition Agency of Georgia has submitted to Parliament a draft amendment to the Law
on Competition to strengthen the Governance of the Competition Agency, raise its enforcement capacity, and
enhance its relations with other regulators, and the government has submitted to Parliament a draft Law on
Telecommunication Infrastructure and Physical Infrastructure Sharing for Telecommunications Purposes) was
a response to concerns of businesses (including potential investors) that “markets in Georgia [were]
dominated by a few entities, concentration… [was] high, and the effectiveness of competition policy weak”
(ICR, para. 23). The two sub-actions were quite distinct, and could better have been stated separately for
ease of monitoring and evaluation. The PD (p. 15) noted that “the Competition Agency of Georgia lacked the
necessary enforcement capacity.” The reform was intended, first, to strengthen the institutional framework for
dealing with increasingly concentrated businesses (especially network services) and, second, to support
“measures to reduce the cost of deploying high-speed electronic communications” (PD, para. 54). With
respect to the Competition Agency, the PD (para, 52) noted that “further reforms will be needed beyond the
DPO horizon” to fully establish its independence and mandate so that “it will be able to better detect and
sanction anti-competitive behavior and curb potential anti-competition effects of economic concentrations to
foster better functioning of markets.” How this would be achieved is not indicated, other than an expectation
that the “EU will continue with its effort to further develop the capacity of the Competition Agency” (PD, para.
52). The results chain for the Telecommunication Infrastructure Law was clearer in that it was intended to
help implement the National Broadband Development Strategy as well as an EU Directive “to reduce the cost
of deploying high-speed electronic communications networks” by

“making existing telecom-ready infrastructure available to all market participants on a non-discriminatory
basis and at reasonable prices” (PD, paras. 53-54). Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.
Improve teacher deployment and remuneration
PA 6:(provide incentives to improve teacher qualifications and to more efficiently deploy teachers, the Ministry
of Education, Science, Culture and Sports had adopted (a) Decree to prioritize the allocation of teaching
hours to certified teachers; (b) Decree to introduce criteria and conditions for initiation and termination of
teacher employment; and (c) amend Decree on Defining the Minimum Amount and Conditions for Work
Remuneration of Public School Teachers to introduce higher salaries for certified teachers) was a response to
the high proportion of teachers who are poorly qualified or part-time, a source of low scores for Georgia on
the Program for International Student Assessment and the observation that the education system was not


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



yielding the skills needed in the labor market (PD, paras. 22 and 56; “businesses complain that undeveloped
human capital is among the biggest constraint to doing business”). The actions were intended to utilize
teachers more effectively, as well as to incentivize increasing the number of qualified teachers. Although the
results chain was well defined, this action was only an initial step in a long process to improve labor market
skills through a better education system as a result of more effective use of better-qualified teachers. Given
the range of other determinants of educational quality and employable labor skills, it would have been
desirable to link this PA to other measures or subsequent operations that would help ensure that the ultimate
objective of enhanced labor skills is achieved. Moderately Satisfactory.
Diversify the financial sector
PA 7: (the government has submitted to Parliament a draft Law on Investment Funds to strengthen the
regulatory and supervisory framework applicable to investment fund operations and public issuers’ financial
information disclosure) was intended to address financial constraints on businesses: “financing at affordable
terms is inaccessible for many businesses, especially SMEs” (small and medium enterprises; PD, para. 63).
(Lagging financial inclusion was also cited as a motivation, but investment funds have little to do with access
to financial services by the general population.) The absence of “private equity, venture capital or collective
investment funds” was attributed “in part to inadequacies of the investment funds legislation adopted in 2013.”
The new Law was intended to make Georgia “better aligned with good international practice” and to bring its
“legal framework for investment funds closer to EU directives” (PD, para. 64). The PD (para. 65) noted that
facilitating investment funds would complement expected “further reforms in capital markets, including
completion of the pension reform, growth of the insurance sector, and FinTech innovations,” which were
being supported by other World Bank financial sector operations. The relationship of this particular action to
the overall agenda for financial system development and financial inclusion was perhaps somewhat
overstated, based on the finding of the “Diagnostic Study of the Capital Markets in Georgia” that “the demand
for investment funds’ financing is there” (PD, para. 64). How effective this would be in facilitating greater
competitiveness through increased investment in SMEs is unclear. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.
Strengthen investment promotion
PA 8: (the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development has [a] adopted a decree endorsing the
strategy for attracting foreign direct investment of the government agency in charge of investment promotion,
and [b] implemented key measures from this strategy, including increasing the staffing of the agency) was
intended to support the implementation of the Investment Promotion Strategy and Action Plan of Enterprise
Georgia to make “a strategic shift … towards attracting more export-oriented (efficiency-seeking) FDI” (foreign
direct investment; PD, para. 66). The intention was to address the concentration of FDI in “market or
resource-seeking [sectors,] resulting in limited integration of Georgian businesses in regional and global value
chains” in order to drive growth (ICR, para. 26). A necessary condition was to strengthen the mandate and
enlarge the staff of the agency for more active outreach to strategic foreign investors who could drive
“economic upgrading and transformation.” It was not clear to what extent endorsing the strategy and
increasing staff to enhance investment promotion would effectively raise FDI in competitive sectors and
thereby increase competition and growth. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

While “growth” is overly broad as an objective for a single operation, the more specific objectives of
strengthening economic management and enhancing competitiveness made sense in this context and were
supported through generally appropriate reforms set forth in the prior actions. The stated PDO also included the
very broad objectives of “greater inclusion” and “resilience,” which were not, in fact, well supported by the
actions (or the indicators) and have been omitted from the specific objectives under review. On the other hand,
some of the objectives would require a more detailed and sustained program of actions for effective
implementation. In particular, a draft law to strengthen regulation of investment funds was hardly sufficient to
justify “diversifying the financial sector” as an objective, nor was improving teacher deployment and


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



remuneration a sufficient condition for the objective of “ensuring a more qualified work force,” although it is
recognized that these represent important first steps as a foundation for potential follow-through in subsequent
operations.

This stand-alone DPO had 8 PAs, five with subcomponents, totaling 14 actions/sub-actions. The ICR (Diagram
1) provided a useful “Theory of Change” summarizing the underlying diagnostic and rationale for each PA
(drawing on the PD). Several actions contributed to implementing well-defined strategies. Four of the sub-
actions required submission to Parliament of a draft law or amendment, in some cases to bring Georgia into
compliance with European Union (EU) directives. Although the PD (para. 7) indicated that the operation “paved
the way for future engagement in important ‘second-generation reform’ areas such as education, competition,
and digitalization,” Georgia had a good “track record of implementing reforms” (PD, para. 35). The specific and
“first step” nature of some of the PAs was not sufficient to achieve the broad objectives without fuller articulation
of further actions to be taken along the results chain to actually reach the intended outcome. In the absence of
a programmatic DPO series with triggers and follow-up actions or specific sectoral operations to ensure follow
through, next steps toward the intended results of these actions were not always clear. Nonetheless, several
actions did represent suitable follow-through on measures initiated in previous operations (regarding public
investment management, procurement and competition.

Objective 1: Strengthening economic management.

PA 1 (the Government has introduced a mechanism to support public financial management [PFM]
improvements by municipalities, by providing additional financing for capital investment…conditional upon
improving identified areas of weakness) was based on Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
findings of “significant material issues, and systemic and control risks” at the local level, in particular “failure to
timely submit annual financial statements for audit …and limited scrutiny of local councils over both internal
audit and external audit reports” (PD, para. 38). In fact, municipalities were not required to submit their financial
statements, and were only audited every three years via on-site visits by the State Audit Office (SAO; TTL
interview). The prior action was appropriate in order to address “the planned decentralization agenda as well as
the unequal opportunities stemming from uneven access to public services across the country” (PD, para. 38).
An incentive-based approach was adopted, with the Ministry of Finance (MOF) offering supplementary capital
investment funds for 27 municipalities, conditional on addressing specified areas of weakness in support of the
objective of improving the efficiency of public resource use. However, the SAO was not informed about its
intended role in reviewing these audits and providing guidance to the municipalities, and was not adequately
staffed “to audit them outside its usual cycle of operation” (ICR, para. 61). Hence, without complementary
support to the SAO, there was a weak link in the chain to the intended result. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 2 (the Borrower has amended the PIM Guideline and established the Charter of the PIM Working Group)
responded to low PEFA scores for economic analysis, project selection, costing and monitoring (estimated by
the IMF to make Georgia 21 percent less efficient than comparable countries; PD, para. 41) and sought to
ensure that “over time, a larger share of investment projects undergo improved pre-selection and appraisal
processes and better monitoring” (ICR, Diagram 1). The PIM Working Group was designed to enable the
Ministry of Finance (MOF) to better “guide sector agencies in project preparation and policy development” and
ensure compliance with PIM Guidelines (PD, para. 42). The action directly addressed the oversight function
needed to achieve the desired result of improving the efficiency of public investment expenditures. Rating:
Satisfactory.

PA 3 (the Government has submitted to Parliament a draft amendment to the Law on State Procurement to
strengthen the independence and impartiality of the Dispute Resolution Council and has further restricted the


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



use of single source procurement) addressed the findings of a study that the “share of single source
procurements remains high at around 19 percent of total procurement value, undermining competition” (PD,
para. 44). The Dispute Resolution Council provides a channel for complaints independent of the State
Procurement Agency, with a potential indirect effect on the efficiency of public resource use (though
implementation of the draft amendment was not assured). The decree restricting the use of single-source
procurement was directly related to promoting “competitive procurement methods [that] result in lower costs
and less failed tenders” (PD, para. 44). Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Enhancing competitiveness.

PA 4 (the Government has begun to facilitate evidence-based policy-making by adopting a methodology for
regulatory impact assessments [RIAs] and assigning adequate responsibilities related to RIAs), which had put
Georgia out of alignment with the EU and resulted in some arbitrariness and uncertainty about implementation
of regulations. The action was needed to bring Georgia in line with the EU Association Agreement and other
regulatory regimes (PD, para. 48; ICR, para. 22). In particular, it promoted “assessment of the environmental
impact as well as the social impact, including gender equality (e.g., social, economic, competition, health,
environment, and fiscal impact)” in preparing major policy proposals and new legislation. The link to the
objective of enhancing competitiveness was indirect, “through lower risk-premiums on investment decisions”
and making “regulations more clear, predictable and consistent” (PD, para. 48). Given “limited capacity,” the
focus was initially to be on laws related to “product and factors markets (for example, company law, labor law,
competition law)…also environment, food and product safety.” The PD (paras. 34 and 49) noted that the DPO
only “provided the convening framework for the RIA reform but relies on the EU, United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), and German Gesellschaft fur Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) for the
actual delivery on the ground,” and that “efforts will need to continue over the medium term to expand the
coverage of RIA and improve the quality.” It was expected that “EU-funded technical assistance support will
continue the efforts to build the capacity and implement the RIA reform over the medium term,” but how this
would translate into the objective of greater competitiveness (and hence growth) was not well defined. Rating:
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA 5 (the Competition Agency of Georgia has submitted to Parliament a draft amendment to the Law
on Competition to strengthen the government of the Competition Agency, raise its enforcement capacity and
enhance its relations with other regulators, and the Government has submitted to Parliament a draft Law on
Telecommunication Infrastructure and Physical Infrastructure Sharing for Telecommunications Purposes) was a
response to concerns of businesses (including potential investors) that “markets in Georgia [were] dominated
by a few entities, concentration… [was] high, and the effectiveness of competition policy weak” (ICR, para. 23).
The two sub-actions were quite distinct, and could better have been stated separately for ease of monitoring
and evaluation.[MOU1] The PD (p. 15) noted that “the Competition Agency of Georgia lacked the necessary
enforcement capacity.” The reform was intended, first, to strengthen the institutional framework for dealing with
increasingly concentrated businesses (especially network services) and, second, to support “measures to
reduce the cost of deploying high-speed electronic communications” (PD, para. 54). With respect to the
Competition Agency, the PD (para, 52) noted that “further reforms will be needed beyond the DPO horizon” to
fully establish its independence and mandate so that “it will be able to better detect and sanction anti-
competitive behavior and curb potential anti-competition effects of economic concentrations to foster better
functioning of markets.” How this would be achieved is not indicated, other than an expectation that the “EU will
continue with its effort to further develop the capacity of the Competition Agency” (PD, para. 52). The results
chain for the Telecommunication Infrastructure Law was clearer in that it was intended to help implement the
National Broadband Development Strategy as well as an EU Directive “to reduce the cost of deploying high-
speed electronic communications networks” by “making existing telecom-ready infrastructure available to all

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



market participants on a non-discriminatory basis and at reasonable prices” (PD, paras. 53-54). Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 6 (provide incentives to improve teacher qualifications and to more efficiently deploy teachers, the Ministry
of Education, Science, Culture and Sports had adopted (a) Decree to prioritize the allocation of teaching hours
to certified teachers; (b) Decree to introduce criteria and conditions for initiation and termination of teacher
employment; and (c) amend Decree on Defining the Minimum Amount and Conditions for Work Remuneration
of Public School Teachers to introduce higher salaries for certified teachers) was a response to the high
proportion of teachers who are poorly qualified or part-time, a source of low scores for Georgia on the
Program for International Student Assessment and the observation that the education system was not yielding
the skills needed in the labor market (PD, paras. 22 and 56; “businesses complain that undeveloped human
capital is among the biggest constraint to doing business”). The actions were intended to utilize teachers more
effectively, as well as to incentivize increasing the number of qualified teachers. Although the results chain was
well defined, this action was only an initial step in a long process to improve labor market skills through a better
education system as a result of more effective use of better qualified teachers. Given the range of other
determinants of educational quality and employable labor skills, it would have been desirable to link this PA to
other measures or subsequent operations that would help ensure that the ultimate objective of enhanced labor
skills is achieved. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 7 (the Government has submitted to Parliament a draft Law on Investment Funds to strengthen the
regulatory and supervisory framework applicable to investment fund operations and public issuers’ financial
information disclosure) was intended to address financial constraints on businesses: “financing at affordable
terms is inaccessible for many businesses, especially SMEs” (small and medium enterprises; PD, para. 63).
(Lagging financial inclusion was also cited as a motivation, but investment funds have little to do with access to
financial services by the general population.) The absence of “private equity, venture capital or collective
investment funds” was attributed “in part to inadequacies of the investment funds legislation adopted in 2013.”
The new Law was intended to make Georgia “better aligned with good international practice” and to bring its
“legal framework for investment funds closer to EU directives” (PD, para. 64). The PD (para. 65) noted that
facilitating investment funds would complement expected “further reforms in capital markets, including
completion of the pension reform, growth of the insurance sector, and FinTech innovations,” which were being
supported by other World Bank financial sector operations. The relationship of this particular action to the
overall agenda for financial system development and financial inclusion was perhaps somewhat overstated,
based on the finding of the “Diagnostic Study of the Capital Markets in Georgia” that “the demand for
investment funds’ financing is there” (PD, para. 64). How effective this would be in facilitating greater
competitiveness through increased investment in SMEs is unclear. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA 8 (the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development has [a] adopted a decree endorsing the strategy
for attracting foreign direct investment of the government agency in charge of investment promotion, and [b]
implemented key measures from this strategy, including increasing the staffing of the agency) was intended to
support implementation of the Investment Promotion Strategy and Action Plan of Enterprise Georgia to make “a
strategic shift … towards attracting more export-oriented (efficiency-seeking) FDI” (foreign direct investment;
PD, para. 66). The intention was to address the concentration of FDI in “market or resource-seeking [sectors,]
resulting in limited integration of Georgian businesses in regional and global value chains” in order to drive
growth (ICR, para. 26). A necessary condition was to strengthen the mandate and enlarge the staff of the
agency for more active outreach to strategic foreign investors who could drive “economic upgrading and
transformation.” It was not clear to what extent endorsing the strategy and increasing staff to enhance




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



 investment promotion would effectively raise FDI in competitive sectors and thereby increase competition and
 growth. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Four RIs are rated Satisfactory and six Moderately Satisfactory. In two cases, no clear system for
monitoring progress toward the target was in place or specified. For actions involving submission to
Parliament of a draft law or amendment, the absence of a clear results chain and follow-on operations for
implementation made it difficult in some cases (especially where implementation lagged) to attribute
results to the associated PAs.

Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement
                                                                                 Actual
                                                                                              RI
                             Associated     RI   Baseline Target Actual at as % of
Results indicator (RI)                                                                   Achievement
                                PAs     Relevance (year) (2021) target date targeted
                                                                                            rating
                                                                                change
Objective 1: Strengthening economic management
RI 1: (number of                PA 1       MU     3 (2018) > 14         14       100%      Modest
municipalities submitting
financial statements for
audit within 3 months after
end of financial year)
monitored one of several
areas of weaknesses of
PFM at the local level
identified in the PEFA, and
is a reasonable indicator of
the responsiveness of the
municipalities to the
incentive provided
conditional upon increased
compliance (to improve
identified areas of
weakness as per public
expenditure and financial
accountability assessment
reports, under PA1). Since
the capital budget subsidy

                                                                                                Page 10 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



was pro-rated according to
the extent of compliance
(ICR, para. 18), the actual
subsidy as a proportion of
the maximum might have
been a more direct
measure of the overall
degree of compliance.
Nevertheless, since audits
provide an entry to
assessing PFM and their
submission is recorded by
the State Audit Office
(SAO), this appeared to be
a reasonable indicator that
was in principle readily
monitorable, with a clear
baseline and target.
Audited reports were
expected to “be scrutinized
by local councils … to use
the findings to ensure
more efficient and
transparent operations of
local governments” (PD,
para. 39). However, the
design did not take into
account that the SAO
lacked adequate staffing
(or even mandate) to
undertake the analysis and
follow up with the
municipalities (ICR, para.
61). Hence the indicator
did not necessarily reflect
substantive improvements
in economic management
at the local level as a
result of the actions taken.
Rating: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.
RI 2:(public investment        PA 2       S       0 (2019) 40% of 50% (2020)      175%        High
projects screened,                                           new
appraised and selected in                                  projects 70% (2021)
compliance with PIM                                         above
Guidelines) was a suitable                                 GEL 5m
indicator of the extent to
which the actions (under

                                                                                            Page 11 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



PA2) to improve oversight
by amending the PIM
Guidelines and
implementing the PIM
Working Group resulted in
increased compliance.
Compliance, in turn, was
expected to result in
stronger economic
management through
better economic analysis,
project selection, costing,
and monitoring (as well as
improving consistency with
environmental and social
objectives) – i.e., “better-
prepared projects with
higher returns that will be
implemented more
smoothly” (PD, para. 41).
Although it was not
explicitly stated how the
relevant data would be
captured and monitored, it
is implicit in the ICR (para.
30) that this was done by
the “strengthened PIM
Working Group
established at the MOF …
the Budget Department
assumed its secretariat
support function,
centralizing information on
public investment projects;
evaluating and prioritizing
projects; and ensuring
integration with the budget
process.” Rating:
Satisfactory.
RI 3: (single source            PA 3      MS       19% (20   16%       16%        100%        High
procurement as % of total                            18)
procurement value)
directly monitored
reduction in a well-
identified source of higher
costs and failed tenders
(PD, para. 44 and footnote
35), which was the second

                                                                                            Page 12 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



part of PA 3. However, it at
best reflects only one
aspect of enhanced
oversight by the Dispute
Resolution Council, which
was to be strengthened by
a draft amendment
supported under the first
part of PA 3 [implemented
in January 2021 (ICR,
para. 34)]. Although not
specified in the PD, the
SPA gathered and
monitored detailed data on
procurement (ICR, paras.
35 and 52 and Figure 1).
The baseline and target
were credible. Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.
Objective 2: Enhancing competitiveness
RI 4: (number of RIAs        PA 4      MS          n.a.   10        0          0%       Negligible
completed on laws and
regulations) was directly
related to the
implementation of the
associated PA 4 to
introduce RIAs as a means
of overseeing new and
amended laws and
regulations being
developed as Georgia
“strengthens its systems
for regulatory management
in-line with the EU
Association Agreement”
(PD, para. 48). Besides
ensuring that
environmental and social
factors are considered, the
“more evidence-based and
consultative approach
embedded in RIAs” was
expected to result in
“enhanced
competitiveness through
lower risk-premiums on
investment decisions”
through clearer and more

                                                                                        Page 13 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



predictable regulations –
“a key demand of the
Georgian business
community” (PD, para. 49).
However, the usefulness
of the indicator was
compromised by the lack
of a system and clear
responsibility for
monitoring it (as well as for
implementing the PA)
(ICR, para. 37). Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.
RI 5: (number of cases
examined by Competition
Agency) referred to the
implementation of draft
amendments to the Law
on Competition (which was
subsequently passed)
supported under PA 5 that
were intended to enhance
oversight of competition
policy for “a better system
of concentration control
[and] an improved model
of competition in regulated
sectors” (ICR, para. 39).
                                                            8 (2-yr.
Since the actual degree of                         6 (2017-           10 (2020-21)
                                PA 5       S                ave.) [ +              200%       Substantial
competition is difficult to                           18)                 [ + 4]
                                                               2]
measure and monitor
directly, this was a
reasonable indicator of the
extent to which oversight
to enhance
competitiveness was being
implemented, but it does
not measure the intended
result of number of
companies sanctioned.
Using a two-year average
for the baseline and target
provided a simple, credible
measure. Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.
RI 6: (number of                PA 5      MS       0 (2019)   2            0          0%       Negligible
telecommunication service
providers using data

                                                                                               Page 14 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



transmission services
through electricity network)
was a direct measure of
the potential impact of
draft legislation (under PA
5) to facilitate sharing of
telecommunications
infrastructure in order to
reduce the costs of doing
business and enhance
competition. The PD was
not clear on responsibility
for monitoring the
indicator, given “the
absence of a ‘champion’ to
lead the process” (ICR,
para. 41). Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.
RI 7: (teachers with full       PA 6      MS        44.9%    55%      58.1%     131%          High
workload as % of all                                (2018) [+10.1% [+13.25%pts]
teachers) directly                                           -pts]
measured allocation of
teaching hours, which was
the action under PA 6
most relevant to the
intermediate objective of
improving the quality of
education through more
effective use of qualified
teachers. (PA 6 also
included actions regarding
employment and
remuneration, intended to
increase the supply of
qualified teachers – an
intermediate objective with
too long a time horizon to
warrant a separate
indicator.) Although at best
only an indirect indicator of
the ultimate objective of a
more educated and skilled
workforce, that outcome
was achievable over a
much longer term, and the
quality of education per se
is difficult to measure.
Hence this was a

                                                                                            Page 15 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



reasonable proxy for
progress in that direction
through the
implementation of the
action supported under the
PA. The baseline and
target were credible, with
the PD (paras. 56-62)
citing detailed data
available from the Ministry
of Education. Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.
RI 8: (female teachers with
a full workload, as % of all
teachers) provided a
gender-specific
counterpart to RI 7, but did
not provide relevant
additional information on
implementation of PA 6 or
on the objective of
competitiveness. An                                         49%
                                                   38.6%             51.5%
indicator on remuneration      PA 6       U               [+10.4%              124%            Modest
                                                   (2018)         {+12.9%-pts]
would have been more                                        -pts]
relevant to the expectation
that actions under PA 6
would help close the
gender pay gap (PD, para.
62) – although this is a
separate objective that is
not clearly related to the
PDOs of this operation.
Unsatisfactory.
RI 9: (number of               PA 7      MU       0 (2019)   2         2 (2021)     100%     Substantial
investment funds
established) was a direct                                              4 (2022)
measure of the impact of
implementing the draft Law
on investment funds
supported under PA 7 and
a step toward increasing
funds available to
businesses, but only
indirectly related to the
objectives of enhancing
competitiveness and
growth. (It was not,
however, as useful as an

                                                                                              Page 16 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



indicator of the stated,
broad objectives of
financial deepening and
inclusion [PD, paras. 62-
63], which were beyond
the scope of this DPO.)
The baseline (nil) and
target were
straightforward. Rating:
Moderately Unsatisfactory.
RI 10: (number of targeted       PA 8     MS         n.a.   200       385        193%     Substantial
companies responding [to
investment promotion
outreach]) was directly
related to the impact of
implementing PA 8 to
improve the investment
promotion outreach of
Enterprise Georgia.
Although it did not capture
the extent to which foreign
direct investment actually
increased as a result (the
next step on the results
chain toward enhanced
competitiveness and
growth), it represented a
first step on that path. The
PD and ICR were not clear
on whether Enterprise
Georgia or the Ministry of
Economy and Sustainable
Development was primarily
responsible for monitoring.
Staffing of the investment
promotion agency was not
formally stated as a RI,
although it was part of PA
8 and specifically
mentioned in the PD (para.
66) as an expected result
(“staffing for investment
promotion to be increased
in the first stage from six to
ten”). Since staffing was
an important step toward
achieving the objective
and readily monitorable, it

                                                                                           Page 17 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



would have been desirable
to include and monitor it as
a formal RI. Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.




Objective 1:Strengthening economic management

RI 1 (number of municipalities submitting financial statements for audit within 3 months after end of
financial year) monitored one of several areas of weaknesses of PFM at the local level identified in the
PEFA, and is a reasonable indicator of the responsiveness of the municipalities to the incentive provided
conditional upon increased compliance. Since the capital budget subsidy was pro-rated according to the
extent of compliance (ICR, para. 18), the actual subsidy as a proportion of the maximum might have been
a more direct measure of the overall degree of compliance (to improve identified areas of weakness as
per public expenditure and financial accountability assessment reports, under PA1). Nevertheless, since
audits provide an entry to assessing PFM and their submission is recorded by the State Audit Office
(SAO), this appeared to be a reasonable indicator that was in principle readily monitorable, with a clear
baseline and target. Audited reports were expected to “be scrutinized by local councils … to use the
findings to ensure more efficient and transparent operations of local governments” (PD, para. 39).
However, design did not take into account that the SAO lacked adequate staffing (or even mandate) to
undertake the analysis, and follow up with the Municipalities (ICR, para. 61). Hence the indicator did not
necessarily reflect substantive improvements in economic management at the local level as a result of the


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



actions taken and needed a complementary measure of follow-up or changes undertaken. Rating:
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 2 (public investment projects screened, appraised and selected in compliance with PIM Guidelines)
was a suitable indicator of the extent to which the actions (under PA2) to improve oversight by amending
the PIM Guidelines and implementing the PIM Working Group was resulting in increased compliance.
Compliance in turn was expected to result in stronger economic management through better economic
analysis, project selection, costing and monitoring (as well as improving consistency with environmental
and social objectives) – i.e., “better-prepared projects with higher returns that will be implemented more
smoothly” (PD, para. 41). Although it was not explicitly stated how the relevant data would be captured
and monitored, it is implicit in the ICR (para. 30) that this was done by the “strengthened PIM Working
Group established at the MOF … the Budget Department assumed its secretariat support function,
centralizing information on public investment projects; evaluating and prioritizing projects; and ensuring
integration with the budget process.” Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 3 (single source procurement as % of total procurement value) directly monitored reduction in a well-
identified source of higher costs and failed tenders (PD, para. 44 and footnote 35), which was the second
part of PA 3. However, it at best reflects only one aspect of enhanced oversight by the Dispute
Resolution Council, which was to be strengthened by a draft amendment supported under the first part of
PA 3 [implemented in January 2021 (ICR, para. 34)]. Although not specified in the PD, the SPA gathered
and monitored detailed data on procurement (ICR, paras. 35 and 52 and Figure 1). The baseline and
target were credible. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Enhancing competitiveness

RI 4 (number of RIAs completed on laws and regulations) was directly related to implementation of the
associated PA 4 to introduce RIAs as a means of overseeing new and amended laws and regulations
being developed as Georgia “strengthens its systems for regulatory management in- line with the EU
Association Agreement” (PD, para. 48). Besides ensuring that environmental and social factors are
considered, the “more evidence-based and consultative approach embedded in RIAs” was expected to
result in “enhanced competitiveness through lower risk-premiums on investment decisions” through
clearer and more predictable regulations – “a key demand of the Georgian business community” (PD,
para. 49). However, the usefulness of the indicator was compromised by the lack of a system and clear
responsibility for monitoring it (as well as for implementing the PA) (ICR, para. 37).Rating: Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI 5 (number of cases examined by Competition Agency) referred to the implementation of draft
amendments to the Law on Competition (which was subsequently passed) supported under PA 5 that
were intended to enhance oversight of competition policy for “a better system of concentration control
[and] an improved model of competition in regulated sectors” (ICR, para. 39). Since the actual degree of
competition is difficult to measure and monitor directly, this was a reasonable indicator of the extent to
which oversight to enhance competitiveness was being implemented, but it does not measure the
intended result of number of companies sanctioned. Using a two-year average for the baseline and target
provided a simple, credible measure. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 6 (number of telecommunication service providers using data transmission services through electricity
network) was a direct measure of the potential impact of draft legislation (under PA 5) to facilitate sharing
of telecommunications infrastructure in order to reduce the costs of doing business and enhance


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 28
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



               competition. The PD was not clear on responsibility for monitoring the indicator, given “the absence of a
               ‘champion’ to lead the process” (ICR, para. 41). Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

               RI 7 (teachers with full workload as % of all teachers) directly measured allocation of teaching hours,
               which was the action under PA 6 most relevant to the intermediate objective of improving the quality of
               education through more effective use of qualified teachers. (PA 6 also included actions regarding
               employment and remuneration, intended to increase the supply of qualified teachers – an intermediate
               objective with too long a time horizon to warrant a separate indicator.) Although at best only an indirect
               indicator of the ultimate objective of a more educated and skilled workforce, that outcome was achievable
               over a much longer term; and the quality of education per se is difficult to measure. Hence this was a
               reasonable proxy for progress in that direction through the implementation of the action supported under
               the PA. The baseline and target were credible, with the PD (paras. 56-62) citing detailed data available
               from the Ministry of Education. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

               RI 8 (female teachers with a full workload, as % of all teachers) provided a gender-specific counterpart to
               RI 7, but did not provide relevant additional information on implementation of PA 6 or on the objective of
               competitiveness. An indicator on remuneration would have been more relevant to the expectation that
               actions under PA 6 would help close the gender pay gap (PD, para. 62) – although this is a separate
               objective that is not clearly related to the PDOs of this operation. Unsatisfactory.

               RI 9 (number of investment funds established) was a direct measure of the impact of implementing the
               draft Law on investment funds supported under PA 7 and a step toward increasing funds available to
               businesses, but only indirectly related to the objectives of enhancing competitiveness and growth. (It was
               not, however, as useful as an indicator of the stated, broad objectives of financial deepening and inclusion
               [PD, paras. 62-63], which were beyond the scope of this DPO.) The baseline (nil) and target were
               straightforward. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

               RI 10 (number of targeted companies responding [to investment promotion outreach]) was directly related
               to the impact of implementing PA 8 to improve the investment promotion outreach of Enterprise Georgia.
               Although it did not capture the extent to which foreign direct investment actually increased as a result (the
               next step on the results chain toward enhanced competitiveness and growth), it represented a first step on
               that path. The PD and ICR were not clear on whether Enterprise Georgia or the Ministry of Economy and
               Sustainable Development was primarily responsible for monitoring. Staffing of investment promotion
               agency was not formally stated as a RI, although it was part of PA 8 and specifically mentioned in the PD
               (para. 66) as an expected result (“staffing for investment promotion to be increased in the first stage from
               six to ten”). Since staffing was an important step toward achieving the objective and readily monitorable, it
               would have been desirable to include and monitor it as a formal RI. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                                  Page 20 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)




Objective
Strengthening economic management

Rationale
All three RI targets were achieved, but RI 1 was flawed as an indicator of results in strengthening economic
management.

Although the number of municipalities submitting financial statements to the SAO reached the target (after an
extension due in part to “lack of awareness at the municipal level,” as well as the impact of the Covid-19
pandemic), the effectiveness of this prior action was limited by the failure of MOF to communicate to the SAO
“that it would receive the financial statements from the concerned municipalities outside the regular
procedures,” the inadequate staffing (or even mandate) of the SAO to undertake the analysis, and limited
follow-up with the Municipalities regarding what was expected of them (ICR, para. 61). Since the deadline for
submission had to be extended due to “lack of awareness at the Municipal level” (as well as the Covid-19
pandemic), and there was “no clear feedback from the SAO to the municipalities on what they need to
improve other than the regular feedback after a regular audit” (ICR, para. 52), achievement of the target did
not necessarily indicate substantive improvements in economic management at the local level as a result of
the actions taken. The act of preparing and submitting an annual financial statement to access the incentive
was considered a beneficial step toward better planning and accountability, and the World Bank team is now
providing assistance to improve manuals and build capacity in the SAO (TTL interview). Overall, only modest
progress has actually been made in ensuring that changes are recommended and implemented at the local
level. Rating for RI 1: Modest.

The proportion of new large public investment projects in compliance with PIM Guidelines (RI 2) was
surpassed in 2020 and rose substantially further in 2021, indicating highly effective implementation of PA 2.
Rating for RI 2: High.

The proportion of procurement value under single source procurement was successfully reduced to the target
of 16 percent (RI 3), despite the potential for emergency single-source procurements under the Covid-19
pandemic. Rating for RI 3: High.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhancing competitiveness

Rationale
Five targets were fully achieved or exceeded, while there was no progress on two. In some cases, further
evidence is needed to support the conclusion that achievement of the target is leading to success in
achieving the downstream objective.

While the legal, methodological and procedural conditions were in place for RI 4 to be implemented, no RIAs
were in fact conducted. The ICR (paras. 62 and 68) noted that, despite initial high interest by donors (which

                                                                                                 Page 21 of 28
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



                      nonetheless waned), “authorities were clearly not pursuing the RIA agenda,” perhaps in part because “the
                      new methodology was too complex,” while “the private sector probably perceives RIAs as a burden to their
                      operations.” Furthermore, the system for monitoring it (as well as for implementing the PA) was not
                      established – indeed, “no formal oversight unit was established,” and the functional responsibility was moved,
                      which “likely created a capacity gap” (ICR, para. 37). Rating for RI 4: Negligible.

                      The increase in cases examined by Competition Georgia for anti-competitive behavior or complaints was
                      double the target of two over a two-year period (RI 5). However, no evidence is given as to the findings and
                      results of these cases, so it is difficult to ascertain whether achievement of the target in fact led to
                      improvement in competitiveness. The Team notes that intensive data collection would be needed to obtain
                      such evidence, and that more active anti-competitive scrutiny with the threat of fines up to 10 percent of total
                      annual turnover is considered sufficient to inhibit anti-competitive behavior (TTL interview). Rating for RI 5:
                      Substantial.

                      The RI 6 target was not achieved because the necessary legislation (for which the PA was to submit a draft)
                      was not passed. Rating for RI 6: Negligible.

                      The increases in the percentage of total teachers, and of female teachers, with full workloads exceeded the
                      targets for RI 7 and RI 8. This represented a first step toward improving the efficacy and quality of the
                      education system, expected eventually to enhance the quality of the labor force and thereby promote the
                      objective of greater competitiveness and growth. However, the indicator for female teachers did not provide
                      additional relevant evidence of achievement of this operation’s objective. Although it is too soon to expect
                      evidence on the extent to which the expected chain of results is being realized, current preparation of a USD
                      400 million Georgia Human Capital Program provides some confidence that the educational reforms will be
                      complemented by more comprehensive measures to address the human capital constraint (TTL interview).
                      Rating for RI7: High. Rating for RI 8: Modest.

                      The target of two investment funds established (RI 9) was achieved by the target date, with an additional two
                      established by mid-2022 and an initial transaction reportedly in the works (TTL interview), indicating a positive
                      impact of the passage (in July 2020) of the draft law that was supported under PA 7. This enables a response
                      to the reported unmet demand for financing from investment funds (PD para. 64), but the actual result in
                      financing provided remains to be monitored going forward. While this adds a useful financial instrument for
                      certain businesses, the claims that this “provides a solid anchor for further reforms in capital markets” (ICR,
                      para.25) and promotes financial inclusion are less convincing. Rating for RI 9: Substantial.

                      Enterprise Georgia received responses from 385 of 650 foreign companies contacted, substantially
                      exceeding the target (RI10). While the ICR (para. 53) indicated that “the amounts invested are substantial,”
                      data on the actual number of companies and amounts invested are lacking in order to confirm that the
                      ultimate objective is being met. Rating for RI 10: Substantial.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




                                                                                                                        Page 22 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Objective 1 is rated Satisfactory and Objective 2 Moderately Satisfactory. Overall achievement is weighted toward
the latter in view of the larger number of actions and indicators and negligible progress on two of them.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PAs were Moderately Satisfactory overall, with a clear underlying diagnostic and rationale for each and
several actions contributing to implementing well-defined strategies. However, four of the sub-actions involved
only submission to Parliament of a draft law or amendment, without clarity on how implementation would be
achieved.

Although 8 out of 10 indicators were nominally fully achieved, in two cases, the RIs did not adequately relate to
the intended objective, and no progress was made with respect to two actions/indicators, yielding an overall
Efficacy rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

With both relevance of prior actions and efficacy rated Moderately Satisfactory, the outcome is likewise rated
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Inadequate institutional capacity in both the Municipalities and the SAO may continue to limit the
effectiveness of incentives provided (under PA 1) to improve PFM at the local level. The ICR (para. 61) noted
that “the SAO is already overstretched and…is not in a position to audit them outside its usual cycle of
operation.” Although the ICR (para. 64) indicated that “municipalities got motivated by the top-up,” it is not
clear that enough is being done to address limited capacity at both the municipal and SAO levels to ensure
results in terms of improved PFM.

Covid-19 pandemic fiscal pressures could undermine the ability of the Government to continue providing
incentives to municipalities for PFM reform, and emergency procurements associated with pandemic
response may offset progress toward reducing single-source procurement.



                                                                                                    Page 23 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



Lack of ownership or political will may continue to stall implementation of RIAs. The Ministry of Justice
has shown little interest, the oversight unit was disbanded, and “there is no demand from the private sector”
(ICR, para. 66). Even the EU’s support was eroded by “the lack of ownership on the part of the authorities,”
although “it remains ready to provide assistance if there is a strong revival of this reform” (which appears
unlikely in the absence of a “champion”). Similarly, although other draft laws/amendments supported by PAs
were subsequently enacted, the draft Law on Telecommunication Infrastructure (PA 5) does not yet appear
to have garnered enough support to be passed. The ICR (para. 66) appears somewhat optimistic that this
could be overcome with “an outreach effort on the part of the Bank to convince the parties involved.”

Teacher reforms may be insufficient to affect labor force quality. The implementation may be impeded
by backsliding: “there is a high risk that teachers who had been ousted from the system because they did not
meet the requirements come back” (ICR, para. 64). Budgets may be insufficient to implement higher salaries
for certified teachers. And labor quality and skills are affected by numerous other factors, including training,
technology and complementary capital investment.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The objectives were generally sound and relevant to the country context and strategy, Nevertheless, the
excessive generality and compound nature of some of the objectives makes meaningful tracking of results
difficult, thereby undermining accountability. Some of the PAs represented only preliminary steps in a
results chain, and would require a more detailed and sustained program of actions for effective
implementation. Some RIs related only to these preliminary steps and did not adequately represent
achievement of the stated objectives.

Stakeholder consultation and donor coordination were minimal.

Lessons from prior experience:

The only lessons from prior operations explicitly cited in the PD (para. 34) were that: “(a) targeted technical
assistance (TA) can be a valuable contribution from the Bank; [and] (b) partnering with other institutions to
overcome resource constraints and lack of in-country presence.” The analytical underpinnings (PD, Table
5) cited the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), PEFA, and public expenditure reviews and also drew on
expertise from IFC Advisory Services and the WB governance and education teams (ICR, para. 58).

Results chain:

The ICR (Diagram 1) provides a clear “Theory of Change” summarizing the underlying diagnostics and
rationale (drawn from the PD) for each policy action in relation to the Pillars and PDOs. The PAs were
based on an analysis of constraints and solutions appropriate to the specific country context. However, in
terms of implementation, some PAs were based on unrealistic assumptions or had missing links in the
results chain – e.g., how to ensure enactment of draft laws/amendments, such as that on


                                                                                                     Page 24 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



Telecommunications (PA 5); ensuring that the SAO could play its intended role in implementing PA 1; and
how examination of cases by the Competition Agency (PA 5) would in fact lead to changes that improved
competitiveness (lacking an indicator of their power to implement sanctions). Although improving the
utilization of qualified teachers was a reasonable input to eventually enhancing labor force quality, the
results chain and further actions needed to achieve this outcome was not fully elaborated.

Risk identification and mitigation:

The PD (para. 87) assessed the risks to the achievement of development objectives as moderate or low,
except for “geopolitical tensions in the region” and “health pandemic” (prescient but not readily amenable
to mitigation within the operation). Prudent fiscal policies and continued strong macroeconomic
management were expected to mitigate fiscal risks. The PD (para. 8) recognized “political risks that the
proposed laws may not be adopted” (mainly in the context of the 2020 election), but considered that “this
risk is significantly mitigated by Georgia’s strong track record in implementing reforms, an effective ongoing
policy dialogue between the World Bank Group and the GOG, and a broad political consensus on national
priorities” (PD, para. 8).

Stakeholder consultation:

There is no discussion in the PD or ICR of stakeholder consultations in preparing the operation. The RIAs
were intended to “ensure adequate consultation with relevant stakeholders in the process of policy-making
on key legislation” (PD, para. 74), but they have not yet been implemented.

Coordination with Development Partners:

The design of support to Enterprise Georgia drew on technical assistance from the IFC. Implementation of
RIAs (PA 4) relied on support from the EU (also German Gesellschaft fur Internationale Zusammenarbeit
and USAID) – although this partnership proved insufficient (ICR, para. 70). Implementation of PA 8
(investment promotion) depended on subsequent support from USAID (ICR, para. 70). The AIIB was
successfully brought in to provide parallel financing as a response to budgetary implications of the Covid
pandemic, one of the first times it has collaborated with policy-based financing. The DPO provided a basis
for AIIB to provide budget support, which it had not done before and would have had difficulty preparing on
its own. There is little other indication of coordination with development partners.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring

The MOF had primary responsibility for monitoring based on data obtained from line ministries and institutions.
The PD (para. 85) indicated that “given the long history of budget lending operations in Georgia, there is

                                                                                                    Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



sufficient institutional capacity built up on monitoring requirements for DPOs. In general, government agencies
have the capacity to provide good and timely data.” The ICR had adequate data.

Adaptation

As a single operation rather than a series, there was little opportunity for observing weaknesses and adapting
accordingly. The problem of poor communication between the MOF and SAO was recognized and improved.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Both design and implementation are rated Moderately Satisfactory, yielding an overall rating of Moderately
Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR indicates that it is too early for evidence to be available on anticipated social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

The ICR indicates that t is too early for evidence to be available on anticipated environmental impacts.



c. Gender

The important role of female teachers was supported in terms of workload, but it is too early for evidence to be
available on recruitment and remuneration.




                                                                                                     Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)




d. Other

N.A.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presented a concise, coherent narrative, drawing on a clear “theory of change” (Diagram 1) and
adequate evidence. The PAs and results were adequately explained, and shortcomings were analyzed (notably
the “design flaw” regarding PA 1). Specific suggestions were provided on how to better achieve objectives in
the “next phase” (meaning subsequent operations and technical assistance; para. 71).

The ICR is consistent with the guidelines. Useful information was provided (para. 61) on a miscommunication
on the implementation of PA1, which compromised the relevance of RI 1 in terms of its ability to reflect actual
changes at the local level.

The ICR laid out the inappropriate assumptions about the role and capabilities of the SAO in relation to both the
MOF and the local municipalities, as well as how the situation may change (and improve) going forward.
Nevertheless, the ICR did not adequately downrate PA1 and the efficacy of RI 1 for this design flaw (which it
highlighted under Bank Performance) or note the incomplete results chain that undermined the implementation
of PA4. Likewise, it could have noted that improving the allocation of teacher hours alone was insufficient to
achieve the objective of developing a more skilled labor force without complementary measures to enhance
skills.

Although this “was one of the first Policy-Based Financings (PBF) by AIIB….with the objective of buttressing the
ongoing EMC reforms program,” this is only footnoted in the ICR (p. 1), with no discussion of how well the co-
financing worked and prospects for further coordination.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 27 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Econ. Management and Competitiveness DPO (P169913)



Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

     1. Undertaking first-step reforms in a single-tranche development policy operation limits the scope
        for achieving objectives without complementary operations. Four of the sub-actions only involved
        draft laws or amendments, with no clear path for follow-up if they were not passed (the failure to pass
        laws resulted in the negligible achievement of two targets). The ICR noted that “three PAs that were not
        fully implemented … may succeed in time if continuous support is well targeted….the purpose of a single
        tranche should be to target a useful steppingstone for the ongoing operations in the sector” (ICR, para.
        67). Whereas a programmatic DPO series can undertake a series of implementation steps and adjust if
        problems arise, a single-tranche DPO depends on sectoral operations for follow-up. While an education
        operation is expected to follow through on teacher reforms, and support from the private sector may be
        sufficient to motivate the further implementation of investment funds and foreign direct investment (PAs 7
        and 8), further progress in PFM in municipalities, RIAs and competition policy appear less assured. A
        two-tranche DPO operation would have provided greater opportunity to carry through on initial reforms
        and build momentum
     2. Development partner backing is insufficient for policy reforms to be implemented in the absence
        of adequate government support and institutional capacity. First, the ability to implement reforms to
        introduce RIAs for “evidence-based policymaking,” as put forward by other development partners and
        Bank reports, was not examined carefully in terms of responsibility for implementation (“should have
        been led by the Ministry of Justice but there was little interest”; ICR, para. 66) as well as stakeholder
        commitment (“no demand from the private sector”). Second, although “the PEFA report correctly
        diagnosed that municipalities did not submit their financial statements to the SAO,” the focus on
        submission led to neglect of the other steps needed to ensure the result of improved PFM (ICR, para.
        69). The implication is that even if the government agrees to a donor-driven reform at a high level,
        having a “champion” who can drive implementation is critical.
     3. Assessments and recommendations from other sources are not necessarily implementable and
        need to be reviewed carefully to ensure appropriate conditions and measures for implementation.
        While the PEFA Report had correctly diagnosed the problem of municipalities failing to submit financial
        statements for audit, the focus on submission (RI 1) failed to address the shortcomings in
        communication between MOF and the SAO and the capacity constraints of the SAO.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 28 of 28
