     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022957

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133591                                    ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53860                                  30-Jun-2019                                      187,340,392.59

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2014                                07-Jul-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           205,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            205,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                        187,340,392.59                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Wendy Schreiber Ayres       Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective, as stated in the Financing Agreement dated April 10, 2014 (page 4), was
   to increase access to improved water supply and sanitation services for residents in participating
   woredas/towns and communities in Ethiopia.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprises three components (PAD pages 6 to 8):

   Component 1. Rural Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (R-WaSH) (cost at appraisal US$109.3
   million, actual cost US$237.32). This component focused on improving access to water supply and
   sanitation services, and to promote improved hygiene in rural areas. It financed (a) construction and
   rehabilitation of community water supply schemes; (b) construction and rehabilitation of water and sanitation
   facilities in schools and health facilities; (c) the design and application of behavior change communication
   materials in beneficiary communities; and (d) capacity building of woredas, communities, and regional
   water, health, and education bureaus and woreda offices to plan, implement and manage their water supply
   and sanitation facilities and promote hygienic practices.

   Revised component 1. Under the first restructuring—which brought IDA resources together with those of
   the African Development Bank (AfDB), United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID),
   and UNICEF into the Consolidated WASH Account (CWA) located at the National Bank of Ethiopia The
   combined resources of One WASH National Program (OWNP)-CWA—component 1 was expanded to
   provide an additional 2.173 million people with access to improved WaSH services.

   Component 2. Urban Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (U-WaSH), (cost at appraisal US$84.7
   million, actual cost US$117.08 million). This component focused on improving access to water supply and
   sanitation services, in urban areas (small and medium towns), and to strengthen the capacity of WaSH
   officials to plan and manage these services in a sustainable manner. It financed: (a) rehabilitation and
   reconstruction of urban water production, treatment, and distribution systems; (b) preparation of a National
   Urban Sanitation Strategy, supporting studies on urban sanitation, and priority sanitation investments in
   beneficiary towns; (c) activities to strengthen the capacity of participating water boards/committees and
   operators to effectively manage their water supply and sanitation facilities; and (d) activities to support
   preparation of follow up interventions in urban areas (including subsector technical, institutional and
   financial assessments, and feasibility studies in selected urban areas as well as look at potentials for public
   private partnership arrangements).

   Revised component 2. Under the first restructuring, the number of towns to be covered was expanded
   from 70 to 144 and the number of people benefiting from access to improved water supply was increased
   from 1 million to 2.16 million. Under the second restructuring the number of towns to be covered was
   reduced from 144 to 94, and the number of beneficiaries provided with access to improved water supply
   was reduced from 2.16 million to 1.5 million. In addition, the design and study of Cibilu Dam and ancillary
   structures was added to component 2.

   Component 3. Project Management Monitoring and Evaluation (cost at appraisal US$11 million, actual
   cost US$42.96). This component focused on supporting and building the capacity of WaSH agencies at
   federal, regional, and local government levels to plan, implement, and manage water supply and sanitation

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



  services under their jurisdiction. This component provided financing to the Ministry of Finance and
  Economic Development, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and
  Energy, and to the regional health, education and water bureaus, woreda WaSH offices, the Bureau of
  Finance and Economic Development, and Woreda Finance and Economic Development Office personnel
  and regionally-based consultants to:

  (a) Support program and project implementation including establishing and maintaining strong contract
  administration and monitoring system (b) support for refinement of sector policies and program
  implementation arrangements, including activities to support creation of the enabling environment for a
  sound programmatic approach; (c) support for activities that would generate evidence and information on
  the existing water and sanitation services sector policy performance, including cost recovery, sector
  financing, public private partnership, and post construction support, with a view to recommend policy
  revisions if needed; (d) equipping water quality testing and training centers; and (e) support for program
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

  Revised component 3. Under the first restructuring, component 3 was expanded to provide for additional
  technical assistance and capacity building support.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$233.8 million, which included a government
  contribution of US$28.8 million. Following the first restructuring which established the CWA, the project cost
  rose to US$485.0 million, including contribution of AfDB, DFID, UNICEF, and Finland (ICR Table 2). The
  actual cost at completion was US$418.8 million.

  Financing: The project’s cost was financed through an IDA Credit of US$205 million, a Credit of US$92.1
  million from the AfDB, a grant of US$131.6 million from the Foreign Commonwealth and Development
  Office of the United Kingdom (FCDO, formally known as DFID), a grant of US$10.0 million from UNICEF,
  and a grant of US$2.3 million from the Government of Finland.

  Borrower Contribution: Once the OWNP was established, the Borrower’s contribution was projected to be
  US$46.3 million. The actual contribution at completion was US$42.1 million.

  Restructuring:

  First Restructuring. The project was restructured on May 12, 2015 to establish a harmonized funding
  instrument that pools resources from various development partners, the CWA, to harmonize planning,
  budgeting, and implementation of activities financed under the OWNP. The restructuring also led to the
  World Bank taking on the fiduciary and safeguards oversight role of the CWA. Targets for indicators in the
  results framework were increased to reflect the additional resources available.

  Second Restructuring. A second restructuring on June 27, 2019 extended the closing date by one year to
  June 30, 2020 to allow time to complete town water supply contracts that were underway and to finalize
  strategic study and design consultancies for sanitation investments. Other changes included triggering
  OP4.37 (Safety of Dams) because the project would finance the design and study of Cibilu Dam and
  ancillary structures. Targets in the results framework were reduced to reflect reductions in development



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



   partner funding and increases in costs of water supply systems to adhere to a higher standard than
   originally envisaged.

   Third Restructuring. A third restructuring on June 17, 2020 extended the closing date by slightly over a year
   to July 7, 2021 to allow time to complete contracts underway that were delayed by Covid-19 pandemic
   restrictions in movement, including the consultancy services for the Cibilu Dam feasibility study and its
   review by the Independent Panel of Experts. The date was selected to coincide with the end of the
   Ethiopian fiscal year, which would facilitate financial management and reconciliation of accounts.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 20, 2014 and became effective on July 7, 2014. The project
   closed on July 7, 2021, two years after the original closing date of June 30, 2019, as discussed above
   under restructuring.

   Split Rating. As the project became overall more ambitious, a split rating is not applied.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal

Ethiopia was a large, diverse, land-locked country located in the Horn of Africa, with an area of about 1.1
million square kilometers and a population of about 91.7 million in 2012. With a per capita income of
US$370, Ethiopia was one of the world's ten poorest countries. However, it had made substantial progress
on social and human development during 2005–2015. During that time, about 2.5 million people had been
lifted out of poverty, and the share of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 percent in
2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11 (using a poverty line of US$0.6/day). Access to safe water in Ethiopia
was estimated in 2013 at 75 percent in urban areas and 49 percent in rural areas, and to improved
sanitation at 80 percent and 60 percent in urban and rural areas, respectively. About 31 percent of schools
had access to safe water and 33 percent had access to sanitation facilities, while 32 percent of health
facilities had access to safe water and 85 percent had access to sanitation facilities.

Alignment with Country Priorities

The PDO was well-aligned with Ethiopia’s socio-economic development and water supply and sanitation
sector policies. The government in its Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) for 2010–2015 had set
ambitious targets of providing 98 percent of the population with improved access to safe water and 100
percent with basic sanitation. In addition it set targets of 84 percent coverage for improved hygiene and
sanitation, 77 percent achievement of proper hand washing, and 77 percent safe water handling and use.
The four Ministries involved in the sector signed a Memorandum of Understanding in November 2012, to
support an integrated OWNP aimed at achieving the GTP’s goals in an effective and efficient manner. The
OWNP’s development objective was to contribute to improving the health and well-being in rural and urban
populations by increasing water supply and sanitation access and the adoption of good hygiene behavior
and practices in an equitable and sustainable manner.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



               Alignment with Bank Strategy

               The project’s objectives are assessed as highly aligned with the World Bank’s current strategy as laid out in
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for fiscal 2018–2022. The project sought to address the
               development problem of lack of access to water supply and sanitation services in rural and urban areas by
               financing the related infrastructure investments. The project also aimed to address weak sector institutions
               to continue delivering services and expanding services to new customers through provision of technical
               assistance and advice. The project objectives correspond to “Objective 2.3: Increased access to improved
               water and sanitation” and “Objective 2.5: improved early child nutrition and early learning outcomes” which
               is linked to access to safe water and sanitation, both under the “Focus Area 2: Building Resilience and
               Inclusiveness (CPF, pp. 37–39).

               Previous World Bank Experience

               The World Bank has been a prominent partner in the water supply and sanitation sector in Ethiopia for
               many years. The US$280 million Water Supply and Sanitation Project (WSSP), jointly financed by IDA and
               DFID (closed on October 10, 2013) piloted a programmatic approach to rural and urban water supply and
               sanitation sector financing in Ethiopia. It provided access to improved water supply and sanitation services
               to more than 5 million people, 3.7 million in rural areas and 1.33 million in urban areas. Through a unique
               capacity building arrangement of ‘learning by doing’, a tripartite arrangement for technical assistance, and a
               stepped and gradual approach for rural and urban water supply and sanitation, the project supported 224
               woredas to prepare and implement woreda-wide WaSH plans. Similarly, the project helped 130 small and
               medium towns to prepare their urban WaSH plans, and financed construction of systems in 83 towns.

               However, while the objective remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary response
               to a development gap in Ethiopia, a significant shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the project formulation
               around what outcomes would be achieved through increasing access to improved water supply and
               sanitation services. The causal chain between funding and outcomes was clear, albeit with most targets at
               output level, as the objective was closer to the output level, rather than the outcome level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: Increase access to improved water supply for residents in participating woredas in Ethiopia.

                             Rationale



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



Rationale
Theory of Change

The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs—IDA’s financial and technical assistance
support—would directly lead to the achievement of project outputs of (a) construction and rehabilitation of
water production, treatment, transmission, and distribution infrastructure in rural areas; (b) construction and
rehabilitation of water supply facilities at schools and health facilities, (c) reduced non-functioning rural water
supply schemes; and (d) strengthened capacity of the water sector institutions to provide services.

In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of more people in targeted rural areas using
safe water that would be supplied sustainably by the responsible service providers. Overall, the causal
pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly
attributed to the project’s interventions. The activities, if completed, would be sufficient to provide a critical
mass for the expected change.

The key assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) programs, plans, and strategies would be
implemented during the project period and would contribute to the improvements of access to improved water
supply in participating woredas and towns; (b) trained staff would remain in the original organizations; and (c)
the proposed studies on water and sanitation sector policy performance would be implemented and contribute
to better service provision. The assumptions were reasonable.

Outputs•

        17,457 community water points were constructed, expanded or rehabilitated under the project. The
         target set at the first restructuring was 24,200.
        10.5 percent of improved rural water supply schemes were not functional in the program woredas. The
         target set in the PAD was 10 percent.
        10,399 institutional water supply systems constructed or rehabilitated at schools and health facilities.
         The target set at the first restructuring was 10,380.
        Rural water and sanitation services programs prepared and Woreda WASH Teams established in all
         participating woredas. The target set in the PAD was 70 percent.

Outcomes

Compared against the end-project targets

PDO Indicator 1 was exceeded.

        Some 4,051,479 people in rural areas gained access to improved water supply services under the
         project. The revised target set in the first restructuring paper was 3,800,000 million people.

The PDO indicator target was exceeded. The efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is high.



Rating
High


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: Increase access to improved sanitation services for residents in participating woredas in
Ethiopia.

Rationale
A direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes. The
activities consisted of (a) behavior change campaigns; (b) construction of sanitation facilities at schools and
health facilities. The key outputs were household, school, and health facility sanitation facilities.

In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of more people in targeted rural areas with
access to improved sanitation facilities. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcome were valid and
direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions. The activities, if
completed, would be sufficient to provide a critical mass for the expected change.

The key assumption leading to this objective was that the behavior change campaign and use of the
community-led total sanitation and hygiene approach would lead to households constructing improved latrines
at their own expense. The construction of latrines at households and at schools and health facilities would
lead to people gaining access to improved sanitation under the project.

Outputs

        1,221,638 improved latrines constructed because of the behavior change and Community-Led Total
         Sanitation and Hygiene approach. The target set in the first restructuring paper was 627,000 latrines
         constructed.
        1.9 million people trained to deliver the behavior change campaign. The target set in the first
         restructuring paper was 2.1 million people trained.
        4,311 kebeles (73 percent) declared and verified open defecation free. The original target 80 percent
         of kebeles would be declared open defecation free.

Outcomes

Compared against the end-project targets

PDO Indicator 3 was exceeded.

        Some 5,575,263 people in rural areas gained access to improved sanitation facilities under the
         project. The revised target set in the first restructuring paper was 3,150,000 million people.

The PDO indicator target was exceeded. The efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is rated High.



Rating
High


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3: Increase access to improved water supply for residents in participating towns and communities in
Ethiopia.

Rationale
A direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes. The
activities consisted of (a) construction and rehabilitation of water production, treatment, transmission, and
distribution infrastructure in urban areas; and (b) technical assistance and capacity building support to
strengthen the management capacity of participating water boards/committees and operators.

In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of more people in targeted towns using safe
water that would be supplied sustainably by utilities and other service providers. Overall, the causal pathways
from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the
project’s interventions.

Outputs

      Water supply systems constructed in 73 towns (69 small and 4 medium towns). This output is not in
       the results framework, and no target was set.
      59,002 additional cubic meters of water produced per day. The target set in the first restructuring
       paper was 49,500 additional cubic meters per day.
      Water Boards established in 122 (102 small and 20 medium) towns and have prepared business
       plans. The target set in the first restructuring paper was 144 towns, and the original target was 70
       towns.

Outcomes

Compared against the end-project targets

PDO Indicator 2 was not achieved.

      Some 1,241,887 people in urban areas gained access to improved water supplies under the project.
       The revised target set in the third restructuring paper was 1,500,000 million people. The original target
       was 1,001,000.

The revised PDO indicator target was not achieved, but the original target was exceeded. The efficacy of the
project in achieving this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)




                            Objective
                            Objective 4: Increase access to improved sanitation services for residents in participating towns and
                            communities in Ethiopia.

                            Rationale
                            A direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes. The
                            activities consisted of (b) construction of public and communal latrines; and (b) improving towns’ de-sludge
                            services by constructing sludge drying beds, and procuring vacuum trucks or other desludging equipment;
                            and (c) promoting sanitation and hygiene through urban health extension programs.

                            In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of more people in targeted towns with
                            access to improved sanitation facilities. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcome were valid and
                            direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions.

                            Outputs

                                  236 public and 200 communal latrines constructed (total of 436). The original target set in the PAD
                                    was 450 public and communal latrines.

                            Outcomes

                            Compared against the end-project targets

                            PDO Indicator 4 was not achieved.

                                  Some 136,500 people in urban areas gained access to improved sanitation facilities under the project.
                                    The target set in the first restructuring paper was 150,000 people, and the original target was 67,500.

                            The revised PDO indicator target was not achieved, but the original target was exceeded. The efficacy of the
                            project in achieving this objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The objectives of increasing access to water supplies and sanitation
                            services in targeted rural areas in Ethiopia were exceeded and are rated high. The revised PDO targets of
                            increasing access to water supplies and sanitation services in targeted towns and communities in Ethiopia
                            were not achieved, but the original targets were exceeded. The objective of increasing access to improved




                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



  sanitation services in some areas of the Recipient’s territory was fully achieved and is rated substantial.
  Overall efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency.

An economic analysis of the project was conducted at appraisal, consisting of separate analyses of the urban
and rural systems (PAD, page 16). The assumptions and methodology used in the cost-benefit analysis were
appropriate. The benefits comprised (a) reduced time to spent collecting water; (b) reduced health costs due to
increased availability of safe water and sanitation facilities and increased knowledge of good sanitation and
hygiene practices; and (c) improved sustainability of water supply. The costs included the investment and the
operations and maintenance of the water supply network. The net present value (NPV) of the rural water supply
component was estimated to be US$31.7 million using a discount rate of 10.23 percent, and the economic rate
of return (ERR) was estimated to be 24.2 percent. The net present value (NPV) of the urban water supply
component was estimated to be US$50.0 million using a discount rate of 10.23 percent, and the ERR was
estimated to be 23.8 percent. The NPV of the rural and urban components combined was estimated to be
US$123.5 million and the ERR was estimated to be 45.3 percent.

These were underestimates, because the benefits of income gained as a result of reduced absenteeism at work
and school due to illness, reduced premature mortality, reduced costs of water treatment due to reductions
in release of sewage, and others were not included in the estimate of the NPV and ERR.

The economic analysis for the urban water and sanitation systems was updated for the second restructuring
reflecting (a) increases in investment costs resulting from pooled financing of several development partners; (b)
reductions in the average number of beneficiaries of small towns from 20,000 to 14,752 (average of the actual
population figures); (c) delays in delivery schedule, which moved completion of nine large and 51 small towns
after the current closing date; and (d) changes in some of the macroeconomic parameters including the
exchange rate, inflation rate, per capita health expenditure, and others. These changes reduced the NPV to US$
6.7 million at a discount rate of 10 percent, and the ERR to 13 percent.

The economic analysis was again updated at project completion, using the same structure used for project
appraisal, with costs and benefits discounted at 10 percent over a 10-year period for rural water supply on spot
systems and over a 15-year period for urban water supply and rural pipe systems (ICR, page 18–19). Separate
analyses were carried out for the urban and rural water supply components and combined (rural+urban) for the
project. The NPV of the rural water supply component was estimated to be US$49.95 million, and the ERR was
estimated to be 25.5 percent. The NPV of the urban water supply component was estimated to be US$270,000,
and the ERR was estimated to be 10.1 percent. The NPV of the rural and urban components combined was
estimated to be US$50.2 million and the ERR was estimated to be 17.3 percent.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



Although the NPV and ERR were lower than anticipated at appraisal, the team clarified in an email to IEG dated
August 29 that the project achieved intended benefits on a per unit basis. The team also noted that a household
survey conducted at completion demonstrated strong qualitative evidence of user satisfaction, reduced time
fetching water and reduced illnesses (water and excrete-borne diseases).

Design and implementation efficiency. The project closing date was extended by two years to allow adequate
time to complete ongoing contracts. In addition, not all contracts related to the urban water supplies were
complete by project closing due to delays in planning and design of facilities and Covid-related restrictions on
mobility, which delayed the delivery of pipes, fittings and electro-mechanical equipment imported from abroad.
Such delays reduce efficiency. However, the project’s pooled funding arrangement which brought six
development partners into a single Bank-managed project contributed to efficiency by reducing transaction
costs for both the government and donors. The “one plan, one budget, one report” principle of the Program
allowed government counterparts to focus on implementation rather than attending to the reporting needs of
each donor separately. Resources from different donors were absorbed more efficiently and quickly than
previous projects and activities financed unilaterally by different donors.

Overall, the quantified long-term benefits are substantial in comparison to the costs, although lower than
estimated at appraisal due to higher investment costs and lower benefits than foreseen at appraisal. There were
shortcomings in planning and design of some urban water systems, procurement, and contract management,
that delayed project implementation. The efficiency of the project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  45.30
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               17.30
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With Substantial relevance of objectives, Substantial efficacy, and Substantial efficiency, the overall rating is
Satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is considered to be moderate. The project has helped to strengthen
the spare parts supply chain and operations and maintenance (O&M) practices, which has led to a reduction
of non-functioning rural water schemes from 25 percent to 10.5 percent. This will lead to higher collection of
revenues and further strengthening of the capacity of the service providers to maintain water supplies.
Strengthening of management capacities of both rural and urban service providers will also help with O&M of
water supply, sanitation, and hygiene facilities. None-the-less, regional disparities in O&M capacities exist,
particularly at woreda and kebele levels. High turnover of staff may erode technical and administrative
capacities to manage water schemes effectively and efficiently, if training of new and existing staff is
inadequate. O&M of facilities at schools, health facilities, and in public places requires focused attention.

Recent incidents of insecurity pose a risk to development outcomes. Obtaining spare parts and other
supplies to operated and maintain water supply schemes constructed in some areas, particularly Tigray, may
be challenging, until the conflict comes to an end. Political instability could also pose a threat to the newly
strengthened water and sanitation service providers.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the objective of increasing access to improved water supply and sanitation services for
  residents in participating woredas, towns and communities in Ethiopia by expanding water and sanitation
  services in rural and urban areas contributing to achievement of the targets set out in its GTP 2010–2015
  was of high strategic priority. Project design built on previous Bank engagements and experience. The
  project’s approach was straight forward, expanding water production, treatment, and distribution
  capacities, and facilitating access to services construction and rehabilitation of public standposts, and
  construction of water and sanitation facilities at schools, hospitals and public places, and strengthening
  capacities to deliver and manage services. The project activities were sufficient to achieve the project
  objectives. The technical aspects of the project were sound. The project supported implementation of
  proven technologies to address the development problem of limited access to water and sanitation
  services. Economic aspects of the project were sufficiently assessed justifying the viability of the project.
  The project implementation arrangements followed the same structures that were used under the recently
  closed Bank-funded WSSP. The National WaSH Coordination Office was responsible for coordinating,
  planning, and overseeing program implementation at federal level. WaSH Project Management Units
  established within the sector ministries were responsible for implementing the project activities. In
  addition the Water Resources Development Fund was responsible for appraisal, monitoring, and
  evaluation of projects proposed for medium towns. WaSH PMUs in the Bureaus of Water Resources,
  Health, Education, and Finance and Economic Development were responsible for implementation at the
  regional level. Finally, dedicated WaSH Team consisting of members from the Water, Health, Education,
  and Finance desks were responsible for program planning and implementation at the woreda level. To
  ensure the adequate implementation of activities, a project implementation manual was prepared.
  Lessons learned from the recently closed WSSP and similar water and sanitation projects in other
  counties in the region, were incorporated in the project design, such as the features required for a

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



  successful sector-wide approach (PAD, page 10). The indicators in the results framework were sufficient
  to measure the project outputs and outcomes. Risks were appropriately identified.

  In addition, during preparation the Bank team started discussions with other development partners the
  possibility pooling IDA resources with those of other development partners, thereby establishing a
  programmatic sector-wide approach. Although by the time of Board presentation agreement had not yet
  been reached on the use of IDA’s fiduciary and safeguards rules, the team fully anticipated that
  agreement would be reached soon.

  However, the quality at entry did have shortcomings. Some key instruments, such as the study and
  design of large water supply systems in urban areas were not ready by effectiveness, which led to delays
  in implementation. Also, the team underestimated the differences among regions of capacities for
  planning, coordination, and implementation, which led to implementation delays, particularly of
  implementation of urban water supply systems.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Two task team leaders led project preparation and implementation, both based in Addis Ababa allowing
 consistent follow up. Close supervision ensured that the implementation teams focused on development
 impact, such as increasing access to water and sanitation services. Some 14 implementation support
 missions were held during project implementation, one every six months or so. These were carried out
 jointly with the development partners, following the 2015 restructuring. Prior to the mission, the team
 prepared a checklist of issues to be covered, which it sent to the implementing agencies. The team held
 pre-mission briefings to ensure that each agency understood what was requested. Except for a kick-off and
 wrap-up meetings with the National WASH Steering Committee, the National WaSH Coordination Office,
 and WASH PMUs of the sector ministries, the mission was divided into different groups, covering different
 regions. Development partners were actively engaged in mission discussions and in the monitoring of
 project implementation and progress towards the project objectives. Aide Memoires and Implementation
 Status and Result Reports were of high quality and candid, thoroughly covering all key issues and
 providing practical recommendations on how to address challenges. Supervision of safeguard and fiduciary
 aspects of the project was appropriate. The Bank team closely monitored compliance with safeguards and
 flagged issues when required procedures were not adequately followed. The task team proactively
 restructured the project three times to extend the project closing date, adjust activities, and amend the
 results framework. The Bank team was flexible and responsive to emerging needs of the client. For
 example, it worked with Client and other development partners to add to the OWNP a climate resilient
 WASH activities, focusing on providing WASH services to people living in drought-prone areas. In addition,
 the Bank team reacted swiftly to address implementation delays related to the onset of the Covid-19
 pandemic and extended the project closing date to enable the client to deliver hand-washing and hygiene
 messages aimed at reducing the spread of the virus. Finally, the Bank team adopted a new online tool,
 called “Geo Enabling Monitoring and Supervision” in late 2020, to facilitate remote monitoring of project
 implementation during the period when travel was not possible.



                                                                                                Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory notwithstanding minor shortcomings in the proactive
 identification of and resolution of challenges.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was sound, specifying how the key activities and outputs led to the outcomes as
 reflected in the results framework. The project development objectives of increasing access to improved
 water supply and sanitation services for residents in participating woredas, towns and communities in
 Ethiopia were clearly specified and reflected in the outcome indicators included in the results framework.
 The intermediate results indicators, measuring outputs such as improved community water points and
 latrines constructed or rehabilitated under the project were adequate to capture the contribution of the
 operation’s activities and outputs toward achieving PDO-level outcomes as presented in the PAD. The
 indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound, with baseline and target values
 specified for all indicators. The proposed data collection methods were adequate for all indicators. Overall,
 the project implementing agencies had the capacity to implement the M&E arrangements and the indicators
 were sufficient to measure the achievements of the project in increasing the access to water and sanitation
 services.

 The design of the results framework had some shortcomings. First, the results framework had no indicators
 related to number of household connections made in rural or urban areas, nor the number of people
 expected to benefit from each connection. The results framework did not account for improvements in the
 water supply or sanitation service chain beyond construction of new community standpipes and latrines,
 such as time saved for fetching water, reliability, or quality. A beneficiary assessment carried out at the end
 of the project implementation period provided evidence that time spent collecting water fell significantly in
 the beneficiary communities and that the quality of water improved. Finally, the results framework did not
 include indicators related to financial performance of service providers, a key measure of the likely quality
 and sustainability of services in the future.



b. M&E Implementation
  The impact and performance of the project were effectively monitored through data collection and
  reporting by national and regional WaSH coordination offices, and results were reported to the National
  Water Coordination Office and to the Bank and development partner teams quarterly. The results
  framework was revised during each restructuring, increasing targets during the first restructuring to reflect
  the pooled resources made available to the OWNP and reducing targets in the second and third
  restructuring to reflect reductions in resources and increases in costs of urban water supply systems. The

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



  quality of the data was a challenge during the first years of project implementation, but improved in later
  years. Data quality on the number of latrines constructed in rural areas was a challenge, because the
  latrines were financed by households and were counted by health extension workers, and their
  assessments were not necessarily consistent. However, the regional WASH offices thoroughly reviewed
  and discussed the M&E data prior to their submission to the Bank team, which helped ensure its
  accuracy. The Client produced its Implementation Completion Report, during which M&E data were
  reviewed and verified. The Client also caried out a beneficiary assessment, with guidance from the Bank
  team. Joint field visits by the Bank team, development partners, and the implementing agencies during
  missions verified results achieved and evaluated the quality of infrastructure constructed under the
  project. When mission stopped during Covid, the Bank team used the Kobo Toolbox to monitor
  implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  Indicators were communicated effectively and used throughout implementation to assess project
  progress, identify the need for adjustments and make decisions accordingly. For example, when the
  Bank and government teams noted that the progress in constructing urban water supply systems was
  below expectations, the Bank restructured the project to reduce the targets in the results framework. The
  M&E data were used to provide evidence of achievement of the increase in the access to water and
  sanitation services.

  The M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievements of the project
  objectives to increase access to improved water and sanitation services, but there were shortcomings in
  capturing other aspects of the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal the project was assigned Environmental category “B” because environmental risks and social
   impacts were expected to be minimal and manageable, and, in most cases, reversible. Five safeguard
   policies were triggered during preparation of the project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples
   OP/BP 4.10, and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). An additional safeguard policies was
   triggered during the second restructuring: Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The ISR dated
   June 24, 2021 stated that the project closed with a moderately satisfactory overall safeguards rating. The
   government updated the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a resettlement
   policy framework (RPF) used for the WSSP to customize it for use by the Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
   Project to address any potential impacts. The government consulted sufficiently with the concerned people



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



  and local governments in preparing the ESMF and the RPF. The ESMF and RPF were disclosed in Ethiopia
  November 28, 2013 and at the Bank’s Info Shop on December 3, 2013.

  Some 351 Resettlement Action Plans and 109 Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans were prepared and
  implemented. The implementing agencies faced challenges throughout project implementation because of
  high turnover of environmental and social safeguards specialists at the regional and woreda levels. To
  address this challenge, the Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and Energy, with assistance from the Bank,
  provided environmental and social safeguards training numerous times.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The ICR does not report on compliance with this
  safeguard.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project’s implementing agencies generally complied with the Bank’s fiduciary
  policies. The project benefited from the financial management arrangements set up in the previous WSSP.
  The financial management risk during appraisal after implementation of mitigating measures was assessed
  to be substantial. The project implementing agencies at the federal, regional, and woreda levels had
  sufficient capacity for financial management of the project, having gained experience under the WSSP.
  The ICR notes that external audit reports were unqualified (paragraph 64). The ICR does not provide
  information on the timeliness of submission of the external audit reports or the interim financial reports.
  There were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project. All project funds
  were accounted for at project closing. The project’s financial management was compliant with the World
  Bank’s requirements.

  Procurement. The Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and Energy had overall responsibility to ensure that the
  procurement process was carried out as per the Financing Agreement and the World Bank’s Procurement
  Framework for Investment Project Financing. The project benefited from the procurement arrangements
  set up in the previous WSSP. Procurement risk after mitigation was assessed as high.

  Although staff in the implementing agencies had over a decade of experience with procurement under
  World Bank-financed operations, lengthy delays in procurement and weak contract management at the
  regional and woreda levels slowed implementation of the project. Delays were caused by use of outdated
  unit costs to estimate costs, and significant price escalations during construction, which led to budget
  shortages and revision of original plans. Several complaints were raised by contractors and consultants
  regarding contracting processes and procedures during project implementation.

  There were capacity gaps among regions. To address the issue, the Bank applied different thresholds for
  Bank’s prior review in goods and civil works contracts for big regions (Amhara, Oromia, Tigray, and
  SNNPR) than for emerging regions (Gambella, Benishangul Gumuz, Afar, Somali, Harari and Dire Dawa

                                                                                                Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



   Administration). The regions were classified “delegated” and “non-delegated” regions. The delegated
   regions received procurement support from the federal level. Technical specialists from the federal
   government were assigned to frequently visit and support regional staff. Tailored training for federal and
   regional staff was also provided.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   A number of schools benefiting from the project established school WASH clubs. Their members were
   involved in activities to keep the school environment clean and promoted sound hygiene practices in their
   homes and communities.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                The M&E system had moderate
                                                                                shortcomings, such as not
                                                                                reporting on the number of
                                                                                household connections
Quality of M&E                  High                  Substantial               constructed as a result of the
                                                                                project, and it lacked indicators
                                                                                related to financial performance
                                                                                of service providers, and other
                                                                                aspects of the results chain
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial               Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

Successful harmonization of donor support requires the active involvement and strong
commitment from the government and development partners. Bringing multiple development
partners together in one program required considerable negotiation and compromise on the part of
the development partners to reach agreement on what fiduciary and safeguards policies would
apply. The leadership of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development was critical in
encouraging the development partners to reach agreement on a programmatic approach. The


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



commitment and leadership of World Bank team was instrumental in driving the process forward,
even following Board approval of the Bank-financed project.

Using a programmatic sector-wide approach in a fragile-country context helps to reduce
conflict. Pooling development partners resources created a large enough budget envelope to reach
communities across the country. The use of one plan, one budget, one reporting system and one
consolidated WASH account, meant that the same approach applied across the country, minimizing
tensions between regions.

Overcoming capacity gaps requires continuous and tailored support. There are significant
regional differences in capacity of implementing agencies, particularly at the local level. The project
did not sufficiently tailor training programs to reduce the capacity gaps, which remained evident
throughout the project implementation period. More intensive efforts to build the capacity of weaker
implementing agencies would help to close the regional capacity gaps.

Ensuring that plans and designs for infrastructure are ready by effectiveness and that
implementing agencies have filled key staff positions reduces implementation delays and
increases efficiency. Some of the plans and designs for large urban water systems were
undertaken during the project implementation period, which delayed construction of works. Some
implementing agencies did not hire key personnel, such as project managers and safeguards
specialists, long after effectiveness. Learning from these lessons, phase 2 of the project includes
criteria that newly-nominated woredas must comply with before managing project-financed activities.
These criteria include establishing (or strengthening) woreda water teams, assigning qualified
personnel to plan and manage the activities at each sector office, nominating a focal point to provide
safeguards oversight. Further reducing delays, rural piped water schemes that cross woreda
boundaries, are managed at the regional level, instead of at the woreda level.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The ICR is clearly written and largely consistent with the
guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s activities, including a detailed annex summarizing the
efficiency analysis. The ICR provides a good theory of change in regard to the causal links and full results
chain, and the reporting is outcome-focused. Its analysis is broadly evidence-based.

The ICR, however, could have provided information on compliance with safeguards, the timeliness of
submission of interim financial reports and external audits, and the amount of funds remaining in the at project
close, and whether they have been returned to the Bank. It could have noted whether all project funds were
accounted for at project closing. The table in annex 3 should have presented the costs of the Bank-financed
project, as in the datasheet, making comparison of the between the planned and actual expenditures possible.



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET- Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (P133591)



Moreover, the figures for actual disbursements in the table in the datasheet (US$187.34 million) does not match
the figure for actual project costs in annex 3 (US$397.36 million).

Some of the figures in the ICR are not correct. For example the ICR states that the cost of component 2 at
appraisal was US$93.0 million, of which IDA financing provided US$77.7 million (page 9). Yet, the datasheet of
the PAD shows the cost of component 2 to be 84.7 million, all IDA.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 19
