     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0023058

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Program Name
 P146583                                     NG-Saving One Million Lives

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                     Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-56000                                   31-Dec-2019                                        387,579,069.24

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Apr-2015                                 31-Jan-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            379,777,658.15                                                0.00

 Actual                                        387,579,069.24                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Objective of the Program was to increase the utilization and quality of high impact reproductive, child
   health, and nutrition interventions (Financing Agreement, May 22, 2015, p. 5).

   The Program formed part of the Federal Government of Nigeria's program titled “Saving One Million Lives
   Initiative” (SOML) that aimed at strengthening the pillars of maternal and child health in the country.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)




b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Program would consist of the following activities (Program Description, Financing Agreement, p. 5):

   I. Carrying out, by States, of programs of activities designed to increase utilization of High Impact
   Reproductive, Child Health and Nutrition Interventions, including: (a) preparation of plans to achieve
   reductions in maternal, perinatal and under-5 child mortality; (b) carrying out of High Impact Reproductive,
   Child Health and Nutrition Interventions; and (c) strengthening of Maternal, New-Born and Child Health
   (MNCH) Weeks (Appraisal: US$305 million; Actual: US$309 million).

   II. Carrying out, by States, of a program of activities designed to increase the quality of High Impact
   Reproductive, Child Health and Nutrition Interventions (Appraisal: US$54 million; Actual: US$16 million).

   III. Carrying out of a program of activities designed to improve monitoring and evaluation systems and
   data utilization, including: (a) conducting SMART Surveys (see definition below); (b) conducting Health
   Facility Surveys; (c) collecting data on maternal mortality rate from available sources; (d) disseminating
   widely the results of SMART Surveys and Health Facility Surveys; and (e) implementing performance
   management systems in all States and building and strengthening management capacity of leadership of
   the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) and ministries responsible for health at the state level (Appraisal:
   US$80 million; Actual: US$42 million).

   Definition of SMART Survey (Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transitions): The
   survey is a standardized, simplified, cross-sectional field survey method designed to aid the collection of
   quality, up-to-date, and timely data necessary for decision-making. It was originally used for assessment of
   the magnitude and severity of a humanitarian crisis and acute emergencies. This survey method balances
   simplicity for rapid assessment and technical soundness.

   IV. Establishment and operation of the Innovation Fund designed to support private sector
   innovations aimed at increasing utilization and quality of maternal and child health interventions,
   including: (a) development and testing of new techniques and technologies; and (b) development and
   testing of innovations designed to expand coverage and quality in health service delivery by private sector
   providers (Appraisal: US$20 million; Actual: US$0 million).

   V. Carrying out of a program of activities designed to increase transparency in management and
   budgeting of primary health care (PHC), including such activities as: (a) transferring of health staff at
   health facility and Local Government Authority (LGA) levels to the State Primary Health Care Development
   Agency (SPHCDA); (b) publication, by state ministries of health, of consolidated budget execution reports
   covering all sources and uses of funds for primary health care at the state level; and (c) publication, by
   FMOH, of consolidated budget execution reports covering all sources and uses of funds for primary health
   care at the federal level (Appraisal: US$41 million; Actual: US$19 million).


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)




e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program scope, boundaries, cost and financing: The Program was designed to support the federal
  government’s overall expenditure framework for its SOML program during the life of the operation. SOML
  was also part of the Second National Strategic Health Development Plan 2016-20. The total planned
  expenditure for SOML was estimated at US$1,052 million, to be financed by a government contribution of
  about US$552 million and a World Bank contribution of about US$500 million. The PforR Program was
  designed to encompass mostly federal roles and activities. Some state roles and activities at the apex level
  were financed by the Program (supervision of LGAs and facilities, technical help to LGAs, analysis of
  performance, problem identification, training, deployment and management of human resources,
  procurement and distribution of drugs), but overall LGA levels and below were not included within the
  Program financial boundaries, although the ICR (p. 10) noted that overall state activities would be directly or
  indirectly "influenced" by the Program. In addition, other development partners were supporting maternal
  and child health (MCH) activities outside the government’s budget.

  The World Bank’s contribution was provided through an IDA Credit of US$500 million that represented
  about 48 percent of total federal expenditure on SOML during the operation’s time frame of five years. The
  Program had a partial cancellation of US$120.4 million on January 28, 2021, prior to the closing date of
  January 31, 2021, because it was unlikely to achieve more results by the closing date (see below under the
  fourth restructuring). The actual cost of the Program was US$387.6 million.

  Dates: The Program was approved on April 23, 2015, and became effective on May 29, 2015. It had a slow
  start during the first two years. A Mid-Term Review was carried out on January 31, 2019. The Program
  closed on January 31, 2021, about one year beyond the originally anticipated closing date of December 31,
  2019.

  Restructurings: The Program underwent four level-2 restructurings:

  The First Restructuring (May 20, 2016): The federal government requested the restructuring to use the
  recent 2015 SMART survey results that covered all the states as a more robust baseline for service
  utilization, rather than the 2014 survey that covered only a few states. It also rewarded all states with
  US$1.5 million to increase utilization, instead of US$2 million for the 20 weakest performing States and
  US$1 million for the remaining 16 states.

  The Second Restructuring (December 18, 2019) extended the Program closing date by nine months,
  from December 31, 2019 to September 30, 2020, to allow the completion of two surveys (National Health
  Facility Survey and 2019 SMART survey) to measure progress toward the PDO and disbursement against
  Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) achievement.

  The Third Restructuring (September 29, 2020): There were quality concerns with the 2019 SMART
  survey, and therefore the Program was reluctant to use its results for disbursing against DLI 1.2 (improving
  key health indicators). The restructuring extended the closing date of the Program from September 30,
  2020 to January 31, 2021, to allow time to verify the survey or to seek credible data alternatives to disburse
  against DLI 1.2.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



   The Fourth Restructuring (January 28, 2021) partially modified DLI 1.2 (see DLI 1 Revision 2 below) and
   partially cancelled undisbursed funds across DLIs 2,3,4 and 5 in the amount of US$120.4 million per
   government and Task Team’s assessment that the Program would not be able to achieve more results to
   trigger disbursements before the Program closing date. In this context, the restructuring allowed the
   Program to use alternative and credible data sources, such as the Lot Quality Assurance Sampling for
   vaccination coverage of pentavalent vaccine, and the 2019 post-harvest General Household Survey
   (GHS) for the utilization of insecticide-treated nets for malaria prevention and control (see section 4 for more
   details).




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives      New




  Rationale
  At appraisal, the Program was responsive to the country’s health challenges and intended to support SOML
  that was meant by the government to be a bold response to the slow progress in MCH outcomes. Over the
  preceding two decades, coverage of key health interventions had stagnated at low levels, the quality of care
  was poor, and important inequities remained among Nigeria’s geo-political zones (PAD, pp. 3-4). Based on
  2013 data of Nigeria’s Demographic and Health Survey, the maternal mortality ratio was at 576 maternal
  deaths per 100,000 live births; the total fertility rate at 5.5; child stunting (height for age) at 37; infant mortality
  rate at 69 per 1,000 live births; and under-5 mortality at 128 per 1,000 live births.

  In terms of relevance of the PforR instrument, the PAD (p. 9) argued that the PforR instrument was a good fit
  because SOML was a well articulated and technically sound program that aimed at achieving measurable
  results in priority areas; it was an existing program with widespread support; and there was an explicit
  interest in changing the focus from inputs to actual results. Improvements in performance would be expected
  to be associated with increased accountability, motivation, and stronger management. Also, government
  policies that can facilitate the achievement of SOML goals were already in place, and therefore a sector
  development policy operation would not have been a suitable option.

  At Program closing, the objectives remained closely relevant to the goal of improving primary health care
  under the second pillar of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Federal Republic of Nigeria for
  the period FY21-FY25, dated November 16, 2020. This second pillar on “Investing in Human Capital and
  Harnessing Nigeria’s Demographic Dividend” had several objectives: increase access to and quality of basic
  education, improve primary health care, increase access to basic water and sanitation services, increase the
  coverage and effectiveness of social assistance programs, and empower women and girls by increasing their
  human capital and economic opportunities, along with a complementary priority to promote youth
  employment and skills.

  Under CPF Objective 3 to improve primary health care, the CPF stated that, with a large portfolio in this area,
  support would focus on consolidating the main financing platforms to provide programmatic support to help
  reduce under-five mortality, improve the quality and coverage of public health services, and promote




                                                                                                           Page 4 of 17
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



                       sustainable financing for basic health services. The CPF also used a Program-specific indicator (Pentavalent
                       3 vaccination) as a CPF indicator.




       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Increase of Utilization of High Impact Reproductive, Child Health and Nutrition Interventions

                Rationale
                The DLI was in line with the strategic focus of SOML and the National Strategic Health Development Plan.
                The DLI would encourage increases in the coverage of key health interventions. DLI 1 had three elements:

                DLI 1.1 -- States Produce Plans for Achieving Reductions in Maternal, Perinatal and Under-Five Child
                Mortality: DLI 1.1 would motivate the states by providing them with an opportunity to address legacy issues of
                poor planning and infrequent supervision. States would be provided with initial “one-off” disbursements at the
                beginning of the PforR Operation, based on each state developing a plan for addressing its own performance
                constraints that hinder PHC service delivery with an emphasis on improving supervision and introducing
                innovations. The 20 most lagging states as judged by the 2014 SMART survey would receive US$2 million,
                and the remaining states would receive US$1 million each. The arrangement avoided perverse incentives or
                moral hazard since: (i) data on which the initial disbursement would be based had already been collected and
                published; (ii) states were unaware that they would receive these disbursements based on performance; and
                (iii) subsequent results-based disbursements would be based on improvements from the baseline.

                DLI 1.2 -- Improvements on 6 Key Health Indicators: The indicators used were key ones in SOML scoring and
                were known to be among the most cost-effective means for saving the lives of mothers and children: (i)
                immunization coverage, Pentavalent 3; (ii) insecticide-treated nets utilization by children under five; (iii)
                proportion of pregnant women who receive HIV counselling and testing as part of their antenatal care; (iv)
                proportion of mothers benefiting from skilled birth attendance; (v) contraceptive prevalence rate using modern
                methods; and (vi) Vitamin A coverage among children under five. Funds provided to States, although
                relatively small compared to overall state budgets, may be catalytic because they could be flexibly used,
                including to meet recurrent costs.

                But DLI 1.2 did not assign appropriate unit prices. Since the DLI depended on a combined coverage of
                services, this meant that even if the entire allocated amount for DLI 1.2 was spent, the final target may not
                have been achieved across all states. There were no consequences for low or declining performance. This
                has subsequently contributed to discrepancies between relatively high levels of disbursement for DLI 1.2
                compared to actual target achievements (ICR, p. 19).


                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



DLI 1.3 -- Lagging States will Strengthen their MNCH Weeks as Part of an Impact Evaluation: MNCH Weeks
can mobilize communities, notably remote ones, as a means of increasing coverage of preventive
interventions such as childhood immunization, Vitamin A supplementation, nutrition assessment, and de-
worming. MNCH Weeks are transitional measures that can boost coverage while the PHC system is being
strengthened. While the approach appears attractive, past experience since 2010 had shown that MNCH
Weeks did not fulfill their potential, and that the participation of children under five remained low.



Rating
Modest

DLI 1 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
DLI 1.2: Increase in quantity of high impact Reproductive, Child Health and Nutritional interventions as
measured by improvements on key health indicators as indicated by SMART or other quality-assured household
surveys with data from SMART Survey 2015 providing the baseline



Revised Rationale
The revision provided more robust baseline data on service utilization, as the 2015 SMART survey covered
all the states with more recent data in contrast with the initial baseline that was based on the 2014 SMART
survey that covered only a few states. Also, the rewards of DLI 1.1 were revised to provide all states with
US$1.5 million as an incentive to increase utilization, instead of US$2 million for the 20 weakest performing
States and only US$1 million for the remaining and better performing 16 states.




Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 1 REVISION 2
Revised DLI
DLI 1.2: % improvements in average national performance of the Key Health Indicator relating to the use of
insecticide-treated nets by children under 5

Revised Rationale
The alternative source of reliable data for service utilization (the 2019 post-harvest GHS that was selected in
lieu of the 2019 SMART survey) dealt with national level performance for insecticide-treated nets. Hence, the
Program changed the DLI from state level performance for this indicator to average national performance.
The trade-off was justifiable because the average national performance under the household survey was
more reliable than the 2019 SMART survey measurements for this indicator, and an overall improvement
pattern was common across the states.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)




Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 2
DLI
Increase of Quality of High Impact Reproductive, Child Health and Nutrition Interventions

Rationale
DLI 2 would help to ensure that the quality of care receives sufficient consideration. It would reward state
level performance and contribute to improving management and data utilization. Quality of care would be
defined by an index that comprised a combination of indicators that are discussed in section 4. However, the
index was based on general process indicators that reflect quality aspects in overall service delivery.




Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Improvement of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems and Data Utilization

Rationale
Having reliable information was considered by SOML as a foundation for increased accountability and would
help decision-making to become more evidence based. The DLI had three elements:

DLI 3.1-- Improving M&E systems: This would largely consist of motivating the expansion of SMART surveys
and institutionalizing annual health facility surveys. The DLI would support conducting SMART surveys in all
states; introducing annual health facility surveys in all states; and collecting data on the Maternal Mortality
Rate.

DLI 3.2 -- Improving Data Utilization by widely disseminating survey results.

DLI 3.3 -- Implementing Performance Management System in All States: This part of the DLI would help in
bolstering performance management systems in the states with a focus on capacity and accountability,
evidence of continuous analysis, and regular reviews of action plans.




Rating
High


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)




            DLI 4
            DLI
            Establishment and Operation of the Innovation Fund Designed to Support Private Sector Innovations Aimed at
            Increasing Utilization and Quality of Maternal and Child Health Interventions



            Rationale
            A competitive innovation fund was planned to support innovations for techniques, technologies, and
            innovations in health service delivery by private sector providers. The relevance of engaging the private
            sector and harnessing its potential is self-evident in theory, but, in the specific context of the country Program
            and its objectives, the DLI was difficult to implement and operationalize, and the recruitment of a firm
            according to the implementation plan was not consistent with government guidelines (ICR, p. 19 and p.
            60). The Task Team also clarified on August 17, 2022, that the Federal Ministry of Health was reluctant to
            proceed with this activity given the large amount of funds that would be managed by the private sector on
            behalf of the government and in view of limited health sector experience in such an undertaking. The DLI
            was not implemented.



            Rating
            Modest

            DLI 5
            DLI
            Increase of Transparency in Management and Budgeting of Primary Health Care

            Rationale
            This DLI was relevant because holding states accountable for improving service delivery would make sense
            only if relevant managers had actual control of human and financial resources that are required for service
            delivery. States would: (i) transfer health staff to SPHCDA, an autonomous entity responsible for PHC that
            would be provided with management authority over staff at health facility and LGA levels, including the power
            to hire, fire, post, transfer, and discipline such staff; and (ii) produce and publish a consolidated budget
            execution report covering all income and expenditures for PHC. The federal government would publish a
            consolidated budget execution report covering all income and expenditures for PHC.



            Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale


                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



               Overall relevance encompasses a full alignment between Program objectives and the CPF at Program
               closing, and a substantial alignment between DLIs and Program objectives, where shortcomings were
               observed in the design of some DLIs. The aggregation of both elements is consistent with a substantial rating
               for overall relevance.



               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase the utilization of high impact reproductive, child health, and nutrition interventions

               Rationale
               The theory of change held that better management of human resources, training, supervision, provision of
               equipment, drugs, vaccines, medical supplies, and operating budgets, along with technical assistance,
               outreach, and community engagement would contribute to increasing the number of people with access to a
               basic package of health, nutrition, and reproductive health services, including immunization and attended
               deliveries. In turn, these developments would plausibly contribute to an increase in utilization of high impact
               reproductive, child health and nutrition interventions.

               The theory of change for utilization was intertwined with that of increasing quality under Objective 2 below, as
               both aspects were mutually reinforcing. For example, high service quality would motivate people to seek
               health care.

               The number of people who received essential health, nutrition, and population services increased from a
               baseline of 9.9 million in 2015 to 11.7 million people by the end of 2019, exceeding the target of 10.7 million
               people. Out of this total, the number of females increased from a baseline of 6.7 million to 7.7 million,
               exceeding the target of 7.4 million.

               The number of women and children who received basic nutrition services increased from a baseline of 2.9
               million in 2015 to 3.2 million by the end of 2019, short of the target of 3.4 million women and children.

               The number of Pentavalent 3 immunized children increased from a baseline of 3.3 million in 2015 to 4.6
               million by the end of 2019, exceeding the target of 3.5 million immunized children.

               The number of deliveries attended by skilled health personnel increased from 3.7 million in 2015 to 3.9 million
               by the end of 2019, exceeding the target of 3.8 million attended deliveries.

               As an outcome reflecting increased utilization, the ICR reported that the combined coverage of six key SOML
               services (Pentavalent 3 vaccination coverage among young children; modern methods contraceptive

                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



prevalence rate; Vitamin A supplementation among children 6 months to 5 years of age; skilled birth
attendance; HIV counselling and testing among women attending antenatal care; and use of insecticide-
treated nets by children under five) increased from a baseline of 236.6 percent in 2016 to 271.1 percent in
2019, short of the target of 284 percent in combined coverage. Aspects pertaining to the reliability of these
results are explained below.

In view of quality concerns related to the 2019 SMART survey, the project used the robust 2018 SMART
survey in addition to two other reliable data sources (Lot Quality Assurance Sampling for vaccinations and the
2019 post-harvest General Household Survey (GHS) for the use of insecticide-treated nets (ICR, pp.55-59).
The restructuring of January 2021 formalized the use of reliable alternative data sources for Program
assessment (ICR, p. 22).




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase the quality of high impact reproductive, child health, and nutrition interventions

Rationale
The theory of change held that, in addition to the interventions included in the theory of change for increasing
utilization under Objective 1, the application of quality scores in service delivery, improving M&E systems and
data utilization, increasing transparency in management and budgeting, and establishing an innovation fund
for the private sector would plausibly contribute to increased quality of high impact reproductive, child health,
and nutrition interventions

The number of states with performance management systems in place increased from a baseline of 10 states
in 2015 to 37 states in 2020, exceeding the target of 30 states with performance management systems.

The number of states in which SPHCDA had managerial authority over PHC staff increased from a baseline
of four states in 2015 to 31 states in 2020, short of the target of 37 states.

In terms of outcomes, the Program used a Quality-of-Care assessment at the health center level that was
based on a composite index of several general domains. Data was measured through National Health Facility
Surveys. The Quality-of-Care Index increased from a baseline of 33.9 percent in 2016 to 51.7 percent in
2019, exceeding the target of 37.1 percent. This indicator combined the following domains: (a) clinical
competence of health workers and adherence to guidelines; (b) availability of drugs and minimum equipment;
(c) readiness to deliver SOML activities, including outreach; (d) frequency and quality of supervision; (e)
quality of financial management and quality of data reporting; and (f) health care waste management (ICR, p.
23 and p. 40).

The first National Health Facility Survey (NHFS) was used in 2016 to determine the baseline. It was followed
by the above results that were based on the second NHFS survey that was carried out by the National

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



  Bureau of Statistics in 2019. No subsequent rounds were undertaken. The impact evaluation of results-based
  disbursements for MNCH Weeks was not performed.




  Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The two objectives to increase the utilization and quality of high impact reproductive, child health, and
 nutrition interventions were almost fully achieved. The aggregation of achievements under both objectives is
 consistent with a substantial rating for overall efficacy. Nevertheless, DLI shortcomings affected project
 performance. Alternative sources of data lacked state specificity. Also, low interaction and complementarity
 between the public and private sector, a major provider of health services, remains an important issue that
 has a bearing on Program objectives.

 During ICR interviews (p. 24), stakeholders reported favorably on the change generated by the Program,
 namely on the results-oriented shift in the sector and the heightened interest of state officials in using data for
 making evidence-based decisions toward strengthening and improving MCH services.




 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

Overall relevance is rated substantial, encompassing a full alignment between Program objectives and the
Country Partnership Framework at Program closing, and substantial alignment between DLIs and Program
objectives. Efficacy is rated substantial, as Program objectives were almost fully achieved, but with
shortcomings in Program performance, largely related to DLI design issues, and with shortcomings in state-
specific evidence on achievements. These findings are consistent with a moderately satisfactory rating for
overall outcome.


    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)




6. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that development outcomes may not be maintained is largely related to fiscal aspects (ICR, p. 35).
Although there was a strong demand for continuing SOML, there may not be a direct successor in the near
term largely due to economic constraints and demands on public finances that were exacerbated by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, SOML continues to be favorably considered as a catalytic fund that
increased attention to results and facilitated health system strengthening. Importantly, the Program was
perceived as a mainstream government initiative rather than as a parallel health program.

Other programs such as the Basic Health Care Provision Fund and Accelerating Nutrition Results in Nigeria
could contribute to sustaining some of the Program outcomes. Also, the ICR (p. 35) reported that there was
an early discussion on a proposed Human Capital PforR for Nigeria.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 33), the Program was the first Program-for-Results operation in the health sector
  in Nigeria, and both the government and World Bank Team went through a learning process during
  preparation and implementation. Preparation benefited from lessons of reform programs in other sectors,
  including reliance on independent assessments, drawing skills from the private sector, taking advantage
  of existing systems, and the importance of motivation. The design benefited from a robust technical
  assessment, clear objectives, added focus on cost-effective interventions, and sufficient available
  information on barriers to access and service utilization (Task Team clarifications, August 17, 2022).
  Institutional arrangements (PAD, pp. 28-30) included an Oversight Steering Committee chaired by the
  Minister of Health, oversight by the Federal Ministry of Finance, a Project Management Unit (PMU) in
  charge of day-to-day implementation, and an Independent Verification Agency (IVA). In addition, FMOH
  was to contract with an organization to act as a Program Support Unit (PSU) to support the PMU at the
  federal and state levels through the provision of technical assistance in various areas, largely in
  performance management, data analytical skills, and helping states in formulating their action plans.
  Also, a Fund Manager was to be contracted by FMOH to administer the Private Sector Innovation and
  Learning Fund.

  Quality at Entry had moderate shortcomings. The Fiduciary Systems Assessment did not benefit from the
  early involvement of fiduciary specialists, and a detailed definition of the Program Expenditure
  Framework was deferred to the implementation phase. Some risks were not adequately identified and
  mitigated, such as for the capacity to conduct high-quality population-based and facility-based surveys on
  an annual basis, engaging a PSU to provide technical assistance to the states, mixed commitment to the
  innovation fund, and clarity of the terms of reference and quality assurance functions of the IVA. Some
  DLI unit pricing was not sufficiently accurate to align incentives, disbursements, and target achievements.
  The above issues subsequently affected initial implementation and reduced the frequency of planned
  surveys. In the larger context, and since PforR was a novel financing instrument in the health sector, a

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



  closer scrutiny of capacities, readiness, and risks would have been expected during the preparation
  process.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was concerted effort to advance implementation while addressing preparation shortcomings (ICR, p.
 35). The Bank Task Team was pro-active in addressing Program threats, and facilitated four restructurings,
 including for overcoming M&E weaknesses. The Team facilitated a strong outreach effort to involve the
 states in terms of their understanding of the PforR, results that needed to be achieved, and provision of
 necessary technical assistance to achieve the same. The Team extended efforts to overcome government
 delays in recruiting a PSU for technical assistance, and to find alternative sources of credible data to
 address quality weaknesses in some surveys. The Team was able to provide effective implementation
 support in a complex sector, with government changes, disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic,
 and in a challenging context of increasing fragility and violence. This included the Boko Haram insurgency
 in the North-East and communal conflicts over oil spills in the South-West.

 However, in terms of procurement support, the ICR (p. 33) reported that the quality of World Bank’s
 procurement implementation support was not effective due to limited participation of the procurement team
 in implementation support missions, and weak monitoring of procurement-related Program Action Plan
 (PAP) actions with respect to annual procurement planning and performance. Also, the Task Team did not
 initiate a detailed definition of the Program Expenditure Framework in a timely manner.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated and generally reflected by the indicators. The design of the M&E system
 was technically appropriate for the Program, although it was ambitious and carried implementation risks
 related to insufficient capacity, as M&E design was based on conducting yearly surveys involving a
 combination of SMART surveys for population-based indicators and health facility surveys for quality-of-
 care indicators.




                                                                                                Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



b. M&E Implementation
  In terms of the planned yearly surveys, only two rounds of the NHFS and three rounds of the SMART
  National Nutrition and Health Survey were conducted. The first NHFS round was carried out in 2016 by a
  private firm to establish the baseline, and the second NHFS assessment round was undertaken by the
  National Bureau of Statistics in 2019. The ICR reported that there was not much time left to conduct
  another survey.

  SMART household surveys were implemented by the National Bureau of Statistics with technical support
  from UNICEF. These surveys were meant to be nimble. The process took 18 months to start. Only three
  SMART surveys were carried out during the Program period. There was an expectation that surveys
  would be institutionalized, but they were funded by development partners. Concerns about data quality
  issues were raised at the 2019 SMART survey, triggering a technical review that identified several issues,
  including in documentation, methodology, analysis, and date-related errors. In consultation with the
  government and development partners, the World Bank decided not to use the results for assessing
  achievements and facilitating disbursements. Instead, the fourth Program restructuring allowed the use of
  credible alternative data sources, including GHS for the utilization of insecticide-treated nets and the Lot
  Quality Assurance Sampling for measuring Program progress in Pentavalent 3 vaccination coverage.

  M&E implementation issues were also encountered at the level of IVA, a public health consultancy firm
  for verification that had prior working experience with the government. There was an expectation that IVA
  would provide quality assurance for the entire process of SMART surveys under SOML, but such a task
  was not well specified in the terms of reference (TORs) and was not adequately budgeted. The quality
  assurance task was not carried out by IVA for the 2018 SMART survey or for the 2019 SMART survey.
  IVA was reluctant to take on this function that was perceived to be outside its TORs and beyond its
  technical capacity. Other IVA issues were related to lack of clarity on the timelines of the verification
  process.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for Program monitoring and adjustments. Dissemination of survey results was
  mixed: the 2015 and 2018 National Nutrition and Health Surveys were disseminated to a wide range of
  audiences, while the 2019 survey was not disseminated because of data quality issues. Likewise, the
  2016 NHFS was disseminated, while the 2019 survey was not. The ICR (p. 31) reported that M&E
  utilization was stymied to a certain extent by the issues encountered during implementation, but that
  M&E contributed to the move toward a results-based approach.

  In view of overall M&E shortcomings, M&E quality is rated modest. In this context, the use of alternative
  sources of credible data and evidence, beyond the Program’s M&E system, contributed to validate the
  efficacy of the Program, as discussed in section 4.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

9. Other Issues


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)




a. Safeguards
  According to both PAD (p. 40) and ICR (p. 32), the Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment
  (ESSA) found that the overall environmental impact of the Program was likely to be positive, owing to
  expectations of increased accountability, improved coordination across the health system, and strengthened
  health programs. The PAD noted that the Program would provide opportunities to enhance sanitation,
  hygiene, infection control, and waste management at health facilities while ensuring that there were no
  adverse impacts to the environment. The related Legal and Regulatory framework in Nigeria was found to
  be strong in terms of provisions for safeguarding the environment. Therefore, the focus of actions for
  environmental management was on increasing capacities at the PMU and sectoral institutions to implement
  regulations and early risk screening. Regular assessments were planned and carried out at the state level.
  There was compliance, and no major risks were encountered. However, the ICR reported that more could
  have been done to strengthen the environmental management system in terms of capacity, and noted that,
  at the federal level, there was no team to follow up on ESSA.

  Key social issues were related to poverty and equity as well as access barriers to quality maternal, newborn
  and child health services. Although elements of Program design were focused on reaching the poor, the
  ICR reported that a greater focus on community engagement to help increase demand for services could
  have been envisaged. The ICR (p. 32) noted that the multi-stakeholder engagement approach to drive
  community outreach and MCH Weeks was weak, thus contributing to low awareness about available
  services at various health facilities. The PMU did not have officers dealing with social aspects. The PAD (p.
  41) discussed the availability of the Grievance Redress System, but the ICR did not offer information on
  related experience.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR (p. 33) reported that financial management arrangements were satisfactory. However, two sets of
  issues were encountered:

  The first was related to the late involvement of fiduciary staff from both sides (Bank and government
  counterparts). Initially, it was incorrectly assumed that using the government’s systems under PforR
  implied that the fiduciary oversight was limited to the review of financial reports. The ICR suggested that an
  earlier involvement and closer participation could have led to better performance in conducting
  procurement audits per the PAP and better performance under DLI 5 (management and budgeting).

  The second set of issues was related to the granular definition of the Program Expenditure Framework and
  which expenditures were subject to audit. As noted in section 7a, a detailed definition of the Program
  Expenditure Framework was deferred to the implementation stage. The World Bank Team and government
  counterparts worked collaboratively to prepare a detailed listing of Program expenditures. A substantial
  bundle of expenditures related to SOML was incurred by the National Primary Health Care Development
  Agency that was an autonomous body with financial governance independent of FMOH. The World Bank
  and FMOH agreed that related expenditures would be subject to audit, and past financial statements were



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



   restated. The final audit for the Program, covering the period January 1, 2020 to May 31, 2021, was
   received by the World Bank on December 3, 2021. The auditors issued an unqualified opinion




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



10. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                 High


11. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 36-38) identified several lessons and recommendations, including the following
lessons partially re-stated by IEG Review:

A meticulous delineation of Program boundaries can incentivize states to achieve more
results. As SOML was a federal program, SOML PforR largely focused on federal-level
expenditures. But a substantial part of the accountability for financing and delivery of primary health
care services also resided at the state level. A more focused Program boundary with the inclusion of
some key expenditures for the delivery of primary care services in the states could incentivize states
to achieve more results and accountability.

In a large federal setting, technical assistance in support of the Program facilitates PforR
implementation progress and complements the role of incentives and financing. The SOML
PforR envisaged strong Program support in terms of technical assistance, but during early
implementation, progress was disrupted by changes in leadership and withdrawal of technical
support. Notable progress was observed only after putting in place a new program support entity
that provided technical assistance and advocacy to the states. It would be reasonable to assume



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG-Saving One Million Lives (P146583)



that a more binding arrangement for the provision of technical assistance during the preparation
phase itself would have contributed to more energetic implementation at the outset.

A realistic assessment of delivery readiness during preparation is key to addressing early
implementation issues. Under the SOML Program, readiness was variable, with overestimated
capacity in some areas. Advancing readiness in a realistic manner during preparation would have
contributed to reducing delays in establishing institutional arrangements for Program
implementation, such as for the intensive M&E surveys, Independent Verification Agency scope of
functions, and facilitating the provision of technical assistance to the states.

Also, The Borrower’s ICR (p. 70) identified the following lesson:

PforR can increase financial transparency at all levels. The Program had a robust system of
financial flows where funds were domiciled in the Central Bank of Nigeria and administered by
Remita platform, remitting end-to-end payments to beneficiaries with clear tracking of transactions.
The release of funds was independent of officers of the Federal and State Ministries of Health who
approved Program activities.




12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough overview of the Program experience. Its narrative was very candid, accurate,
aligned to development objectives, and supported the outcome rating and available evidence The analysis and
evidence were aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. The latter aptly identified shortcomings in DLIs
design, implementation readiness, and M&E, where its discussion on the use of alternative sources of data was
thorough. The ICR offered specific lessons derived from Program experience. It followed guidelines and was
internally consistent, although it was lengthy and had occasional but relatively minor lapses in clarity.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
