     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022988

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P090644                                     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09)

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                     Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-44960,IDA-54070,IDA-58400             31-Dec-2013                                         382,281,402.72

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Jul-2008                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            409,062,889.44                                              0.00

 Actual                                        382,281,402.72                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the Financing Agreement, the project's original objective was "to increase access by the poor to
   improved social and natural resource infrastructure services in a sustainable manner throughout the
   Recipient's territory." The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) had the same objective with slightly different
   wording: "to sustainably increase access of poor people to improved social and natural resource infrastructure
   services." The Project Paper at a 2014 restructuring revised the objective to match that in the Financing
   Agreement.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



   At a June 2016 restructuring, the objective was revised: "to increase access by the poor people, and
   particularly by the internally displaced and vulnerable people in the North East of Nigeria, to improved social
   and natural resource infrastructure services in a sustainable manner throughout Nigeria."

   As the substance of the objective remained the same, and the revised objective added a specific target
   population for which all outcome indicators were met or exceeded, this ICR will not perform a split rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components at appraisal:

   1. Federal-level coordination and program support (appraisal: US$10 million; Additional Financing
   (AF)1: US$15.75 million; AF2: US$23.25 million; actual: US$15.17 million) was to work with the Federal
   Project Support Unit (FPSU) in providing assistance to state-level agencies and activities, particularly on
   procurement, financial management (FM), gender, environment, and local government capacity issues;
   maintaining a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework for the project in all project states
   and across all levels of activities; and developing poverty reduction, social protection, and community-driven
   development-related policies and programs, as well as dialogue and dissemination of best practices. At the
   first AF, federal-level coordination activities were added, including a focus on community-driven
   development (CDD) policy and strategy assessment and formulation, technical support, and monitoring and
   impact evaluation.

   2. Local government authority (LGA)/sectoral ministries capacity and partnership building (appraisal:
   US$20 million; AF1: US$47.5 million; AF2: US$57.5 million; actual: US$41.88 million) was to support State
   Agencies in all participating states in capacity building, skills training, and hardware investments, with the
   goal of establishing and strengthening partnerships between LGAs and communities.

   3. Community-driven investment (appraisal: US$170 million; AF1: US$236.75 million; AF2: US$256.75
   million; actual: US$259.02 million) was to fund community development plans (CDPs) of selected
   communities, chosen on the basis of criteria that included community participation in plan formulation,
   micro-project identification and preparation, and matching contributions from communities. The component
   was to be managed by state agencies, which were to carry out information campaigns on community
   selection, CDPs, agency goals, and funding procedures; support community identification of needs and
   priorities as well as development of CDPs; in collaboration with LGAs, appraise, approve, and finance CDPs
   developed and implemented by community-based groups (community project management committees,

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



  CPMCs, and group project management committees, GPMCs); and monitor and evaluate implementation of
  the CDPs and achievement of set goals. Possible micro-projects included rehabilitation, extension, or
  construction of primary schools and health centers; rural electrification; construction of water points,
  reservoirs, or drainage systems; community sanitation; rehabilitation or construction of feeder roads, small
  bridges, culverts, drifts and stock routes, boreholes, or other basic transport and other infrastructure; and
  small socioeconomic infrastructure for community use, such as markets and storage, vocational training
  centers, community energy access or efficiency, and natural resource management facilities (community
  reforestation, woodlots or community-managed measures for firewood use, or physical and biological
  measures for lowering soil erosion degradation).

  A fourth component was added at the March 2014 restructuring, which included AF of US$140 million:

  4. Vulnerable groups investment facility (AF1: US$40 million; AF2: US$77.5 million; actual: US$69.24
  million) was to support micro-project investments that specifically targeted vulnerable groups, including
  widows, internally displaced persons (IDPs), itinerants, and physically challenged persons. Eligible micro-
  projects expanded beyond those included in the third component, to include also specialized skills centers,
  classrooms, and health centers' tools and equipment; community housing; and one-time start-up grants for
  revolving funds, scholarship funds, or other welfare funds.

  At a 2016 restructuring, a second AF of US$75 million was added to support the government's social
  response to the Boko Haram crisis, after violent attacks started to spill over into Nigeria's north-eastern
  frontier. The AF earmarked additional resources to six North East states (Borno, Adamawa, Yobe, Bauchi,
  Gombe, and Taraba) that had been confirmed as particularly damaged by a Recovery and Peace Building
  Assessment (RPBA) and other assessments.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was approved as a Specific Investment Loan in the amount of US$200 million, with a US$180
  million planned contribution from the Recipient, bringing total costs at appraisal to US$380 million. The
  Recipient contribution was to include approximately US$4 million from each participating state government
  on annual contributions and overhead (amounting to about US$100 million), US$50 million in total from
  participating LGAs, US$25 million in matching community contributions, and US$5 million from the federal
  government for operating costs. The 2014 AF added US$140 million in Bank financing, most of which went
  to the two investment components (Component 3 and the newly-added Component 4), and the 2016 AF
  added US$75 million more. US$5.87 million was cancelled in April 2021. A total of US$382.3 million was
  disbursed, and governments and communities contributed US$58.6 million. The ICR (p. 26) notes that most
  of the difference between planned and actual Bank spending was due to exchange rate fluctuations.

  The project was approved on July 1, 2008 and became effective on February 23, 2009. Its mid-term review
  was held in December 2011. An interim ICR was submitted on November 12, 2016, as AF2 extended the
  project's lifetime beyond ten years. The project closed on June 30, 2021, 7.5 years after its originally
  scheduled closing date of December 31, 2013. It underwent nine restructurings:

        October 25, 2012: Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories to support increased
         capacity building of CPMCs, LGA workers and officials, and state agency M&E staff.
        November 4, 2013: The closing date was extended by one year to December 31, 2014, as over 98
         percent of the original credit had been disbursed, and AF1 was under preparation.

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



         March 26, 2014: AF1 of US$140 million was added to introduce the new fourth component, and the
            results framework, components, and component costs were adjusted accordingly. The wording of
            some indicators and targets was modified, including increasing target values to reflect the AF, and
            some intermediate outcome indicators were added to reflect the addition of the new component. The
            statement of objectives was revised to match the wording in the financing agreement with that in
            the appraisal document. Two new safeguard policies, OP 4.36 Forests and OP 4.04 Natural
            Habitats, were triggered.
           December 8, 2014: The closing date was extended by nine months to September 30, 2015, to avoid
            disruptions pending AF1 becoming effective on August 17, 2015.
           June 7, 2016: AF2 of US$75 million was added, and the project's results framework, targets,
            components, component costs, and institutional arrangements were adjusted accordingly. The
            objectives were revised to specify the project's enhanced focus on vulnerable IDPs in the North
            East. New indicators were added to reflect the AF and new activities, including support for
            communities that had suffered damage and for persons suffering from trauma. The project's closing
            date was extended to June 30, 2020.
           June 11, 2020: The closing date was extended, the first of four extensions over an eight-month
            period intended primarily to support preparation and implementation of the emergency Nigeria
            COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus Program for Results (US$750 million, 2021-
            2023).
           September 28, 2020:The closing date was extended largely due to pandemic-related delays
           December 23, 2020: The closing date was again extended because of the pandemic.
           April 28, 2021: The closing date was extended a final time to June 30, 2021, and US$5.87 million of
            the loan was cancelled.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, Nigeria experienced high rates of poverty (54.4 percent in 2004), ranking in 2006 at 159th out
of 177 countries on the Human Development Index. Limited access to basic social services, unemployment
and other labor market issues, and overall limited economic opportunities due to inadequate infrastructure
presented major challenges to the poor. The government's National Economic Empowerment and
Development Strategy (NEEDS) and State Economic Empowerment and Development Strategies
(SEEDS), developed in 2003, showed that past anti-poverty initiatives had suffered from poor coordination,
the absence of a comprehensive framework, and ineffective targeting. The need to involve beneficiaries as
key players and partners was clearly identified in these documents. In response, the federal and state
governments had piloted some CDD-based interventions in selected states and communities, with the
support of international agencies (including the Bank, for the Community-Based Poverty Reduction Project
and the Local Empowerment and Environmental Management Project). These pilots, according to the PAD
(p. 10), produced results in increasing access of the poor to social and economic services at the grassroots
level. These successes led to pressure to expand the CDD approach to additional states.

Access to services to improve the quality of human development has remained a key development
constraint across the project's lifetime, including specifically in the states of the North East following the
Boko Haram insurgency, justifying the focus of the revised objectives. The 2015 RPBA conducted by the

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



               government, World Bank, European Union, and United Nations confirmed extensive damage to livelihoods
               and job opportunities in the North East, especially arising from attacks on markets and farms. The project's
               expanded objectives encompassed basic social and natural resource management services to conflict-
               affected households, returnees, and IDPs, as well as activities to provide trauma and psycho-social
               support. This expansion of the objectives was highly relevant to the evolving context.

               The Bank-supported Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (CPS, 2005-2009), formulated in response
               to NEEDS, stated that it is crucial to empower people for poverty reduction, and that such empowerment
               should promote increased access to basic social services and a sustainable environment. The
               Empowerment and Human Development pillars of both NEEDS and the CPS recognized the potential for
               using the CDD approach as a vehicle for financing social infrastructure across the country and for
               community participation in efforts toward poverty reduction. The project continued to be relevant to
               successive Bank-supported strategies and government strategy. The 2010-2013 CPS contained a pillar on
               human development, as well as outcome indicators for access to roads, water, health, and education
               services. The 2014-2019 CPS contained a pillar on quality and efficiency of social service delivery at the
               state level for greater social inclusion. The second AF was prepared specifically in response to a
               government request for crisis recovery support in the North East, which suffered the most due to the
               insurgency. The current CPF (2021-2025) has a strategic cluster on quality, effectiveness, and efficiency of
               social service delivery at the state level for greater social inclusion, with a specific outcome on increased
               access of the poor and vulnerable to social and economic services.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase access by the poor to improved social and natural resource infrastructure services in a sustainable
                             manner throughout the Recipient's territory / Increase access by the poor people, and particularly by the
                             internally displaced and vulnerable people in the North East of Nigeria, to improved social and natural
                             resource infrastructure services in a sustainable manner throughout Nigeria

                             Rationale
                             This review assesses all of the elements of the objective statement under a single objective, as the nature of
                             CDD operations involves service integration and frequent interlinkages and multisectorality in pursuing
                             opportunities for improving social inclusion in poor and rural communities. The project's theory of change held
                             that support for a community-driven investments facility, accompanied by coordination activities to build
                             capacity and develop partnerships in state ministries and LGAs as well as federal-level support for policy and
                             strategy development, would lead to effective preparation and implementation of CDD projects. These
                             projects, in turn, would improve access for the poor to social and natural resource infrastructure services, as
                             well as improve tracking of project performance and accountability for results. The project's original theory of

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



change did not adequately address specific targeting of women and other vulnerable groups, a shortcoming
that was addressed at the first and second additional financings. The addition mid-project of an investment
facility specifically targeted to vulnerable groups and IDPs added grants for those vulnerable persons,
increasing their access to social and natural resource infrastructure. Key assumptions underlying this theory
of change included that investments through project-supported facilities would increase availability of social
and natural resource infrastructure assets, thus increasing access for poor and vulnerable persons, and that
capacity-building activities at the local, state, and federal levels would sustain the CDD approach through and
beyond the project's lifetime.



Outputs

A CDD policy framework for Nigeria was developed and delivered to the government, achieving the target. A
third-party monitoring report commissioned at the project's mid-term review in December 2011 noted that
focus specifically on women and other vulnerable groups was lacking, and specific targeting of investments
was added at the two AFs.

14,774 CPMC members and 1,699 GPMC members were trained in various project aspects such as
bookkeeping, accounting, team building, basic project management and administration, project reporting,
communications, CDP formulation, contract methods, and procurement. Technical support was provided to
state agencies and LGAs on procurement, financial management, gender, the environment, CDD policy
design and dissemination, and M&E. 3,113 staff members of state ministries, agencies, and departments
were trained in supporting communities and vulnerable groups.

The percentage of LGAs that received training that have integrated the CDD approach in the formation of
their local development plans increased from zero in 2009 to 72 percent in 2021, exceeding the original target
of 40 percent and the revised target of 65 percent.

5,604 community development plans were approved and funded, surpassing the original target of 3,000 and
the revised target of 3,750 plans. 16,167 microprojects (1,200 of which were new) from eight socio-economic
sectors (education, environment, health, rural electrification, rural markets infrastructures, skills acquisition
centers and equipment, transport, and water infrastructure) were completed and remained operational and
maintained one year later, surpassing the original target of 7,500 and the revised target of 8,500
microprojects. This represents 94 percent of the 17,180 microprojects that were approved by project closure,
indicating a high rate of completion and sustainability. Through these microprojects, 1,600 health centers
were built or rehabilitated, exceeding the original target of 1,000 and the revised target of 1,500 health
centers. 5,674 classrooms were built or rehabilitated, exceeding the original target of 3,000 and the revised
target of 2,000 classrooms. 1.8 million children (665,000 boys and 1.15 million girls) were enrolled in primary
education schools supported by the project, exceeding the target of 50,000 children. 5,607 community water
schemes were supported, exceeding the target of 3,500 water schemes. 947 units of community housing
were created or supported by the project, not quite reaching the target of 1,000 units.

68 percent of project funds were channeled to community-driven investments, not reaching the target of 75
percent of funds.




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



2,138 of the supported micro-projects were created specifically for vulnerable IDP groups; of these, 2,133
were completed. Among the results of these micro-projects were 307 education facilities and 227 health
facilities.

183 damaged host communities were supported by the project with the creation of 947 community housing
schemes, not reaching the target of 250 communities.

Women made up 30 percent of CMPC and GMPC membership, and in most cases, a woman held the
position of treasurer. Women were actively involved in CPD preparation and implementation, though rarely in
leadership positions; the ICR (p. 27) notes that women were generally assigned ancillary roles (such as
cooking food for workers) during micro-project implementation. A gender and vulnerable groups (GVGs)
registry or list was available in 936 project-supported communities, exceeding the target of 500 communities.
934 functional micro-projects or specialized services were made available to GVGs, exceeding the target of
500 microprojects/services. This indicates that almost all registered GVG groups -- 934 of 936 -- benefited
from their registration through microprojects or specialized services.

1,784 trauma and psychosocial support sessions were conducted for those affected by the insurgency, of
which 1,161 were in the North East, exceeding the target of 200 sessions.



Intermediate outcomes

The percentage of project beneficiaries satisfied with project interventions increased from 30 percent in 2016
to 80 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 60 percent. The percentage of grievances addressed within the
time frame stipulated in the Operations Manual increased from zero in 2016 to 92 percent in 2021, exceeding
the target of 70 percent. These indicators were added at the 2016 AF.



Outcomes

The percentage of the annual local government budget in participating states that incorporated community
development plans increased from 1 percent in 2009 to 77 percent in 2021, exceeding the original target of
30 percent and the revised target of 45 percent.

The number of poor communities with access to social services increased from 1,000 communities (500,000
households) in 2009 to 5,855 communities (2.6 million households) in 2021, exceeding the original target of
3,000 communities and the revised target of 3,750 communities (1.5 million households). Within these
households, 52 percent were headed by women, exceeding the target of 40 percent, and 10.5 percent were
IDPs or other vulnerable groups, exceeding the target of 10 percent. The ICR cites interim results from a
2013 impact evaluation showing that project support resulted in significantly increased primary and secondary
school enrollment, decreased average travel time for children to get to school, increased access to water for
domestic use, reduced water costs, improved access to health care, and increased access to electricity for
rural households (ICR, pp. 17-18).

The number of poor communities with access to natural resource management services increased from
50 communities (25,000 households) in 2009 to 965 communities (620,000 households) in 2021, exceeding

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



                            the original target of 700 communities and the revised target of 800 communities (about 400,000
                            households). The ICR does not report whether the project achieved the revised target of 30 percent of these
                            households being headed by women and 10 percent being from other vulnerable groups (IDPs).

                            There were 12.36 million direct project beneficiaries (measured by the number of poor people provided with
                            access to social services), exceeding the target of 3.2 million. 196,828 IDPs benefited from the project in the
                            North East.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project significantly exceeded original and revised targets for provision of social and natural resource
                            management services in a sustainable manner, with specific benefits demonstrated for vulnerable populations
                            and IDPs.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD's economic analysis (pp. 87-89) drew from two background studies conducted by the Nigerian Institute
   for Social and Economic Research in 2004 and 2006 on the two ongoing Bank-financed CDD projects. It found
   that CDD-type projects are about 26 percent more cost-effective than similar alternative government agency
   projects of the same specification. Specifically, the Bank-financed CDD projects generally used higher-quality
   materials and better construction methods, covered diverse geographic areas, and contracted out all
   construction work. They used detailed technical criteria, standard designs, and simple economic criteria to
   determine sub-project viability, including application of a comprehensive list of unit costs by type of sub-project.
   They also promoted participatory decision-making at the local level, empowering communities to allocate scarce
   resources across sectors, ensuring that project resources were applied efficiently in response to local priorities.
   According to the PAD, these findings justified the current project in economic terms.

   Updated analyses at the time of the ICR confirmed the project's efficiency. The cost of building the same units
   through project-supported micro-projects was 61 percent of that for government water infrastructure, and 51
   percent of that for government electricity infrastructure; overall, measured as cost per unit of output, project
   outputs cost less than half of comparators under state or local government programs (ICR, Figure 2, p. 23). The
   ICR (pp. 20-21) speculates that these savings accrue from lack of contractor profit, community decision-making
   and scrutiny of the works, and/or lack of political interference in contract awards. Following the first AF, the

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



project used poverty mapping in all states for targeting the poorest LGAs and communities. The design of micro-
projects also led to efficiencies; for example, electricity distribution systems were designed to carry high-tension
and low-tension wires at different levels on the same poles, economizing on poles. A 2020 project evaluation
showed that micro-projects resulted in economic benefits such as significantly reduced cost and time of
accessing water for household chores and for business use in communities, as well as reductions in reported
cases of waterborne diseases. Benefit-cost ratios for specific water and electricity micro-projects were found to
be as high as 52.02 (for electricity in Kwara state); the ICR provides benefit-cost ratios and net present
values for only a small sample of micro-projects, and there is no assessment across the entire project.

The ICR (p. 21) also argues that the project improved allocative efficiency in public expenditure in relation to the
needs of the poor, as more community participation and local governance correlate with better response to local
priorities and improved operations and maintenance (as described in the 2020 project evaluation). The project's
operational cost ratio (cumulative total operating cost divided by total disbursements annually) was about 13
percent, a reasonable result given the project's scope and geographic reach.

There were moderate shortcomings in efficiency. It took two years for the initial set of CDPs to be prepared,
submitted, and approved, delaying launch of micro-projects, but implementation picked up speed rapidly after
that. Counterpart state financing was challenging, particularly given the recessionary environment at the time of
AF2. Only two states made their planned contributions in full. Local governments were not expected to make
financial contributions up front, but they were expected to provide staffing and recurrent costs (where needed)
for completed micro-projects; this was also challenging in several cases. Community counterpart contributions of
10 percent for each micro-project, delivered in cash or in kind (materials or labor), were provided as planned
prior to micro-project implementation, though the provision of in-kind labor was difficult to valorize and verify.
The Boko Haram insurgency, farmer-herder clashes, and local criminal activities affected project implementation
and monitoring in some communities. Government-mandated lockdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic
affected completion and supervision of some micro-projects. The project's lifetime extended to 13 years; the ICR
(p. 26) reasonably justifies its extensions as responses to expansion of target groups and crisis, as the project
was one of the main vehicles available to the government to respond to insurgencies and COVID-19's impact on
livelihoods and basic services. However, the multiple restructurings over an eight-month period in 2020 and
2021 could reasonably have been consolidated.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)




6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy at
appraisal, and they remained so through the two additional financings and change in the objectives during
implementation. Well-evidenced outcomes exceeded targets covering all elements of the objectives, including
the added element of the objective to support vulnerable and internally displaced people in the North East.
Efficacy is rated high. Efficiency is rated substantial due to reasonable administrative costs and demonstrated
cost-effectiveness of micro-projects. These ratings point to essentially no shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and results, producing an Outcome rating of Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government at all levels remains committed to mainstreaming the CDD approach, given its demonstrated
results and efficiency. The federal government has submitted a CDD policy to the Federal Ministry of
Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development. Some local governments are already
replicating the approach. The current Bank-supported CPF aims to further streamline and simplify social
service delivery mechanisms, particularly in the North East. Lessons from delivery of this project were
incorporated into an AF for an ongoing Multi-Sector Crisis Response Project (US$200 million, 2017-2024),
approved by the Board in May 2020, and the service delivery platforms established under this project have
been primary vehicles for delivery of the emergency response to COVID-19 and the accompanying fiscal
crisis through the COVID Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus Project (US$750 million, 2020-2023) and
for a National Social Safety Net Program Scale-Up (US$800 million, 2022-2024).

Institutional strengthening was significant and likely to be sustained (ICR, p. 28). The project had a visible
role in improving the knowledge and skills of CPMC and GPMC members, participating local government
development officers, and desk officers in ministries, departments, and agencies. According to the ICR (p.
28), the increasing level of LGA budget support for CDP implementation in poor communities has
built sustainable social cohesion and trust between local governments and citizens.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design and preparation drew from key analytic work and the experience of previous community
  development projects in Nigeria. A joint Country Portfolio Performance Review in 2005 recommended
  harmonization of existing Bank-financed CDD interventions, in their tools and methods in the short run,
  and in their financing windows, where possible, in the long run. Harmonization of the projects was
  intended to make the operations of individual projects more efficient and effective by avoiding duplication

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



  of efforts and adopting shared good practices, and by ensuring common processes at the community
  level. A review of tools and approaches was completed as part of this project's preparation, and a
  detailed harmonization of the operational manuals of this and the other two rural CDD projects was
  completed. As a result of this review, this project focused on support for comprehensive CDPs rather
  than individual micro-projects; moved to more full engagement with LGAs; created structures and
  incentives for collaboration between LGAs and community groups; incorporated capacity-building of LGA
  personnel for participatory planning; and used autonomous project implementation units at the state level,
  based in existing state government agencies set up by state law, for project implementation and
  management, to provide autonomy and insulation from undue political or administrative interference.
  These units already existed in the 21 states supported by ongoing Bank-supported CDD projects, but
  required capacity strengthening in order to implement this project.

  The project's overall risk rating at appraisal was moderate (PAD, pp. 60-65), with substantial risks related
  to the possibility that LGAs would not be willing to involve communities in participatory planning and
  project implementation, mitigated through supervision or monitoring by steering/advisory committees; that
  community groups would have limited capacity to handle fiduciary responsibilities, mitigated by training,
  skills building, and peer learning activities; and that implementing agencies had little or no experience
  with donor-assisted projects, producing risk of misuse of funds, mitigated by states being eligible to join
  the project only when they had necessary laws in place and satisfactory financial management units
  established. Two risks materialized early in the implementation period: staff turnover and suboptimal
  FPSU performance, and lengthy time frames for preparing and reviewing CDPs, before which no micro-
  project work could start. These issues were resolved in the first two years of implementation.

  Implementation and institutional arrangements were specified in great detail. M&E arrangements and the
  results framework were adequate (see Section 9a). Initial project design did not contain adequate
  provisions to target micro-projects toward benefit for the most poor and vulnerable people, as specified in
  the objectives. However, the team effectively used available proxies: self-selection and a focus on rural
  areas (as there was no specific mechanism to target only the poor). Later, many of the states created
  poverty maps to focus attention on poorer areas, and these maps are also now being used for other
  interventions (Interim ICR, p. 24).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The 2011 mid-term review drew on a comprehensive set of background studies. It concluded that the
 project was on track, but that the Bank needed to provide additional support to: (i) the FPSU, to meet its
 obligations for technical and policy support to state agencies; (ii) states, for data collection and usage
 related to the project's impact on women and other vulnerable groups; and (iii) LGAs, to increase their
 commitment to supporting communities and local governance structures. At the mid-term review, and as
 the security context evolved, the Bank team adjusted effectively to changing circumstances. The
 implementation support team developed and implemented action plans to improve FPSU performance.
 There were some shortcomings. It took more than two years from the time that reviews identified a lack of
 micro-project focus on poor and vulnerable populations until the first AF took measures to enhance that


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



 focus. The ICR (p. 36) also notes that Implementation Status and Results Reports could have been more
 candid in the project's early years, given delays.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, a participatory M&E system was already in use under the two existing Bank-financed CDD
 projects. This system designated type of data and collection methods and responsibilities at the
 community, LGA, state, and federal levels. It was complemented with a software-based management
 information system. This project was to use and strengthen these mechanisms for the monitoring of
 activities, outputs, and outcomes. A baseline survey was to be conducted prior to project initiation to
 establish baseline data. The FPSU had overall responsibility for setting standards and methods for data
 collection and reporting, and was to organize technical support, implementation verification visits, and data
 collation, as needed. It was also to conduct quarterly review meetings and prepare overall quarterly and
 annual reports. Reports on community-based organizations, CMPCs, local government review committees,
 and state sectoral agencies for capacity-building and partnership activities were to be collated by state
 project units into quarterly and annual progress reports. Beneficiary assessments were to be conducted to
 provide feedback on the quality of services provided.

 The results framework in PAD was clear, with intermediate outcome and outcome indicators logically tied to
 achievement of the objective. Given that specific micro-projects and baseline values would be defined
 during early project implementation, targets were appropriately defined in terms of percentage
 improvement over baseline. However, project design did not contain adequate provisions for targeting
 micro-projects to the benefit of the most poor and vulnerable people (see Section 8a).



b. M&E Implementation
  The project's results framework was appropriately updated, with indicators refined and targets adjusted
  through the two additional financings. Poverty maps were adopted to focus attention on poorer and more
  rural areas. The FPSU carried out its M&E responsibilities as planned. Periodic FPSU-coordinated
  project performance reviews, carried out with active state agency participation, helped inform M&E and
  management information system design. Implementing agencies used a combination of qualitative and
  quantitative methods to collect data, including questionnaires, focus group discussions, key informant
  interviews, in-depth interviews with selected beneficiaries, and written official records of beneficiary
  institutions (schools, clinics, etc.). The implementing agencies sent monthly, quarterly, biannual, and
  annual M&E reports to the state agencies, FPSU, and the Bank. In 2019, the project adopted new
  application software, MEVAPIS, a data collection and analysis tool for collecting and evaluating the

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



  overall effects of state agency project activities (covering inputs, processes, outputs, funds, and outcome
  indicators). After the project's enhanced focus on IDPs, new M&E challenges emerged. Because IDPs
  were unsettled and group formation and dynamics (a major CDD element) were ongoing, monitoring of
  IDP-related indicators was difficult.



c. M&E Utilization
  Over 850 high-level meetings were held to provide policy direction at the state level, informed by over
  5,000 management meetings and 1,200 quarterly reviews at the implementation level to ensure that the
  project was being implemented in compliance with guidelines and procedures. The data delivered at
  these meetings fed into ongoing planning and strategy formation. Ongoing tracking of results contributed
  to decision-making on the evolution of project design, financing needs, extensions, and measures
  needed to respond to the changing environment.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered OP/BP/GP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). Environmental and social impacts
   were expected to be minimal, site-specific, and manageable. The range, scale, and number of micro-
   projects and their environmental impacts were to emerge from the project's participatory processes. An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared and
   disclosed in line with national and Bank policies. Each state agency was to have in place a review process
   to ensure environmental and social screening of all micro-projects. An environmental or natural resource
   specialist attached to the state agency was to be responsible for following up environmental or social
   concerns during implementation.

   At the March 2014 restructuring, two additional safeguard policies -- OP 4.36 Forests and OP 4.04 Natural
   Habitats -- were triggered.

   According to the ICR (p. 34), there were no "serious" environmental or social safeguards issues during
   implementation. After completion, micro-projects sometimes encountered erosions and flooding-
   or waterlogging-related environment challenges. Funds from sustainability accounts established by each
   community, supplemented by community member donations, mitigated the negative impacts of these
   problems. An environmental and social audit of the North East showed no major adverse effects from
   completed micro-projects. 99 percent (829 or 832) of environmental micro-projects effectively addressed the
   issues that prompted their construction. Land donation documentation was improved with adoption of a
   Land Donation Protocol (LDP) that documented community land donations for micro-projects. Beginning in
   2019, every completed micro-project has an LDP to identify the geo-coordinates and size of land involved
   and to ensure that title to the land was transferred in advance.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



   The ICR did not contain a straightforward statement on safeguard policy compliance, nor did it address
   compliance with the two safeguards triggered during implementation. The project team later confirmed that
   the project was in compliance with all Bank safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management was provided by the Finance and Administration Unit in each state agency and the
   Accounts Unit of the FPSU. The Accounts Unit was already in place and managing the finances of one of
   the other Bank-financed CDD projects. FM arrangements were to be strengthened with additional staffing
   and training, and the establishment of satisfactory FM arrangements at the state level was an eligibility
   criterion for state participation in the project. During implementation, Bank support reviewed FM processes
   and documentation, with annual visits to each participating state and necessary information and
   documentation requested from communities. FM training was provided to state officials, who then
   cascaded the training to LGAs and communities. At one point early in the implementation period, project
   disbursements were halted when the FPSU was unable to reconcile transfers to states due to fluctuating
   exchange rates, but this issue was promptly resolved. According to the ICR (p.35), FM performance was
   within acceptable limits throughout the project's lifetime.

   Procurement processes were satisfactory throughout implementation (ICR, p. 35). Initial concerns about
   training of CMPCs on community contracting, procurement filing by state agencies, and contract
   management were adequately addressed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)



12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 37-39) offers insightful lessons, including:

Local community capacity building and empowerment are key to sustainable human capital
development. In this case, capacity building and training of community members in the operation
and maintenance of micro-project facilities strengthened the functionality and sustainability of those
projects, leading to improvements in social services.

Results demonstrated through the CDD approach can inspire local governments to allocate
their own budgets toward CDD projects in poor communities. In this case, LGAs have
increased budgets for this purpose, and some states have begun financing similar interventions in
communities not covered by Bank-financed projects.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project offers potentially valuable insights on drivers of success with community-driven development in
  highly insecure and fragile contexts. Its lessons could usefully contribute to the planned IEG FY24 evaluation
  on Adaptive Social Safety Nets.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, internally consistent, outcome-oriented, and evidence-based. It was attentive to established
ICR guidelines. It effectively interrogated the results chain during different stages of the project's development.
However, there were moderate shortcomings. The ICR was lengthy and sometimes repetitive, particularly in the
efficiency analysis. Its discussion of safeguards performance was thin. Its lessons, while valuable and insightful,
were not all drawn directly from project experience documented in the main ICR text (for example, its multiple
lessons on social cohesion, which are based on speculation rather than evidence).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NG-Comm. Social Dev. (FY09) (P090644)




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
