     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022955

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P106975                                     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Republic of                          Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84450,IDA-47010,IDA-55410             31-Dec-2015                                         73,001,249.14

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Mar-2010                                30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             25,500,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              74,996,765.38                                             0.00

 Actual                                          73,001,249.14                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objective was “to increase sustainable access to basic infrastructure and safe
   drinking water for the inhabitants of targeted areas in the Recipient’s cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-
   Noire”. This was as per the Loan Agreement, 2010, Schedule 1, p.5, as well as the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD), p.13.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



   The PDO was revised during restructuring in 2014 to read: The project’s development objective was “to
   increase access to basic infrastructure services, safe drinking water and electricity for the inhabitants of
   targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire”.

   In the analysis that follows, the PDO can be parsed as follows: ‘(i) “to increase access to basic infrastructure
   services”, (ii) “to increase access to safe drinking water”, and (iii) “to increase access to electricity” for the
   inhabitants of targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire’.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Aug-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Urban Infrastructure and Services (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$70.5 million, of which
   IDA 13.6 million; Actual cost at closing: IDA US$15.76 million, total cost unavailable from ICR). This
   component aimed to improve urban infrastructure and services in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-
   Noire. The first sub-component aimed at rehabilitation/construction of socio-economic infrastructure,
   especially: (i) main, secondary and tertiary feeder roads, (ii) commercial facilities, integrated health centers,
   primary schools and other municipal infrastructure. The second sub-component aimed to improve local
   governance, municipal and urban management, and fiscal performance in the two cities. The third sub-
   component intended to support the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development through: (i) establishment
   tools, and (ii) provision of technical support to the Ministry.

   Component 2: Urban Water Supply (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$36.7 million, of which US$8.8
   million; Actual cost at closing: IDA US$10.13 million, total cost unavailable from ICR). This component
   supported the objective of a sustainable increase in access to safe drinking water in Brazzaville and Pointe-
   Noire and improvement in urban water subsector management, through investments and provision of
   support to the Government and to the water utility (SNDE) toward the company’s technical, commercial and
   financial recovery. A private operator (PO) was to be hired under a 4-year service contract. The goal of this
   component was also to finance a communications program and cover the cost of hiring independent
   financial and technical auditors to measure and review the PO’s performance.

   Component 3: Electricity Sector Reform, Electricity Supply Systems Upgrade (Estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$3.4 million; Estimated Cost at Restructuring: US$149.20 million; Actual cost at closing:
   IDA/IBRD US$47.11 million, total cost unavailable from ICR). This component aimed to develop a
   comprehensive strategy for reform of the electricity sector, and to strengthen Government’s capacity to
   implement the reform. The first sub-component was to fund: (i) diagnosis of the sector, (ii) short-term
   measures to stabilize the sector, (iii) proposals for reform of the sector, (iv) workshop with all stakeholders,

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



  (v) road show to present the reform proposals to the private sector, and (vi) finalization of the reform
  proposals with inputs from the workshop and the road show. The second sub-component was to fund: (i)
  tariff studies, (ii) a review and update of the legal and regulatory framework, and (iii) assistance to the
  Ministry of Energy and Hydraulics on budget implementation and investment planning, including assistance
  to strengthen the Ministry’s ability to develop policies, and (iv) communication.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost and Financing

  Of the initial US$ 125.5 million cost of the project, IDA/IBRD financing amounted to US$25.5 million, with
  the balance US$100 million to be provided by the Government. An Additional Financing (AF) of US$150
  million was approved in August, 2014, with US$15.0 million coming from IDA and US$45 million from IBRD.
  The objective of the AF was to scale up the project’s activities to enhance the electric utility (SNE)’s
  managerial, technical and commercial performance, through investments in the transmission and
  distribution (T&D) system, activities to improve SNE’s operational performance in key business areas, and
  via institutional strengthening and capacity development of SNE. To capture the scope of the new activities,
  three new subcomponents were added to Component 3, to upgrade the T&D system, improve SNE’s
  operational performance and strengthen its capacity. The reliance on a high proportion (up to 80 percent)
  of counterpart funding was based at the time on the Republic of Congo’s export earnings from oil, and
  expectations that these would be maintained. This approach however proved to be unsustainable, and
  when the oil price plunged, counterpart funding dried up and the World Bank Group was requested to ramp
  up its resource contribution in order to support the pursuit of the project’s development outcomes.

  The project was restructured six times subsequent to the restructuring associated with the AF in
  2014. These restructurings (all Level 2) saw a sizeable reduction in activities, commensurate with the
  significant reduction in availability of counterpart funding. The revision in project scope led – under the April
  2018 restructuring - to a prioritization of project activities that were most likely to contribute to the
  achievement of project development outcomes. The September 2019 restructuring was used to cancel a
  few activities planned under Component 3, due to the Borrower’s reluctance to proceed with reforms in the
  energy sector. The IBRD loan of US$ 45 million was reduced to US$35 million, the difference
  corresponding to the activities that were cancelled. Results frameworks were adjusted during these
  restructurings, through changes in PDO indicators and targets.

  Borrower contribution

  The Borrower contribution was originally expected to be of the order of US$100 million at appraisal, and
  US$90 million at the time of the AF in 2014. Of these amounts, for reasons mentioned above, only US$
  80.90 million were actually made available by the Borrower during project implementation (ICR, Annex 3,
  p.62).

  Dates

  The project was approved on March 25, 2010, becoming effective on October 27, 2010. It was originally set
  to close on December 31, 2015. However, as a result of the various restructurings, the project finally closed
  on June 30, 2021.



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

The Republic of Congo (RoC) is a post-conflict country endowed with substantial natural resources,
especially oil and minerals. Since the 1970s, the State had dominated key sectors of the economy,
crowding out the development of the private sector and slowing down economic growth and
diversification. Following a civil war, which ended in 2000, and the adoption of new Constitution in 2002,
substantial progress was made in rebuilding and strengthening governance institutions. Following a surge
in oil production and revenue after 2000, economic growth took off and remained vigorous until the global
financial crisis in 2008-09.

The country’s urban infrastructure was in relatively poor shape during the period preceding approval of the
project. Drainage networks existed only in big cities and only 19 percent of urban households had access
to adequate sewerage. Road networks were concentrated in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, with a network
of about 100 km of asphalted road, 70 percent of which were deteriorating because of poor
maintenance. As regards water, although water resources were abundant in RoC, access to potable water
was insufficient, with only 26 percent of the urban population and 11 percent of the rural population at the
time having access to reliable and potable water. The water utility (SNDE) faced a number of serious
problems at the time of appraisal, including deficient operational management, excessively low water tariffs,
a chronic lack of investments, all of which were reflected in a financial deficit and a high and unmanageable
company debt. SNDE’s rate of technical loss in the distribution network was an estimated 45 percent, and
a bill collection rate of only 53 percent. Water service was being provided under precarious production
conditions, with frequent breakdowns in the distribution networks, and virtual non-existence of working
meters, thereby worsening the commercial viability of the utility.

As regards electricity, the transmission and distribution (T&D) system for RoC’s interconnected grid, running
from south of the country, linking Brazzaville and Ponte-Noire, had lost its reliability on account of
underinvestment and inadequate maintenance. The system consisted of 354 km of 220 kV lines, 125 km of
110 kV lines and 9 substations for transmission, and 1400 km of medium voltage lines, 760medium/low
voltage transformers, and 3800 km of low-voltage lines. Many transmission lines were damaged during the
civil war, and never repaired. As a result, the interconnected grid came to function essentially as two
separate systems, one around Brazzaville and the other around Pointe-Noire. Brazzaville was being
supplied from power stations in The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) by a transmission line providing
40 MW during peak hours and from the Brazzaville diesel power station, while the system around Pointe-
Noire was being supplied by other power stations. Many power transformers were found to be overloaded,
and damaged equipment in some substations had not been replaced. All of these factors contributed to the
network system being unreliable and operating with a high level of technical inefficiency.


Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives were broadly consistent with the World Bank Group (WBG)’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Republic of Congo for the period FY10-12. The CPS supported the

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



               Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), and placed emphasis on providing support to RoC to help
               improve access to, and the quality of, its infrastructure and basic services. The CPS’s focus on helping the
               Government improve prioritization and implementation, subsequent management of its ambitious
               infrastructure program, and its efforts to improve delivery of basic services was reflected in the project. In
               this context, the World Bank’s role was visualized less as a financier but rather as a catalyst for change
               (PAD, p.2), helping to leverage a relatively small IDA/IBRD amount with a larger amount from the
               Government to advance the reform and infrastructure agenda in the urban, water and electricity sectors.

               The project’s objectives continued to be substantially aligned with the most recent Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for the country. The CPF for the Republic of Congo for 2020-24 included a continued
               focus on improving infrastructure for growth and inclusion, principally through an emphasis on the energy
               sector, with the objective of (a) increasing access and quality, (b) ensuring adequate and reliable supply at
               lowest cost, (c) improving the sector’s and the utility’s operational and financial performance, and (d)
               strengthening sector regulatory and planning capacity; and partly through a focus on improving effective
               water and sanitation services, to provide improved access and usage among the poorer segments of the
               population (CPF, FY20-24, p.29). The reform agenda for both sectors however saw a shift in emphasis
               towards greater private sector participation and public private partnership solutions. To this extent, the
               Borrower’s commitment to improving the governance and management of the energy sector decreased
               somewhat, prompting the cancellation of some project activities and a portion of the World Bank’s funding.

               Based on the above, Relevance is rated Substantial.



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To increase sustainable access to basic infrastructure services in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             The project represented an effort by the World Bank to boost the country’s infrastructure sector by leveraging
                             a small lending envelope, mobilizing significant amounts of financing from the Government of RoC, and
                             thereby achieving the necessary critical mass. The project’s activities initially consisted of: (a) measures to
                             rehabilitate critical socioeconomic infrastructure in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, such as roads and primary
                             schools and commercial facilities, as well as to improve local governance, municipal and urban management,
                             and establish urban management tools by updating the urban master plans of the two cities; (b) investments
                             in the two cities to improve access to safe drinking water, whilst assisting the water utility to improve its

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



commercial performance; and – as introduced during the Additional Financing (AF) in 2014 - (c) introduction
of sector reforms for electricity, and investments to upgrade the National Electricity Company through
rehabilitation and upgrading of the T&D system. Outputs produced by these activities included inter alia, (i)
Drainage networks constructed/rehabilitated, urban roads rehabilitated, school facilities and health centers
improved, (ii) community water points constructed/rehabilitated, new piped water connections with meters
completed, new tariff system and water regulatory framework defined and enforced, and (iii) transit capacity
of network distribution improved, the electricity sector reform plan completed, transmission lines constructed
or rehabilitated, and meters installed. These led directly to PDO-level outcomes, to help increase sustainable
access to basic infrastructure and drinking water for the inhabitants of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, and to
increase access to electricity to the inhabitants of targeted areas in these two cities. Higher-level outcomes
arising from the project included improved social welfare for more people in the areas of health, education
and infrastructure access, safe drinking water supplied to more people in the two cities, and greater access to
electricity for more people in the two cities.

Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were consistent with the above results chain. For
PDO1, outcome indicators measured the number of people benefiting from improved drainage in project
areas, access to all-season roads, improved health facilities in targeted areas, number of pupils in improved
schools, and annual expenditure on infrastructure maintenance in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. For PDO2,
outcome indicators measured the number of people with access to improved water sources (users per
standpipe and users with individual connections), plus annual expenditure on infrastructure
maintenance. Also included were core indicators measuring direct project beneficiaries, and the satisfaction
of people with the services provided. For PDO3, introduced during the AF, outcome indicators measured the
number of additional people provided with access to electricity by household connections, transmission,
resulting from improvements in network transit capacity and T&D lines constructed or rehabilitated.

Indicators were adjusted during the 2018 restructuring, to reflect the substantial reduction in project resources
and scope, including cancellation of several activities, that took place on account of the shortfall in
counterpart funds.

Outputs


- Rehabilitation of urban roads and drainage network: A total of 32 km of non-rural roads were rehabilitated
or constructed, achieving the target. Some 48 km of drainage network were similarly constructed or
rehabilitated, in excess of the target of 34 km.

- The target of improving annual expenditures on infrastructure maintenance in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire
was however not achieved, reaching only 1.34 percent instead of 6 percent.

- Towards enhancing health and education services, health centers and classrooms were renovated: Seven
integrated health centers were rehabilitated in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire, then upgraded and equipped with
maternity facilities. The number of people with access to improved health facilities was 185,000, more than
double the revised target of 90,000.

- Some 56 classrooms were built or rehabilitated, equivalent to 112 educational classes with administrative
blocks, tables, benches and school supplies. The number of pupils with access to improved school facilities
was 7,200, achieving the formally revised target.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



- Technical Assistance (TA) and institutional strengthening was provided to the public entities in charge of
construction, town planning and housing: This took the form of support to the Ministry of Construction, Town
Planning and Housing for: (i) capacity building, (ii) resource mobilization, (iii) administrative and financial
management, and (iv) communication with key stakeholders. In addition, the project supported (a)
completion of a preliminary draft of the town planning code and updating of urban master plans for the two
cities, (b) the protection of 6,000 sq.m. of erosion-prone areas in Brazzaville (meeting the original target),
completion of anti-erosion works and infrastructure, and the rehabilitation of 11 km of urban drains.

Outcomes

In relation to AF Restructuring (2014) targets:

As noted, the Additional Financing enhanced the scope of the project, by adding a third development
objective. PDO indicators were streamlined and adjusted accordingly, eliminating an indicator that proved
difficult to measure and downgrading two outcome indicators to intermediate status. As such, a split rating
will be applied to the 2018 restructuring, at which time the scope and ambition of the project contracted
significantly.

Against this background,

The objective of increasing access to basic infrastructure services was substantially achieved.

(i) The project benefited 1,304,120 people overall (against an initial target of 1,230,000 and a revised target
of 1,400,000 people) of whom 691,338 were female (target was 714,000).

(ii) 331,710 inhabitants benefited from (a) improved drainage, and from (b) access to all-season roads, on
account of the rehabilitation of urban roads in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire (target was 200,000 for both).

In addition,

- The indicator to measure the population’s level of satisfaction with the services provided (target of 75
percent of the population) was dropped at restructuring in 2014, being considered too difficult to measure.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To increase access to basic infrastructure services in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.”

Revised Rationale
The same theory of change applied. During restructuring in August 2018, and again in September 2019, the
same three PDO indicators were maintained, with one of the targets (for Direct Project Beneficiaries) being
revised downwards.


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



Outputs
The same outputs as before applied to this phase.

Outcomes

In relation to Post-August 2018 Restructuring targets:

The objective of increasing access to basic infrastructure services was significantly achieved. At project
closing, the three PDO indicators had exceeded their targets.

(i) The project benefited 1,304,120 people overall (against a revised target of 1,200,000 people) of whom
691,338 were female (target was 636,000).

(ii) 331,710 inhabitants benefited from (a) improved drainage, and from (b) access to all-season roads, on
account of the rehabilitation of urban roads in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire (target was 200,000 for both).



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To increase sustainable access to safe drinking water in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.”

Rationale
The performance of the project in meeting the objective of increasing access to safe drinking water in the
project areas was measured by a single PDO indicator and several intermediate indicators.

Outputs

The project funded:
(i) The expansion of metering, and the rehabilitation of 229 km (221 km secondary and tertiary; 8 km primary)
of water supply system – exceeding the original target of 212 km, but falling slightly short of the revised target
of 232 km. The number of connections with operating water meters rose to 26,791, falling slightly short of the
revised target of 30,000.

(ii) The supply of equipment for, and the drilling of, 2 boreholes (target was 2) in Pointe-Noire and their
connection to the existing water supply system.

(iii) The construction and equipment of 40 standpipes, fully achieving the revised target.

(iv) Establishing a monitoring mechanism to prevent the intrusion of saline water into the fresh water basin of
Pointe-Noire.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



The project also funded preparatory work leading to institutional and management reforms in the water
sector. This included the following activities:

(a) Initiation of the reform of the urban water supply subsector; (b) Study on water pricing; (c) General
inventory of SNDE subscribers; (d) Financing of a service contract with a foreign water entity - the Véolia
company - to help improve the performance of water management and distribution by SNDE. Furthermore,
the following improvements were made: (i) Creation/operationalization of the development department; (ii)
Timely completion of financial statements by the water utility (LCDE); (iii) Timely submission (by May 15
annually) of audit reports for the previous year to customers by LCDE, as per target; (iv) Completion and
operationalization of a Revised Resource Management System for human resources by LCDE; (v) increase in
revenue collection rate by LCDE to a level of 79 percent (Target was 75 percent); (vi) Introduction and
enforcement of new water legal and regulatory framework. A new water tariff was completed, but not yet
implemented as per target.

It should be noted that the efforts to improve the water management and distribution performance of the water
utility, via the service contract with Véolia, were not successful. The service contract was continued in the
form of a TA contract with a subsidiary company, SEURECA, with financial support from Agence Française
de Development (AFD). Subsequently, the Government completed the transformation of the utility into a new
company (La Congolaise des Eaux), but this was not supported by the project, and the results of this reform
were not provided.

Outcomes

In relation to AF Restructuring (2014) targets:

The only indicator used to measure the achievement of this objective was the number of people in project-
affected areas with access to improved water sources. The target for this indicator was 500,000 people,
which was only partially achieved (only 259,340 people – or about 52 percent of target - had access by
project closing). As such efficacy for this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To increase access to safe drinking water for the inhabitants of targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and
Pointe-Noire.”

Revised Rationale
Outputs
The same outputs as before applied to this phase.


Outcomes


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



In relation to Post-August 2018 Restructuring targets:

During restructuring in August 2018, and again in September 2019, the same PDO indicator was maintained,
though with a change (downwards) in target value. The number of people receiving access to “improved
water sources” - 259,340 by project closing – fully achieved the target.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
“To increase access to electricity for the inhabitants of targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-
Noire.”

Rationale
This objective was introduced at the time of the 2014 restructuring providing additional financing. The
performance of the project in meeting the objective of increased access to electricity in the two cities was
measured by a single indicator, and several intermediate indicators.

Outputs

The electricity distribution network in the two cities was enhanced under the project, with a positive impact on
distribution losses. Key outputs included the following:

(i) An increase in the transit capacity of the distribution network from 430,000 KVA to 465,000 KVA,
compared to a target of 482,000 KVA.

(ii) A substantial increase in length of distribution lines built/rehabilitated, reaching 426 km – partially
achieving the target of 500 km.

(iii) An improvement in the feeder load factor, reaching 65 percent (from a baseline of 105 percent), thereby
exceeding the target of 75 percent.

(iv) A reduction in total distribution losses in the project area, from a baseline of 54 percent at appraisal to 48
percent by closing – thereby meeting the revised target.

Other outputs include the construction of 16 subterranean feeders in the two cities; the rehabilitation of 40 MV
transformer stations in Brazzaville and Pont-Noire; and 20 new medium voltage stations in Brazzaville; supply
and rehabilitation of 40 medium voltage and low voltage transformer stations, and associated low voltage
networks.

The project also supported the preparatory work leading to institutional and management reforms in the
energy sector. Various sector studies were conducted, including an integrated information management




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



system, preparation of a financial model for the sector, a report on the organizational structure of the public
electricity service, and a tariff study, an electricity demand study and an Electricity Sector Reform Plan.

Though the project funded the completion of a diagnostic study of the electricity sector, the World Bank Group
was not involved in the unbundling reform of the sector, due to differences of opinion between the Bank and
the Borrower on the most efficient way to conduct this reform. The Government completed the transformation
of the electricity utility into a new company (E2C), but the Bank was not associated with this activity, and the
results of the reform are not known.

Outcomes

In relation to AF Restructuring (2014) targets:

The target for the single indicator measuring the additional people provided with access to electricity under
the project, by number of household connections, was 400,000. Actual achievement was only 213,210,
indicating a significant shortfall relative to the target.

On this basis, efficacy is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To increase access to electricity for the inhabitants of targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-
Noire.”

Revised Rationale
Outputs
The same outputs as before applied to this phase.

Outcomes

In relation to Post-August 2018 Restructuring targets:

Against the background of the reduction in scope of the project in 2018, the target for the single indicator
measuring the additional people provided with access to electricity under the project was reduced, from
400,000 to 112,000. This target was significantly exceeded by the actual achievement of 213,210 people
provided access.

On this basis, efficacy post-2018 restructuring is rated High.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As seen from the above, the project efficacy for PDO1 was rated Substantial for the period prior to the 2018
                            restructuring (Period 1) and High for the post-2018 restructuring period (Period 2). PDO2 was rated Modest
                            for Period 1 and High for Period 2. PDO3 was similarly rated Modest and High for each of the respective
                            periods.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            As seen from the above, the project efficacy for PDO1 was rated Substantial for the period prior to the 2018
                            restructuring (Period 1) and High for the post-2018 restructuring period (Period 2). PDO2 was rated Modest
                            for Period 1 and High for Period 2. PDO3 was similarly rated Modest and High for each of the respective
                            periods.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial efficiency

   Although an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project as a whole was not estimated at appraisal,
   EIRRs were computed for the individual components. On this basis, at project completion, the EIRR for the
   urban infrastructures was estimated at 14 percent, relative to 20 percent at appraisal; for water supply at 24.6
   percent compared to 28 percent at appraisal. For electricity investments however the EIRR at completion was
   estimated at 28.7 percent, much higher than the 16.1 percent for the overall component. A financial analysis
   was conducted at the time of the 2014 restructuring for the electricity investments being made at the time in new
   meters and other equipment, which indicated a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 26.1 percent, relative to
   a much lower 11.9 percent estimated at completion (mostly on account of the change in scope of the
   investments and the cancellation of commercial plan activities in 2019).

   Operational/Administrative Efficiency



                                                                                                                            Page 12 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



The project underwent a cumulative extension of 66 months to the closing date, changing the project’s duration
from 5 years to over 11 years. Although the additional financing was approved in 2014, it did not become
effective until December 2015. Meanwhile, the seven extensions added significantly to the project’s
administrative costs without necessarily increasing the net financial or economic benefits. On account of the
non-availability of counterpart funds, World Bank resources and some of the activities had to be partially
cancelled, and the ambition of the project to be severely curtailed. The restructurings arose out of changes in
the Borrower’s priorities, and external shocks, including the drop in oil prices, disagreements on the priorities of
the electricity reform agenda and the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Based on the above, the efficiency of the project is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives remain substantially relevant to the needs of the Republic of Congo’s
urban infrastructure, water supply and electricity sector. Project efficacy was rated modest, on average, against
the 2014 PDO indicators, but High compared to the post-2018 indicators. Project efficiency was rated as
Modest. A split assessment of the project’s overall outcome was conducted, as per Table 1 below, leading to a
rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Table1                    Derivation of Overall Outcome

                             Compared to AF 2104          Compared to post-2018
                                                                                  Overall Rating
                             PDO indicators               PDO indicators
1.   Relevance               Substantial                  Substantial
2.   Efficacy                Modest                       High
3.   Efficiency              Modest                       Modest
4.   Outcome                 Moderately Unsatisfactory    Moderately Satisfactory
5.   Rating Value            3                            4


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



6. Weight (% disbursed
                       63%                               37%
amount)
                                                                                     3.37, rounded down to
7. Weighted Value           1.89                         1.48
                                                                                     3.0
8. Overall Outcome                                                                   Moderately
Rating                                                                               Unsatisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

At appraisal, a thorough risk identification was conducted, leading to various mitigation measures – not all of
which were effective. The vulnerability of a relatively undiversified economy to external shocks was
identified, but could not be mitigated. The risk that counterpart funding, which accounted for a substantial
portion of the project’s funding, would not materialize was anticipated, and some mitigation measures
initiated, including the adoption of a new public investment management framework to better inform public
investment decisions. This risk did materialize and was at the core of most of the restructuring operations
that followed.

Looking forward, significant risks to development outcome remain, relating to (a) Lack of certainty that sector
reforms would continue. Though various reforms were undertaken in the water and electricity sector, key
reforms pertaining to the introduction of new tariff systems for the water and energy sectors have not yet
been implemented; leaving the financial status of their utilities in limbo. (b) In addition, operational and
maintenance (O&M) arrangements for infrastructure are not yet in place. Stable funding arrangements for
O&M are critical to the performance and efficiency of the water and electricity sectors, hinging on
improvements in the financial stance of the relevant utilities and a resolution with the Treasury on the issue
of cross-debts between them. (c) The long-term sustainability of government subsidies also creates
uncertainty. The water and energy utilities had succeeded in providing the minimum support to the
infrastructure, based on Government subsidies and loans, justifying the high level of debt of the utilities to the
Government. The deterioration in the Government’s financial status, however, means that there is no
guarantee that sufficient subsidies will be available in the future to maintain the quality of services
offered/rendered with the resources provided under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design did take into account lessons learned, from other World Bank-financed water and
  urban projects in West Africa, especially the Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Living

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



  Conditions Improvement project, which set high technical standards for design of storm drain systems, a
  water supply system, and urban roads. The project, being a multi-sector operation, was ambitious (and
  risky) in its objectives, and hence more difficult to design and implement in a post-conflict context –
  calling for stronger and more diverse Bank and Borrower teams to design and implement. A less
  complex operation would have been easier to design and would have entailed lower costs of assessment
  and supervision. Also, the reliance on the Government of a post-conflict country, relying exclusively on
  oil export revenue, to provide 80 percent of project resources was clearly risky. This risk did materialize,
  when oil prices plunged, and the counterpart’s financial resources dried up, requiring the Bank Group to
  ramp up its resources to try and achieve the project’s developmental objectives.

  As argued by the ICR (p.35), there was an insufficient understanding of the political economy
  underpinning the finances of the water and electricity utilities. For one thing, the Bank team did not rely
  on a recent assessment and projection of the fiscal performance of the treasury, which was reliant on
  revenues from oil exports. Failure to do so left the Bank vulnerable to the consequences of the oil-price
  volatility, in terms of the Government’s inability to meet its co-financing commitments. For another, the
  Bank team failed to make a realistic assessment of the political economy underpinning the reforms that
  were projected towards improving the management and financial performance of the water and energy
  utilities. As such, notwithstanding the Bank’s support for conducting studies and assessments ahead of
  the planned reforms, the Government went ahead with the unbundling reforms of the water and electricity
  utilities without the involvement of the Bank. Resources earmarked for the Revenue Protection Plan and
  the Management Information System (MIS) ended up being canceled and the scope of the project was
  reduced.

  The ICR also points out (p.35) that while key project risks were analyzed at appraisal, some of the
  mitigation proposed measures were weak. For instance, the adoption of a new public investment
  framework, to better prioritize public investment projects in the Government’s budget, proved ineffective
  when oil prices fell, and the Borrower’s commitment to reforms waned. The Bank also did not take
  sufficient account of the implications of the tax regime on project funds. The Financing Agreement
  authorized the Government to use project resources not only to fund goods and services, but also to
  cover taxes – the rate varying from 20.8 percent to 100 percent. This resulted in US$14 million of funds
  earmarked for the project to be transferred to the Treasury – which further reduced the resources
  available to the operation, and hastened the cancellation of some activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p.35), the project was adequately supervised up until the outbreak of the Covid-19
 pandemic, at which time field missions were suspended and supervision had to be conducted on a virtual
 basis. Over the entire 10-year implementation period of the project, the Bank conducted 21 bi-annual
 supervision missions – assessing the progress of project activities, including fiduciary components,
 monitoring & evaluation, and environmental and social safeguards measures. During this period, the Bank
 team carried out several restructuring operations, including one involving a change in developmental
 objectives. The team also carried out a generally productive dialogue with the authorities, which led to the
 2014 Level-1 restructuring for the Additional Financing, followed by four Level-2 restructurings to

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



 accommodate the Government’s inability to deliver on the counterpart funding it had initially committed
 to. Towards this end, the Bank rose to the challenge, funding all on-going activities and updating all
 implementation arrangements that could contribute to achievement of the PDO.

 Reporting on the progress of project implementation was strong throughout the project implementation
 period, though the ICR mentions (p.36) that fiduciary monitoring could have been improved. Various
 ineligible expenses did come to light and were confirmed before the closing date, and were being notified
 to the client after closing. However, as mentioned in Section 10 below, the procurement began to resist
 complying with transparency and integrity standards. Closer scrutiny of procurement and financial
 operations by the team, possibly combined with TA to the PCU, as needed, might have avoided the
 occurrence of these expenses, or allowed them to be identified in time and paid back before project
 closing.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Theory of Change (ToC) was fairly clear and straightforward. The results chain supported the
 ToC, the indicators being generally relevant, specific and achievable. Each PDO outcome had a specific
 description, baseline and annual targets. Institutional arrangements to capture and report M&E
 performance were strong. For each PDO indicator, there was a frequency of reporting, a data collection
 instrument, and an institution responsible for collection data. There was also good implementation
 readiness on the ground, with key stakeholders being the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the Steering
 Committee and the Local Development Committees.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR does not provide sufficient details on the extent to which planned baseline data collection was
  carried out, the extent to which indicators in the Results Framework were measured and reported on, or
  on the reliability and quality of data. However, the PAD does clarify the responsibilities for collecting
  information and for operating the system: the principal actors being the M&E Specialist in the PCU, the
  financial management team, the technical team and the beneficiary institutions. The ICR reports (p.32)
  that the M&E system was flexible and was adjusted to factor in the multiple events that occurred during
  project implementation.




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on performance and results progress were used by the Borrower and the World Bank to inform
  project management and facilitate decision-making, as for instance in underpinning the restructurings of
  the project. Data collected by the M&E system also facilitated dialogue among the key stakeholders
  overseeing project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B, triggering OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.12
   (Involuntary Resettlement). Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) were prepared in view
   of the rehabilitation of roads and drainage, markets, schools and health centers that was involved. An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
   were also prepared to guide the management of environmental and social safeguards risks.

   A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) committee was instituted in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire in 2017,
   which allowed any impacted person to submit complaints at the level of the local authorities, neighborhood
   steering committee and the project.The project received 12 complaints from Project-Affected Area Persons
   (PAPs) through the GRM – 10 of which were resolved to the satisfaction of the complainants (the remaining
   2 being found to be not directly linked to the project.Nine Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) incidents
   were identified in 2019, all of which were resolved by project closing.

   At project closing, compliance with environmental and social safeguards was rated Satisfactory, with all key
   issues raised during implementation having been addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   According to the ICR (p.33), the financial management in place was assessed as acceptable, with timely
   submission of project accounts, audit and financial reports. Some weaknesses were observed during
   implementation, for instance in relation to inconsistencies in treatment of capital expenditures, certain
   questionable expenses, and deficiencies in internal controls as flagged by the external auditor. A detailed
   financial management report was shared with the PCU, with several proposed actions to address the
   identified weaknesses. At project closing, the administrative, financial and accounting management of the
   project was considered to be Moderately Unsatisfactory on account of more systemic shortcomings
   identified, including non-availability of documents for review of the financial management, failure to
   revise/update the procedures manual since 2014, despite the World Bank’s recommendations, lack of
   physical inventory of the project’s fixed assets, the absence of budget forecasts until the closing, all of
   which pointed to an ineffective control system.



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



   The procurement system, while it had some weaknesses, was initially considered satisfactory for project
   implementation. There was a project procurement master plan (PPM), which was regularly updated,
   integrating past contracts by rating. However, as implementation progressed, it was observed that neither
   the PPM and its updates not contract award decisions for national tenders had not been regularly
   published on the World bank’s public website. The procurement authorities began to resist complying with
   the principles of transparency and integrity. However, due to the completion of most of the procurement
   activities, procurement performance was ultimately assessed as Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately              Moderately                  Efficiency was rated Modest by
Outcome
                                Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory              IEG
                                                                                    Quality at Entry was rated
                                Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                    Moderately Unsatisfactory by
                                Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    IEG
Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. When appraising a project cofinanced by counterpart funding, a review of the Borrower’s
fiscal outlook and sustainability should be undertaken. The goal of such a review would be to
ascertain that Government counterpart funding is underpinned by stable tax inflows collection. In
the case of the project in question, the dependence on oil export revenues meant that when oil
prices fell the Government was unable to provide its share of counterpart funding. The result was
that the burden of project funding fell exclusively on the World Bank’s shoulders, causing a number
of activities to be canceled, and the ambition of the project to be scaled back.

2. In designing infrastructure projects, the costing of components and activities needs to
clarify the taxation regime of supplied goods and services. For the project in question, the
Government preferred that project expenditures on all goods and services supplied using project
resources include a value added tax (VAT). This meant that tax payments effectively reduced the
resources available to generate targeted outcomes. At project closing, taxes paid to the Treasury


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CG-Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P106975)



amounted to about US$14.0 million – resources that should have been used to fund project activities
supported expected outcomes.

3. When a project is implemented in the context of weak economic governance, the World
Bank needs to strengthen its fiduciary oversight of project implementation: The stark contrast
between the relatively low level of fiduciary risk assessed at appraisal and the poor level of fiduciary
management during implementation demonstrates that PCUs implementing Bank-funded projects
cannot by themselves transform the governance context in the Borrowers’ management systems for
public resources. The World Bank team needs to provide TA and exert fiduciary oversight.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, evidence-based and internally consistent, and provides a fair amount of detail on
implementation issues, for a project that underwent multiple restructurings. The achievement of objectives is
adequately analyzed, utilizing the methodology of a split rating, as is the Risk to Development Outcomes. The
overall lessons drawn from the performance of the project appear to be relevant and fairly clear. One area that
could have benefited from more detail is the discussion on implementation and utilization of the M&E system,
especially as regards the collection and reporting of baseline and current data by the PCU, and the quality and
reliability of data collected. Also, the weaknesses in project design in the form of relatively ineffective mitigation
measures which later impacted project performance, could have been better highlighted.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 19
