     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0023107

1. Project Data



 Project ID                             Project Name
 P144335                                NIRTTP

 Country                                Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                  Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52730,IDA-H8630                    31-Dec-2019                                         70,537,770.52

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jun-2013                            30-Nov-2021

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        99,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         76,705,753.67                                              0.00

 Actual                                     70,537,770.52                                              0.00




 Prepared by              Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur            Peter Nigel Freeman         Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project
   appraisal Document (PAD) (para 26), was "to decrease transport time and logistics costs for bilateral
   trade between Nepal and India and transit trade along the Kathmandu-Kolkata corridor for the benefit
   of traders by reducing key infrastructure bottlenecks in Nepal and by supporting the adoption of
   modern approaches to border management".



                                                                                              Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components :

   Component A. Modernize transport and transit arrangements between Nepal and India (appraisal cost
   US$9.0 million; actual cost US$1.65 million). This component planned to provide Technical Assistance (TA)
   to: (i) introduce a modem and effective transit regime including technical assistance in enhancing the
   capacity to negotiate trade and transit treaties; (ii) simplify and harmonize customs and border management
   procedures, processes and systems, especially to provide for electronic interchange of transit data; and (iii)
   strengthen and modernize the regulation of national and international trucking services including axle load
   control and road safety from a transport management perspective.

   Component B. Strengthen Trade-Related Institutional Capacity in Nepal (appraisal cost US$23.0
   million; actual cost US$10.12 million). This component included three subcomponents: (i) trade portal and
   Single Window System Development; (ii) Improvement of Trade-Related Laboratories; and (iii) institutional
   strengthening for Interagency Coordination including financing of Project Coordination Office (PCO).

   Component C. Improve Select Trade-Related Infrastructure (appraisal cost US$69.0 million; actual cost
   US$58.77 million). This component included three subcomponents: (i) expand and upgrade the
   Narayanghat-Mugling road section and implement measures for improvement of entire Birgunj-Kathmandu
   Corridor; (ii) build a Container Freight Station (CFS) or Inland Container Depot (ICD) in Kathmandu; and
   (iii) improve the infrastructure at Birgunj and Bhairahawa ICDs.

   Following revisions were made during implementations (ICR para 14):

         Slope protection works were added to the scope of the Narayanghat-Mugling road upgrade based
          on risk assessments during monsoons and in the aftermath of the 2015 earthquake.

         Construction of four additional bridges along the Narayanghat-Mugling road alignment.

         Training activities for the Department of Roads was not undertaken due to lack of approvals from the
          Ministry of Finance (MoF) to use the project credit funds for training. However, essential trainings
          were conducted in-country including a training on slope stabilization.

         The initially planned Railway Track Modification at Birgunj ICD was dropped by Nepal Intermodal
          Transport Development Board (NITDB), as bids were not received from qualified bidders even after
          two attempts.

         The planned cargo monitoring system for Nepal Intermodal Transport Development Board (NITDB)
          was not developed, as there was no mechanism to receive the data generated by the Kolkata Port



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)



          Authority, Indian Customs, and Indian Railways. Instead, a study to design a Data Capture
          Framework for Kolkata-Kathmandu Corridor Monitoring was undertaken.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$70.54 million, substantially lower than the appraisal estimate
   of US$101.0 million.

   Financing. The project was originally financed through an IDA Credit of US$69.0 million and an IDA Grant
   of US$30.0 million. The actual IDA credit disbursed was US$58.77 million and IDA Grant disbursed was
   US$11.77 million.

   The ICR reports (para 17) that on November 22, 2021, SDR 2.0 million of IDA Credit and SDR 11.00 million
   of IDA Grant were cancelled based on an assessment of projected disbursements. Due to savings from the
   exchange rate gain of about 35% and non-completion of National Single Window (NSW), at the end of
   project closure, on March 2022 a further SDR 2.3 million from the IDA Credit and SDR 669,000 from the
   IDA Grant were cancelled.

   Borrower Contribution. The actual borrower contribution was US$1.5 million. At appraisal, there was no
   planned contribution.

   Co-financing. At appraisal, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) planned contribution was US$2.0
   million. The actual contribution was none.

   Closing Date. The project’s closing date was extended by 23 months from December 31, 2019 to
   November 30, 2021, to complete two critical activities under the trade component, viz., development and
   implementation of National Single Window (NSW) and the construction of the Inland Container Depot (ICD)
   at Kathmandu (ICR para 17).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Nepal is a landlocked country, nestled between China and India. As a
consequence, transport costs are high and the country completely depends on India for transit
routes. Nepal is ranked as one of the worst performers in the world in the global Logistics Performance
Index, ranking 151 of 155 countries ranked. Exports suffered from low productivity, high tariffs, and poor
transportation infrastructure (PAD para 4).

Over 60 percent of Nepal's imports and exports are traded with India. The Governments of Nepal and India
have had a long history of cooperation on trade and transit. The two countries meet regularly at several
levels to discuss these issues. The Kolkata-Haldia port in India serves as Nepal's access to the sea and is a
major transit point for Nepal's third-country trade.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NIRTTP (P144335)



               Alignment with the Government Strategy. The PDO was aligned with Nepal Trade Integration Strategy
               (NTIS) 2010 which sought to enable inclusive growth in Nepal through enhancing the competitiveness of
               Nepal's exports and reducing the cost of trade. The priorities of this strategy were: (i) reducing the time and
               cost of trade-related transactions through efforts at simplification, harmonization, and automation; (ii)
               building the capacity of domestic trade-related institutions including for sanitary and phytosanitary
               inspections (measures to control plant diseases), trade negotiations, logistics, and monitoring and
               regulating trade-related sectors; and (iii) enhancing the Government's ability to coordinate trade-related
               institutions and development partners (PAD para 29).

               The PDO is aligned with the Nepal’s Long-Term Vision as articulated in the ongoing 15th Plan (2019-2024).
               The vision highlights (a) the importance of trade for growth in production and productivity; and (b) the
               development of trade infrastructure, trade facilitation and strengthening of institutional capacity, as key
               priorities.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank Group's Nepal
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2019-2023. The Objective 2.2 "Increased transport
               connectivity" of the CPF emphasized the need to improve transport connectivity to facilitate the movement
               of people and goods within and across the borders of Nepal. The CPF indicated that the World Bank would
               support regional transport connectivity with India and China to facilitate trade integration with the IDA
               Regional Program Window (CPF para 34).

               The current World Bank South Asia Regional Strategy recognizes regional cooperation and integration as a
               key strategic objective. It pinpoints limited intraregional trade and connectivity, cumbersome procedures,
               non-tariff barriers, and costly road transport and logistics services as key impediments to increasing trade in
               the region (ICR para 19).

               Previous Bank experience. This was the first regional project for the regional trade and transport series in
               the South Asia Region (PAD para 30).

               The statement of objectives was clear and focused. The PDOs remained highly relevant to the Government
               and Bank strategy for Nepal. The objectives were formulated to a level of ambition that adequately reflected
               a potential solution to a development problem i.e., reduction in transport and logistics cost for Nepal, a
               landlocked country. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is assessed as high.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NIRTTP (P144335)




Objective
Decrease transport time and logistics costs for bilateral trade between Nepal and India and transit trade along
the Kathmandu-Kolkata corridor.

Rationale
The theory of change of the project envisioned that activities including (i) modernization of transport and
transit arrangements between Nepal and India; (ii) strengthen trade-related institutional capacity in Nepal; and
(iii) improving select trade related infrastructure, would result in outputs such as trade policy documents,
guidelines for cross border monitoring, Nepal information Trade Portal System, Geo-positioning System
(GPS) enabled Vehicle Tracking System (VTS), Inland Container Depot (ICD) in Kathmandu, upgraded
Narayanghat-Mugling road section, and new bridges. These outputs would result in (a) simplification,
harmonization, and automation of trade related transactions, (b) adoption of modern approaches to border
management, and (c) the reduction of key infrastructure bottlenecks for transit, thereby contributing to the
achievement of project outcome "decreased transport time and logistics costs for bilateral trade between
Nepal and India and transit trade along the Kathmandu-Kolkata corridor".

The key assumptions were related to the proper utilization of capacity enhancement activities which would
help reduce the time associated with meeting regulatory requirements for import, export and transit activities.
The key critical assumptions were: (a) the capacity enhancement activities in the field of Sanitary and Phyto-
Sanitary (SPS), Custom labs, and improvement of border infrastructure would help reduce the border
crossing time at Raxaul-Birgunj border post; and (b) the capacity enhancement of National Trade and
Transport Facilitation Committee (NTTFC) and Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies (MoICS), for
policy level and bilateral issues, introduction of Customs Transit Declaration (CTD), use of National Single
Window, and improvement of Narayanghat Mugling road (which was a key bottleneck) would help reduction
in total time between cargo offloading at Kolkata to arrival at Birgunj and Kathmandu.

Outputs

      The upgrading of a 33 km of the Birgunj-Kathmandu Road corridor (as targeted), construction of four
       new bridges (as targeted), and slope stabilization. The last additional contract for the valley side slope
       stabilization was not completed by project closing due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was
       completed by the Government of Nepal using its own resources.

      Piloting of the Road Accident Information Management System in the Kathmandu valley and the
       Kathmandu-Birgunj corridor.

      The ICD at Kathmandu was substantially completed by project closing and became operational in
       April 2022. Improvement of the ICDs in Bhairahawa (pavement works), and Birgunj (railway shed).
       The ICD facility at Birgunj led to proper cargo segregation and consolidation at the border. An
       integrated check-post was constructed on the Raxaul (India)-Birgunj (Nepal) border (the construction
       of this check-post was underway at appraisal and the Nepal side was financed by a grant from the
       Government of India).

      Completion of the Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary (SPS) building in Kathmandu with all required lab
       equipment and furnishings.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NIRTTP (P144335)




      Studies were conducted to expediate the movement of cargo at Kolkata port. These studies identified
       cumbersome procedures and documentation as the main cause of high logistics costs and time. The
       project facilitated policy dialogue between the governments of India and Nepal and agreements were
       reached to develop the automation of processes, reduce the number of administrative documents, and
       streamline procedures.

      Improvements in banking regulations were made such as for developing e-payment alternatives.
       Insurance mechanisms were updated and are now common across the two countries along the transit
       routes. The regulatory changes on banking, and insurance eased the process for traders to recover
       goods from ICDs.

      Technical assistance activities led to: (a) automation of documents and procedures as part of the
       National Single Window (NSW), (b) automated system for customs data (ASYCUDA), and (c) training
       on e-customs and coordination of border management for terminal operators.

      Launching of the Nepal Trade Information Portal (NTIP).

      Launch of Phase 1 of the National Single Window (NSW) and the successful integration of 13
       agencies (significantly exceeding to a target of five agencies). The remaining phases of the NSW are
       being completed by the Government of Nepal using its own resources.

      National Trade and Transport Facilitation Committee (NTTFC) mandate was increased to coordinate
       relevant agencies (public or private) involved in trade and transport logistics. It monitored issues
       related to trade and transport and addressed them in a timely fashion through discussions with all
       high-level stakeholders.

Outcomes

The construction of an integrated check-post on the Raxaul (India)-Birgunj (Nepal) border (not a direct project
output) and the ICD facilities, along with the technical activities (mentioned above) resulted in a reduction in
delays, costs, and red tape. Border crossing times at Raxaul -Birgunj was significantly reduced from 2.3 days
to 0.87 days, significantly exceeding the target of 1.5 days.

Transit trade. Total time between cargo off loading at Kolkata to arrival at Birgunj by road and Birgunj to
Kathmandu for trucks was reduced from 10 days (baseline) to 5.94 days, exceeding the target of 8 days.

Total time between cargo offloading at Kolkata to arrive in Birgunj by rail, and Birgunj to Kathmandu for trucks
was reduced from 22 days (baseline) to 3.74 days, exceeding the target of 17.6 days.

Time associated with meeting regulatory requirements for import, export and transit activities was reduced
from 4.8 days (baseline) to 2.5 days, achieving the target of 2.4 days. This indicator directly measures the
transaction costs to traders.

The project resulted in (a) simplification, harmonization, and automation of trade related transactions, (b)
adoption of modern approaches to border management, and (c) the reduction of key infrastructure
bottlenecks for transit, thereby contributing to the achievement of project outcome "decreased transport time



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NIRTTP (P144335)



                            and logistics costs for bilateral trade between Nepal and India and transit trade along the Kathmandu-Kolkata
                            corridor". The achievement of the objective is substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project resulted in (a) simplification, harmonization, and automation of trade related transactions, (b)
                            adoption of modern approaches to border management, and (c) the reduction of key infrastructure
                            bottlenecks for transit, thereby contributing to the achievement of project outcome "decreased transport time
                            and logistics costs for bilateral trade between Nepal and India and transit trade along the Kathmandu-Kolkata
                            corridor". The achievement of the objective is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency.

   At appraisal, the economic analysis of the project was based on a "Quantitative supply chain model" which used
   the impact of logistic cost, delays and uncertainty in lead time to transit operations. The benefits included: (i)
   reduction in cargo dwell time and its unpredictability in the port of Kolkata in India; (ii) reduction in cargo
   clearance and border crossing times at the main border posts, and in particular at the Birgunj border post; (iii)
   reduction in loading and unloading time and unpredictability in Kathmandu; and (iv) improvement
   in transparency and predictability of import, export and transit requirements (PAD para 53).The ex-ante
   Economic rate of Return (ERR) was estimated 30 percent, at a 12 percent discount rate over a 20-year period.

   The ex-post ERR was 41 percent, higher than the appraisal estimate. This was due to unexpectedly large transit
   benefits within Nepal (almost all from the Narayanghat-Mugling road improvements and largely because of a
   longer assessment period for benefits), and the impact on Kathmandu ICD (ICR para 29). The ex-post net
   present value was double that estimated at appraisal (US$60.3 million compared to US$29.8 million).

   Implementation Efficiency.




                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NIRTTP (P144335)



The project experienced implementation delays and was extended by 23 months due to cancellation of some of
the Component 3 works at Birgunj ICD because of unsuccessful procurement. Also, NSW was not completed by
project closure (ICR para 31), which was expected to adversely affect project efficiency.

Overall, project efficiency was substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   80.00
 Appraisal                                                30.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   85.00
 ICR Estimate                                             41.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was high. Project efficacy and efficiency was substantial. The overall outcome is
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified the following two risks to development outcome:

Government ownership/commitment risk. This risk is rated Moderate. This risk relates to the successful
completion of the National Single Window (NSW). The ICR notes (para 64) that the government is committed
to the completion of this activity.

Operation and Maintenance risk: This risk is assessed as Moderate. The ICR notes (para 64) that the ICD
Kathmandu has been in operation since April 2022. Regarding the maintenance of Narayanghat-Mugling
road, the government has prioritized it for maintenance allocations and any needed repairs.



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project covered both investments in infrastructure and policy issues covering both trade and transit
  issues. The project design reflected lessons learned from previous transport and trade facilitation
  projects, but did not mitigate sufficiently the lack of capacity. The ICR (page 18) says that the MoICS
  could have identified further training needs in large contract management. For the trade component,
  global lessons from successful Trade Portal and National Single Window systems (such as Lao PDR for
  the Trade Portal and Singapore, Philippines, and Indonesia for the Single Window) were incorporated
  into the project design. The project design included findings from the Bank-managed Non-Lending
  Technical Assistance such as: preparation of the technical and functional architecture for the National
  Single Window, business process simplification, change management and communication as well as
  capacity building for officials and the trading community. For the transport component, the application of
  E&S policies and the inclusion of key governance and sustainability features were incorporated (PAD
  pages 11 and 12).

  Overall, the project's risk rating at appraisal was assessed "high" due to weak implementation capacity.
  To mitigate this risk, during project preparation, the Bank Team highlighted the need for filling critical
  positions such as a Project Director, a Procurement Specialist, and a Financial Management Specialist.
  There were some delays in hiring these positions. The ICR reports (para 43) that the risks related to
  political instability did not materialize. The ICR reports (para 43) that substantial capacity building
  activities, targeting both policy and technical levels, combined with sound project implementation
  mechanisms (in particular sound coordination among various agencies), contributed to mitigate capacity
  and governance risks. However, this did not prevent delays from insufficient consultations with local
  communities (six months), which the Inspection Panel said should be strengthened. The capacity building
  was not enough because there was insufficient contract management and procurement capacity to
  explain requirements clearly for the bidders. This led to a 10-month delay while re-bidding took place
  after lots of errors were made. ICR (para 59) notes that the appraisal was completed rapidly in only 9
  months. Perhaps more time should have been devoted to capacity building in preparation.

  The safeguards were adequately identified (see section 10 a). The quality at entry also fell short because
  of a weak M&E design (see section 9).

  Overall, the quality-at-entry was moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports (para 61) that the project team worked closely with the Government of Nepal and the
 implementing agencies and provided direct capacity building support and ad hoc technical inputs even

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)



 during periods of political instability, the 2015 earthquake, and the COVID-19 pandemic related disruptions.
 Regular site visits were conducted, and mission documentation and reporting was timely and
 comprehensive (ICR para 61). The project team had monthly meetings with the client and contractors to
 support contract management. For the transport component, the Bank team provided technical support for
 slope protection works. For the trade component, study tours were arranged to learn about NSW good
 practices.

 There were a few shortcomings: (i) the M&E was not updated during implementation, thereby missing an
 opportunity to address issues to improve the results framework, and (ii) moderately
 satisfactory performance in financial management and serious delays in procurement.

 Overall, the quality of supervision was moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 A corridor monitoring system was designed and implemented during project preparation with the
 collaboration of stakeholders in both India and Nepal (PAD para 36). The Nepal Intermodal Transport
 Development Board (NITDB, under MoCS) was responsible for the monitoring system, and M&E capacity
 building was included in the project design.

 There were three PDO level indicators: (i) time associated with meeting regulatory requirements for import,
 export and transit activities; (ii) border crossing time at Raxaul-Birgunj border post; and (iii) total time
 between cargo offloading at Kolkata to arrival at Birgunj by road and rail and Birgunj to Kathmandu for
 trucks. These indicators could have been much improved as they only captured the time savings and did
 not measure logistics costs as stated in the PDO "to decrease transport time and logistics costs" could
 have been useful in assessing the achievement of the logistics part of PDO. The ICR notes (para 22) that
 the reduction in total time of travel proportionately reduces inventory costs and travel times have been
 considered an adequate proxy for logistics costs.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports (para 46) that each implementing agency monitored the relevant indicators and
  submitted reports to the Project Coordination Office (PCO). However, the data on time reduction was not
  submitted on time and did not include all required origins/destinations. Also, the reductions in time and
  costs for freight forwarders were not monitored.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 47) that the National Trade and Transport Facilitation Committee (NTTFC)
  reviewed and discussed semi-annual data and monitoring reports and suggested actions for addressing
  identified problems.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned environmental category "A" and the following six safeguards policies were
   triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); Physical & Cultural Resources
   (OP 4.11); Forests (OP 4.36); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP
   4.10).

   According to PAD (para 87), although the civil works for the Narayanghat-Mugling road were planned within
   the existing Right of Way, the fragile ecosystem in this hilly/mountainous country could pose greater than
   average environmental risks, if not managed appropriately. The key environmental issue of concern was the
   likely impact of the road on biodiversity/wildlife. A small section of the Narayanghat-Mugling road (about 6
   km) from Aaptari to Jugedi was within the Barandabhar Forest Corridor had been gazetted as a Protected
   Forest in February 2012.

   The upgrade of Narayanghat-Mugling road would adversely impact 80 private structures owned by 74
   households (414 Project Affected Persons (PAPs)). It would also affect 11 community structures which
   included public toilets, a temple, and a park with a statue of political leader, a chautara, waiting hall, and a
   youth club (PAD para 81).

   The upgrade of Narayanghat-Mugling road would adversely impact a total of 66 vulnerable households
   which included 55 janjati (nearly three fourth of the total affected households), 6 dalit (8 percent) and 4
   chepang community households (5.41 percent), and one female-headed household (PAD para 83).The
   operational policy on Indigenous People OP 4.10 was triggered and a Vulnerable Community Development
   Plan was prepared.

   At appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared. It included a
   screening tool (to help in identifying appropriate locations for sub-projects, wherever applicable);
   identification of likely impacts; and a management plan. The ESMF included: (i) the Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF), (ii) Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), (iii) Gender Development
   Framework (GDF), and (iv) consultation framework.

   Environmental Safeguards.



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NIRTTP (P144335)



  The project introduced bio-engineering techniques to stabilize the hill slopes, valley side slopes, and the
  disposal areas along the Narayanghat-Mugling road upgrading alignment. To protect natural habitats along
  the Narayanghat-Mugling road and Inland Container Depot (ICD) at Kathmandu, the contracts included
  compensatory tree plantation for the tree losses (25 trees to be planted for each tree felled). The project
  also developed innovative environmental measures, such as wildlife animal crossing along the
  Narayanghat-Mugling road. Four water holes were rehabilitated (two on either side of the road) for
  quenching the thirst of wildlife animals inside Barandabhar forest.

  The ICR reports (para 52) that the environmental safeguards implementation faced several challenges: (i) a
  high turnover of Environmental and Social (E&S) staff and capacity constraints to implement and manage
  E&S issues, especially in sub-projects under the trade component; (ii) safeguards capacity and
  commitment/ownership of the contractors; and (iii) lack of monitoring by the Bank during COVID -19
  pandemic related restrictions.

  Social Safeguards.

  The Narayanghat-Mugling road upgrade works, and landslide impacts impacted 131 private structures
  (appraisal estimate was 80) owned by 103 households (appraisal estimate was 74). In addition, twenty
  community structures, mainly public toilets, and passenger sheds were also affected by the road works. All
  community structures were reinstated.

  A Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) was implemented to address project impacts on 91
  households, mostly dalit people and other minority ethnic groups.

  Cash compensation, displacement allowance, stipend for rental, and business disturbance allowance were
  paid to the project affected households in line with the RAP, except for one absentee household.

  Inspection Panel.

  The Inspection Panel received and registered a request for inspection of the Kathmandu ICD, with the
  requesters alleging non-compliance with World Bank’s policies on Involuntary Resettlement, Indigenous
  Peoples, Physical Cultural Resources and Environmental Assessment. The Inspection Panel visited the
  project site and did not find sufficient grounds to investigate the complaint. However, the Inspection Panel
  recommended that consultations with local communities be strengthened in future projects (ICR para 55).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR reports (para 56) that the project's financial management was
  “moderately satisfactory” due to some internal control deficiencies such as (i) no vouchers of designated
  account, (ii) “PAID” stamp not affixed on supporting documents, (iii) payment of reimbursable expenses not
  as per actual expenses, (iv) no payees’ signatures on some payments, (v) claimed retention amount of
  Nepalese Rupees 32.64 million with the Bank before payment to the contractors, and (vi) payment of full
  daily allowance to individual consultants for the day of return. The audit reports with unqualified opinions
  were generally submitted on time.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NIRTTP (P144335)



   Procurement. The ICR reports (para 57) that project procurement complied with Bank Procurement
   Guidelines. However, significant delays occurred in the two-stage procurement for National Single
   Window.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are taken from the ICR with some modification of language:

Building on solid analytical work is key to successful design and implementation of trade
and transit projects. The non-lending technical assistance allowed the Bank to formulate
recommendations to enhance the legal and regulatory framework, prepare options for the effective
governance and operational models, prepare the technical and functional architecture for the
National Single Window, carry out preliminary work on business process simplification, and capacity
development of relevant stakeholders. Implementation arrangements allowed for effective project
delivery.

World Bank guidance and support for the project’s technical and Environmental and Social
(E&S) design can provide the government with high quality standards, that can be
mainstreamed in other similar projects. Given the importance of tourism in Nepal and its rich
biodiversity, the systematic incorporation of environmental features, such as the construction of the
animal passes and the development of water holes for wildlife, constitutes good practice. Similarly,
the early design of road safety components and slope stabilization can minimize road safety risks
during implementation.

IEG adds following lessons:



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NIRTTP (P144335)



Environmental Category “A” projects which trigger safeguards policies on “Involuntary
Resettlement” and “Indigenous Peoples” could strengthen consultations with local
communities. During the implementation of this project, the Inspection Panel received and
registered a request for inspection of the Kathmandu Inland Container Depot, with the requesters
alleging non-compliance with World Bank’s policies on Involuntary Resettlement, Indigenous
Peoples, Physical Cultural Resources and Environmental Assessment. The Inspection Panel visited
the project site and did not find sufficient grounds to investigate the complaint. However, the
Inspection Panel recommended that consultations with local communities be strengthened in future
projects.

Processes such as “two-stage bidding” require additional training is countries with weak
procurement capacity. In this project, significant delays occurred in the two-stage procurement for
National Single Window.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a sound detailed overview of the project. It presents adequate evidence
to support the project achievements. The ICR is internally consistent; the logical linking and integration of the
various parts of the report is adequate. The lessons are based on evidence and analysis.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
