     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0023023

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Program Name
 P154984                                     China Health Reform Program

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87440                                  31-Dec-2021                                        599,250,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 09-May-2017                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           600,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            600,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        599,250,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the Program were to improve the quality of healthcare services and the efficiency of the
   healthcare delivery systems in Anhui and Fujian provinces (Loan Agreement, June 30, 2017, p. 6).




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The operation included three result areas that were derived from priority areas of provincial masterplans
   (see Program scope and boundaries in 2e, below). Implementation would follow a “scaling-up approach” in
   accordance with the two provincial masterplans and with lessons learned for sequencing of actions and
   scaling up of piloted initiatives across the two provinces (PAD, p. 35).

   Result Area 1: Reforming public hospitals with the aim of improving the quality and efficiency of
   hospital services (US$268.5 million). Support would be provided to the government’s efforts to improve
   the quality and efficiency of hospital services in Anhui and Fujian, contribute to reining in the fast growth in
   health expenditures, and improve patient outcomes and satisfaction (PAD, p. 10). The Results Area
   included (i) improving governance and management of public hospitals; (ii) policy and institutional
   interventions to help control the growth of health expenditures, to which hospitals contributed significantly;
   (iii) strengthening quality assurance in the delivery of hospital services; and (iv) institutionalizing effective
   hospital monitoring and evaluation that are integrated with the broader Health Management Information
   System. These activities would be supplemented with investments in infrastructure and equipment.

   Result Area 2: Establishing effective and accountable People-Centered Integrated Care (PCIC)-
   based service delivery system with strengthened primary healthcare services (US$185 million).
   Support would be provided to the government’s efforts to build an effective tiered service delivery system to
   address the challenges of an aging population and the rising prevalence of non-communicable diseases
   (NCDs). Reform actions would be catalyzed by a combination of incentives to be provided through
   revamped provider payment mechanisms and improved governance, monitoring, and regulation of the PCIC
   system, including: (i) strengthening primary care service capacity; (ii) transforming service delivery,
   including institutional and organizational reforms, in order to strengthen integrated service provision for
   NCDs; (iii) enhancing quality through adoption and improvements of evidence-based clinical pathways,
   clinical protocols, continuous quality improvement in health facilities, and quality monitoring and public
   disclosure by health administration and/or health insurers; (iv) introducing prospective provider payment
   schemes to incentivize the provision of integrated NCD management; and (v) establishing an enabling
   environment for PCIC as described in Result Area 3 (PAD, p. 12).

   Note: The PAD characterized the separation of the two above Results Areas (reforming hospitals and
   establishing PCIC) as somewhat synthetic, given that they represent a continuum and are integral to health
   service delivery. The government, however, expressed a strong preference for separating these two levels,
   as underscored in the national reform strategy and in the provincial masterplans, and to highlight
   experience and specific interventions of previous pilots (PAD, p. 10).

   Results Area 3: Addressing the cross-cutting dimensions of the policy, institutional, and financial
   environment, in addition to program stewardship and institutional capacities, for the health reform
   (US$145 million). The Program would support the government in strengthening key cross-cutting systems
   that represent the foundations on which the proposed public hospital reform and PCIC are premised.
   Reform actions included: (i) institutional arrangements needed to provide overall governance and

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)



   stewardship; (ii) strengthening comprehensive management and information systems, including information
   technology (ICT); (iii) training for health providers and para-professionals to improve the delivery of both
   hospital and PCIC services; and (iv) strengthening program stewardship at the central level, including
   building implementation capacity in the two targeted provinces of Anhui and Fujian (PAD, p. 14).




e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program scope, boundaries, costs, and financing: The PforR Program was financed by an IBRD loan of
   US$600 million that constituted 15 percent of the government health reform expenditure plan estimated at
   US$4.1 billion, that included Borrower expenditures estimated at US$3.5 billion. The Program was designed
   to support, over a five-year period (2017-2021), a subset of the Anhui and Fujian health reform masterplans
   across the two provinces. The loan was essentially fully disbursed, including a front-end fee of US$1.5
   million and a disbursement of US$5 million against a disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) under the
   responsibility of the National Health Commission.

   According to the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 3), the reason for selecting Anhui and Fujian was
   that these two provinces were trailblazers in tackling health system issues that are discussed in section 3a.
   The commitment of these provinces to advance health reforms was strong (ICR, p. 8). Around appraisal,
   Anhui province had a population of 69 million, and its per capita GDP in 2015 was 35,997 RMB, which
   ranked 25th among 31 mainland provinces of China. Fujian had a population of about 39 million with a 2015
   per capita GDP of 67,966 RMB, placing it seventh nationally. Overall, the health system reform supported
   by the Program served approximately 100 million people (ICR, p. 23).

   PforR expenditure boundaries were defined as core expenditures by the Anhui and Fujian Provincial Health
   and Family Planning Commissions for capacity building and reform management, as well as key capital
   outlays for physical and ICT infrastructure. PforR included only those expenditures traced to central and
   provincial levels that financed policy reforms and strengthened health delivery systems. It excluded health
   insurance fund flows, but included management expenditures on health insurance schemes, since
   management expenditures were related to policy reforms associated with provider payments. Drug
   procurement expenditures were not included, although the compensation paid by the government to
   hospitals for the revenues foregone due to the implementation of a zero-mark-up policy was included.
   Financing the upgrading, rehabilitation and/or new construction of healthcare facilities at the county,
   township, and village levels was also included (PAD, pp. 9-10).

   Dates: The Program was approved on May 9, 2017 and became effective on September 11, 2017. A Mid-
   Term Review was carried out on July 3, 2020. The program closed on December 31, 2021, as originally
   planned.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              China Health Reform Program (P154984)




                       Rationale
                       The Program was responsive to sectoral needs and challenges. These included volume-driven approaches
                       with treatment bias, perverse incentives that played a role in hospital expansion with insurance covering
                       inpatient services through fee for service payments, poor capacity at the grassroots with weak delivery and
                       poor quality of primary health services, and insufficient coordination among institutional actors.

                       The PforR instrument was appropriate because it was anchored in the government’s health reform agenda
                       with a focus on results and it would directly support the government’s implementation. Concurrently, it would
                       strengthen existing capacities and program management. The instrument would also facilitate geographic
                       scale-up (PAD, p. 4).

                       According to the PAD (p. 4), China embarked in 2014 on a so called "deep water" phase of its national health
                       reform to address systemic issues in health financing and health service delivery. In 2015, the government
                       endorsed a comprehensive national health reform agenda, including a national strategy known as the
                       Healthy China 2030 Plan; a Health Sector Development Plan; and the 13th Five Year Health Reform
                       Plan that laid out a sectoral reform agenda for the period 2016-2020, covering ten areas for strengthening
                       and enhancing effective delivery systems, hospital reform, universal health insurance, drug procurement and
                       supply systems, a sectoral regulatory framework, health information, human resources, essential public
                       health equalization, health care industry/private sector, and leadership for implementing comprehensive
                       reforms.

                       At entry, the operation’s objectives were closely aligned with one of the three main areas of engagement of
                       the Country Partnership Framework for China (CPF FY 2013-2016), namely to increase “access to quality
                       health services and social protection." The engagement reflected the World Bank Group’s value added in the
                       country by bringing and applying ideas, innovation, and knowledge to support national and provincial
                       healthcare reforms (PAD, p. 4). Outcome 2.1 focused directly on deepening health sector reform, improving
                       the treatment of NCDs, and revising health system organization and service delivery.

                       At closing, development objectives were fully aligned with the CPF (FY2020-2025), specifically in
                       Engagement Area 3 on Institutional Constraints and its CPF Objective 3.1 on “Increasing Access to Quality
                       Health and Aged Care Services," which focused on addressing (a) a fragmented and hospital-centric health
                       services delivery system and lack of integration across levels of care; (b) the need for strengthened capacity
                       for strategic purchasing from health service providers in support of the National Health Security
                       Administration, and the need for broader use of performance incentives; and (c) the need for a
                       comprehensive policy and institutional framework for elderly care. The above CPF objective intended to
                       deepen health sector reform that was important for China’s future social and economic success, and to cope
                       with rapid aging, including through quality aged care that includes NCD management.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                          New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Health Reform Program (P154984)




DLI 1
DLI
The County Integrated Delivery System has been scaled up to at least 50 counties/districts in Anhui

Rationale
Both DLI 1 and DLI 2 (below), which were merged in the ICR text, built on three successful pilots (the
integrated delivery pilot in Anhui; the Sanming hospital reform, including pharmaceutical reform; and the
integration of health insurance management in Fujian) that triggered a government decision to scale them as
part of the PforR. DLIs 1 and 2 captured the effort to improve integration of services. They provided sufficient
incentives to promote integration, which has a bearing on efficiency, effectiveness, and improved coordination
in general. The PAD also stated that the DLIs would incentivize the provinces to seek out-of-the-box
solutions.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 2
DLI
The integration of the management of the three health insurance schemes at the provincial level in Fujian is
undertaken

Rationale
As above



Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Proportion of hospital discharges paid through case-based payment for all county-level public general hospitals
and Traditional Chinese Medicine hospitals

Rationale
This DLI, also used as an outcome indicator, was closely aligned with the PDOs and constituted an important
driver to achieve the intended outcome to improve efficiency. Using cased-based funding would generate the
right incentives to improve hospital efficiency in lieu of open-ended fees for services that commonly
encourage over-servicing. Global literature indicates that changing these underlying financial incentives is
among significant instruments that can positively influence health care provider behavior. Concurrently, case-
based payments contribute to improving the quality of care by sparing patients unnecessary procedures and
services.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Health Reform Program (P154984)




Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Proportion of inpatients to be treated through the use of standardized clinical pathways at county-level public
general hospitals

Rationale
This DLI, also used as an outcome indicator, was closely aligned with the PDO. Clinical pathway protocols
provide guidance on recommended steps to follow in the course of treatment. Appropriate use of
standardized clinical pathways is known to improve case management, thereby improving the quality of
health services provided, and leading to better patient outcomes and efficient use of resources. Using clinical
pathways reduces variation in treatment. Their institutionalization can facilitate continuous quality
improvement.




Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
Proportion of outpatient care delivered by primary care facilities

Rationale
This DLI, also used as an outcome indicator, was relevant, as addressing primary health care needs at the
primary level rather than at higher levels of care would be expected to lower the cost of overall health
services. However, the DLI assumed that the primary health care system and general practitioners (GPs)
were effectively responsive to patient needs even when low capacities and performance at the primary level
were being strengthened.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Health Reform Program (P154984)



Number of prefectures that manage Type II diabetes patients using the integrated NCD service package
(threshold value for a prefecture to qualify as using the integrated service package is 25% of total managed
patients).

Rationale
DLI 6, also used as an outcome indicator, was relevant because adopting protocols for the integrated
management of Type II diabetes promotes the quality of related patient management. The DLI can promote
the utilization of an integrated package of NCD services combined with adequate workforce training.
Nevertheless, the DLI was narrow and did not fully reflect effective and accountable PCIC-based service
delivery approaches with strengthened primary healthcare services.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
Number of counties that have established a county-township-village population health information system in
Anhui

Rationale
DLIs 7 and 8 were relevant, as they supported the government in strengthening key cross-cutting systems
that represent some of the institutional foundations and capacities on which the proposed public hospital
reform and PCIC are premised. Also, information systems can facilitate patient participation in healthcare
services. The two DLIs were aligned to a reasonable extent with the PDOs.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 8
DLI
Number of Township Health Centers/Community Health Centers that have established primary care health
information systems in Fujian



Rationale
As above.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  China Health Reform Program (P154984)




                  DLI 9
                  DLI
                  Program experience sharing and dissemination

                  Rationale
                  As a DLI, experience sharing may not be a core driver or primary trigger to improve the quality and efficiency
                  of health services at the local level. Nevertheless, the DLI had its merits in incentivizing other stakeholders to
                  replicate interventions, and in guiding the scale-up of reform initiatives.



                  Rating
                  Substantial


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  Program objectives were fully relevant to the country context, government reform agenda, and the Country
                  Partnership Framework, both at entry and at Program closing.

                  DLIs were also generally aligned with the PDO and constituted adequate triggers for enhancing favorable
                  conditions and performance toward improving the quality of healthcare services and the efficiency of the
                  healthcare delivery systems in Anhui and Fujian provinces. However, the relevance of DLIs had some
                  shortcomings by omission. The ICR (pp. 14-15) noted the gaps in addressing demand-side levers of health
                  service utilization, and patient perceptions and satisfaction aspects that are key considerations in dealing with
                  service quality and effectiveness, including for aspects related to influencing patients on the merits of seeking
                  care at the appropriate level of health settings, uptake of primary health care, and reducing unnecessary
                  hospitalizations.



                  Rating
                  Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       Improve the quality of healthcare services in Anhui and Fujian provinces

                       Rationale


                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Health Reform Program (P154984)



The theory of change held that improving governance and accountability, the use of standardized clinical
pathways in hospitals, the use of integrated NCD management pathways at the primary level (including
prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and self-management), health personnel training (including GPs, nurses,
and community workers) would plausibly contribute to improving the quality of health care services in Anhui
and Fujian provinces.

The Program supported activities that sought to strengthen the health system and to improve service quality,
including (a) mandating the development of clinical protocols, establishing quality assurance mechanisms,
and creating GP-centered multidisciplinary teams; (b) rolling out an empanelment mechanism based on
tailored service packages; (c) developing integrated NCD management pathways covering prevention,
medical treatment, and rehabilitation; (d) establishing public participation mechanisms; (e) strengthening
health management information systems; (f) providing public disclosure of information on the use of
diagnostics and prescriptions; and (g) promoting disclosure of hospital performance indicators (ICR, p. 16).

The number of clinical pathways that were adopted with verified use reached 595 protocols. Their
implementation was incorporated into staff’s performance-based salaries. Fujian also developed a module on
clinical pathways within the hospital’s information system to encourage clinicians’ adherence.

As part of a move toward PCIC, the Program supported prefectures in managing Type II diabetes by
promoting the utilization of an integrated package of NCD services. Both provinces issued protocols for the
integrated management of Type II diabetes, starting with pilot prefectures.

The ICR (p. 16) reported that service capacity in 332 primary medical institutions was strengthened to meet
basic quality standards, including 249 township hospitals and 83 Community Health Centers. The Program
established networks across facilities and enhanced GPs' training. In Fujian, medical alliances were
established to provide technical support to contracted family doctors. By the end of 2020, 8,970 teams of
family doctors were organized and 7.5 million people were contracted, including the poor, elderly, pregnant
women, children, and patients with chronic diseases. According to the ICR, training created a stronger pool of
existing practitioners and a future pipeline. A total of 259 GPs and 235 assistant-GPs passed a certification
exam, and an additional 248 GPs and 375 assistant-GPs were in the pipeline for future training. In Anhui,
1,058 doctors completed a training program and qualified as GPs.

The ICR (p. 17) reported that the Center for Health Statistics and Information conducted evaluations that
reflected improvements in reporting on hospital performance, information systems, and governance. Over the
life of the Program, 17 additional hospitals in Anhui and 18 additional hospitals in Fujian began disclosing
their performance. Also, 39 additional hospitals in Anhui and 90 additional hospitals in Fujian connected with
regional health information platforms. The number of hospitals reforming staff remuneration systems
increased from 195 to 227 hospitals in Anhui and from 154 to 215 hospitals in Fujian.

The ICR reported the following process quality indicators (that were also DLIs) to reflect the objective’s
achievement:

      The proportion of inpatients treated through standardized clinical pathways at county-level public
       general hospitals increased in Anhui from a baseline of 4 percent in 2017 to 71.4 percent in 2021,
       exceeding the target of 50 percent; and in Fujian from a baseline of zero to 62.2 percent, exceeding
       the target of 50 percent.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Health Reform Program (P154984)




      The number of prefectures that managed Type II diabetes patients using the integrated NCD service
       package increased in Anhui from a baseline of zero in 2017 to 6 prefectures in 2021, achieving the
       target, and in Fujian from a baseline of zero to 4 prefectures, achieving the target.

All outcome indicators (for both Objectives 1 and 2) consisted of DLIs. This is appropriate in many instances
when DLIs are in an advanced location on the results chain pathway, or when PBF operations use quality
scorecards reflecting structural and process indicators. However, final outcomes such as improved patient
outcomes and patient satisfaction were envisaged under the Program (PAD, p. 10 and Results Area 1 in
section 2d). Final outcomes on the quality of care are commonly related to dimensions of treatment
effectiveness, patient safety, and patient-centeredness such as patient satisfaction. The ICR reported that the
National Health Commission has recently launched a national public hospital performance assessment
framework for tertiary hospitals and secondary hospitals that includes patient satisfaction.

The above-reported results associated with quality dimensions were also reflective of improved efficiency
(Objective 2, below). For example, the use of standardized clinical pathways also reduces unnecessary
procedures in patient management and thus attenuates the cost of over-servicing.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the efficiency of the healthcare delivery systems in Anhui and Fujian provinces

Rationale
In addition to the elements described under Objective 1, the theory of change held that using case-based
payments, promoting service integration (including insurance schemes and agreements with general
practitioners), and developing information systems would plausibly contribute to improved efficiency in
healthcare delivery.

The Program sought to achieve this objective through public hospital reforms and an overall shift in the
service delivery model toward increased activity in primary care settings (ICR, p. 17). The Program
established GP-centered multidisciplinary teams and facilitated service agreements with GPs. The Program
incentivized more efficient use of the healthcare network by limiting the use of hospital facilities for services
that can be provided in primary care settings, and sought to promote efficiency through the integration of
care, that can help in limiting unnecessary procedures and costly interventions. The advancement of hospital
reform and the shift to primary settings occurred against a backdrop of a wider context where there was
continued expansion of hospitals in both provinces.

Over 11,000 standardized village clinics were established, and 9,994 village clinics were connected with the
health insurance system (ICR, p. 17). In Anhui, a total of 59 counties set up 124 medical alliances providing
integrated services to cover a population of 45 million. Over 60 percent of the population was empaneled by
2019. Also, 109 central township hospitals were upgraded to secondary hospitals. This resulted in a two
percent increase in in-county utilization of care. In Fujian, a modified global budget system was introduced in
44 counties, allowing the retention of savings with the aim of reducing costs. In addition, county hospitals

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Health Reform Program (P154984)



were strengthened to serve as the nucleus for the prefecture by developing core skills, technologies, and
various core disciplines, including pathological investigations, electrocardiography, imaging, and remote
medical services.

Evaluations conducted by the Center for Health Statistics and Information showed that, in Anhui, between
2019 and 2020, expenditure per inpatient admission fell from CNY 8,314 to CNY 7,999, with a reduced
average daily inpatient expenditure from CNY 935 to CNY 879 (ICR, p. 18).

Telemedicine services were strengthened, notably for managing increased patient expectations in the context
of an aging population with a growing NCD burden. In Fujian, telemedicine covered 905 primary medical and
health care institutions, enabling remote imaging and remote electrocardiograph diagnosis. In Anhui, an
electronic health card was rolled out in the province, and 26.2 million e-health cards were in use. The
telemedicine service system covered 1,309 hospitals at all levels. There were also innovations to access
radiologist advice at primary care institutions that reduced the need for patients to seek X-rays and other
imaging services at the hospital level. Small survey results provided to the ICR mission showed that imaging
requests generated by primary care institutions increased from 22,922 in 2016 to 117,335 in 2020, and that
93 percent of patients were willing to use Township Health Centers for imaging (ICR, p. 18).

Notable progress was observed in cross-cutting dimensions and the integration of health information and
insurance systems where some DLIs and intermediate results indicators were exceeded. The integration of
health information allowed health providers to be better positioned to address patients’ needs, avoid
unnecessary care, and encourage the uptake of primary care. Through experience sharing, health system
administrators were better placed to troubleshoot common challenges (ICR, p. 19).

Pricing adjustments were introduced to correct distorted fee schedules and misaligned provider incentives.
Substantial improvements in drug procurement and utilization were observed. In Anhui, a centralized system
for supporting outpatient drug use for chronic diseases was developed to reduce out-of-pocket costs for high-
value medical consumables and drugs. Prices of 60 drugs were negotiated, resulting in an average decrease
of 50.3 percent and a maximum decrease of 76.6 percent, thereby achieving a total saving of CNY 506 million
(US$78 million) in annual drug costs. For example, 86 new medical services were covered by provincial
medical institutions, including for COVID-19 nucleic acid detection. Reviews undertaken by the Center for
Health Statistics and Information identified a reduction of 3.8 percent in Anhui and 0.8 percent in Fujian in the
proportion of medical consumable revenue generated from inpatient services as a percentage of hospital
revenue.

A program to reduce the irrational use of antibiotics was also introduced. It had clear guidelines, including a
stipulation for withdrawing prescribing rights when there were significant gaps in related performance. The
Center for Health Statistics and Information found that, in 2020 and 2021, the ‘proportion of patients
prescribed with antibiotics’ fell from 15.7 percent to 11.0 percent in Anhui, and from 10.8 percent to 10.3
percent in Fujian.

A positive parallel development, independent of the PforR (Task Team clarifications on June 14, 2022), was
noted in 2018, when the reorganization of the health sector saw the creation of the National Healthcare
Security Administration. This institution gained responsibility for managing health insurance schemes in
China, resulting in a purchaser and provider split (ICR, p. 26).




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    China Health Reform Program (P154984)



The ICR reported noteworthy progress based on DLIs 3 and 5, which were also considered by the Program
as outcome indicators:

      The proportion of hospital discharges paid through case-based payment for all county-level public
         general hospitals and Traditional Chinese Medicine hospitals increased in Anhui from a baseline of 12
         percent to 44.4 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 32 percent; and in Fujian, from a baseline of 3
         percent to 58.7 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

      The proportion of outpatient care delivered by primary care facilities increased from 61 percent in
         2017 to 62.7 percent in 2021, slightly exceeding the target of 61.8 percent; and in Fujian, from a
         baseline of 51 percent to 57.4 percent, exceeding the target of 55 percent.

At the same time, Fujian did not achieve a reduction in the average length of stay for county-level public
hospitals or an increase in the proportion of patients hospitalized within the county. The baseline average
length of stay in Fujian was 7.41 in 2017. It marginally increased to 7.48 in 2021, and did not decrease toward
the target of 7.37 days. By contrast, it was achieved in Anhui, where it decreased from a baseline of 8.82 to
7.8 days. The proportion of patients hospitalized within-county did not increase in Fujian. It remained at 62.75
in 2021, similar to the baseline of 63 percent in 2017 and short of the target of 80 percent. By contrast, it was
achieved in Anhui where the proportion of patients hospitalized in-county increased from a baseline of 69
percent to 79.59 percent, exceeding the target of 73 percent.

According to the ICR (p. 19), and apart from variable disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, low
performance in these specific efficiency dimensions of service delivery in Fujian pointed to the persistence of
long-standing challenges that the Program was not able to fully address. The ICR concluded that an
important unfinished agenda remains within the overall reform. The extent of persisting challenges varied
across provinces and according to local responses, political will, and local resources (Task Team
clarifications, June 14, 2022).



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
The two Program objectives to improve the quality of healthcare services and the efficiency of the healthcare
delivery systems in Anhui and Fujian provinces were almost fully achieved. There was sufficient evidence of
results being associated to changes initiated by the government reform trajectory and of improvement in
development issues that were targeted by the Program.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Health Reform Program (P154984)




5. Outcome

Overall Relevance is rated substantial, encompassing a full alignment between development objectives and the
Country Partnership Framework at Program closing, and a substantial relevance of DLIs. Efficacy is rated
substantial, as objectives were almost fully achieved. These findings are consistent with a satisfactory rating for
overall outcome, indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of its objectives
and in its relevance.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

At the time of the ICR, the risks that development outcomes may not be maintained are relatively moderate.
Political commitment and ownership at the center and in the two provinces remain high for continuing the
Program agenda and its focus on improving the quality of health services and efficiency of healthcare
delivery.

There are some technical risks associated with the capacity of the sector in sustaining the management of
NCDs, such as in integrated diabetes management, as was reported by the ICR (p. 32). Also, there may be
challenges for future scale-up in other provinces that may have different commitment to health reform than
Anhui and Fujian provinces.

Nevertheless, the Program contributed to strengthening the public hospital sector, including improving
governance and management, controlling growth expenditures, strengthening quality assurance, and
building better links between hospital management information systems and health information systems.
Overall, 295 hospitals, accounting for 98 percent of secondary hospitals, strengthened internal governance
and management systems. In addition, recruitment and compensation procedures were strengthened to
focus on performance-based pay and institutionalize levers to strengthen the quality and efficiency of the
health system (ICR, p. 22).




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The overall design of the Program was relevant and pertinent. Health sector issues were thoroughly
  identified, and the World Bank was co-leader of a Joint Health Study that provided strong technical
  underpinnings for health reform. Preparation benefited from Senior Bank Management engagement that
  was essential given the complexity of the Program and its ambition. This engagement in the preparation

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Health Reform Program (P154984)



process also helped in building further political support. The PforR was the first in the health sector in
China and was only the second PforR in the country. The Bank Team supporting Program preparation
had an adequate mix of skills that included domestic and international experts on health system reform.
The DLI verification protocol was appropriate to the context and to information available at the time of
preparation. The selection of the Center for Health Statistics and Information as the agency verifying DLI
achievements represented a deliberate choice to develop government capabilities to monitor future
reform efforts (ICR, p. 24).

Institutional implementation arrangements, including for M&E, built on existing structures in the provinces
where there was a vertical structure for health reforms extending from the province to the prefectures and
the counties/districts. In Anhui, the Provincial Healthcare Reform Leading Group was headed by the
Governor, and in Fujian, by the Party Secretary General. At the central level, the State Council
Healthcare Reform Office was the leading agency for the national health reform agenda. It was supported
by the Center for Project Supervision and Management that served as its PforR secretariat, responsible
for supporting the two provinces in implementation through technical assistance, coordination across
provinces, capacity building, exchange of experiences, and implementation support (PAD, p. 21). An
Expert Panel at the central level was to serve as a pool of technical experts to government agencies
under the national health reform program. Program assessments in terms of technical, fiduciary, and
social and environmental aspects were adequately carried out. The overall risk of this operation was
assessed as high, as the technical and fiduciary assessments identified significant risks associated with
the Program's technical design, institutional capacity, procurement, and financial management (PAD, p.
30). The lack of familiarity with the PforR instrument was adequately mitigated through early training and
regular engagement to identify specific issues requiring additional support (ICR, p. 24). The Bank
provided several training workshops on PforR to familiarize participants with the instrument, and shared
best practices in key reform areas.

Program design had moderate shortcomings, as it lacked a focus on patient satisfaction and demand-
side drivers of hospital utilization. Its theory of change required a clearer articulation of the implicit
assumptions and links between broad inputs and specific outcomes (ICR, p. 31). The theory of change
made broad assumptions that the changes would improve patient satisfaction without gathering
information on patient perspectives either before or after the changes took place (ICR, p. 8). The
Program did not include indicators that directly assessed patient satisfaction to better understand
whether the reforms were having the desired impact on patient experience, given that this constitutes an
important dimension of quality (ICR, p. 27). Demand-side drivers of hospital utilization were not
addressed, although these aspects were well discussed in the Joint Health Study, according to the ICR.

In terms of readiness, the Client was not clear about fund flows and the allocation process, subsequently
resulting in disbursement delays. Guidance on how to disburse in the context of a PforR was still under
development. The Program became effective in September 2017, but the first disbursement for Anhui
Province was delayed by one year until October 2018 because the on-lending agreement signing process
was significantly delayed. The ICR stated that one takeaway from the Program was the importance of
discussing fund flow arrangements as early as possible, both during preparation and following Program
effectiveness (ICR, p. 25).



Quality-at-Entry Rating
Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)




b. Quality of supervision
 Program monitoring and supervision were reportedly effective and provided additional support for the
 proactive resolution of arising issues. Throughout supervision, there was a consistent focus on
 development impact and advancing key reform aspects (ICR, p. 31). Reporting on Program monitoring and
 Implementation Status & Results Reports were candid about Program progress and arising issues.
 Reporting provided realistic advice on areas for attention and on recommended actions. Additional joint
 fiduciary and procurement missions were deployed when it was recognized that there were substantial
 challenges for the government to address, and such missions included training, technical support, and
 sustained follow-up. The Team provided added support on procurement, contract implementation, and
 procurement audits (ICR, p. 25). As DLI 5 (recorded as DLI 4 in the ICR text) -- to promote outpatient care
 delivery by primary care facilities -- was more challenging to implement than other DLIs, the Bank Team
 carried out several missions and provided additional support to help in addressing related bottlenecks (ICR,
 p. 25).

 A Midterm Review was carried out in July 2020. It was used to address lagging progress in the integrated
 diabetes management reflected by the fourth PDO-level indicator. The COVID-19 pandemic had a negative
 impact on implementation and verification of results, but the Bank Team, working closely with the
 government, was able to overcome related challenges, including by switching to a virtual modality for
 interactions.

 Team leadership changed three times during implementation, although transitions were smooth, supported
 by detailed handover, and with no impact on the continuity of implementation support. According to the ICR
 (p. 31), the government expressed appreciation for the level of support provided by the World Bank Team
 and the extent to which it was tailored to Program needs at different stages of implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Program objectives were clearly specified and DLIs were aligned with the stated PDOs, but with moderate
 shortcomings (see section 3b). The theory of change was reasonably established, but also with
 shortcomings, including insufficient clarity between inputs and specific outcomes and implicit assumptions.
 Program design lacked a focus on demand-side drivers of hospital utilization and on patient perceptions
 and satisfaction, which are key dimensions of service quality (see section 7a), and were envisaged in the
 PAD.



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)




b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring was reportedly effective in supporting Program implementation as planned. The Center for
  Health Statistics and Information fulfilled its responsibilities for verifying results and reporting. The Center
  had a large team of qualified professionals and was independent from other institutions in the two
  Program provinces. The Center guided and strengthened verification procedures. Concurrently, the
  Center benefited from technical assistance that was provided under the Program Action Plan to further
  strengthen its M&E capacity, including the development of new information technology modules on
  monitoring to improve longer-term monitoring capabilities.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used to assess progress, to facilitate discussions with government counterparts, and
  to identify potential challenges and areas for added attention. For example, in May 2019, the mission
  team noted that progress of non-DLI results indicators was mixed and that there was a need
  to address the growth rate of medical services revenue of public hospitals in Fujian, and the proportion
  of patients being hospitalized within the county in Anhui. This led to a sharpened focus on related
  implementation aspects in these areas.

  According to the ICR (p. 28), there was an ongoing dialogue between the government and the World
  Bank to document reform efforts and lessons learned. This reflected a commitment not only to use the
  formal tools of M&E, but to go beyond and leverage the Program for a wider learning agenda, including
  for sharing the experience of successful pilots. The experience of the PforR operation was widely shared
  and publicized (Borrower’s Comments, ICR, p. 53). The Program organized five domestic and three
  international large-scale health reform experience exchange meetings, and three phases of health
  reform experience training covering 30 provinces in China.

  The health reform experience of Anhui Province and Fujian Province was recognized by leaders at all
  levels in China. Selected project experience aspects were transformed into health reform policy
  documents (Borrower’s Comments, ICR, p. 54). On October 29, 2021, the general office of the National
  Health Commission issued a Notice on Promoting the Experience of Sanming City in Fujian for the
  development of medical alliances to support integrated service delivery, and put forward key tasks for
  promoting it.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, an Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was carried out, and risks were
   rated moderate. The ESSA recognized that the Program constituted an opportunity to improve system

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    China Health Reform Program (P154984)



  performance, while medical waste management, radiation risks, and public participation were considered as
  the main areas for attention.

  Performance in managing environmental and social risks was satisfactory throughout implementation (ICR,
  p. 29). Both provinces made substantial efforts to strengthen medical waste and radiation management in
  healthcare facilities in accordance with the Program Action Plan. This included enacting specific rules,
  providing regular training, and conducting supervision. Training courses to medical workers were recurrent,
  with a minimum of one course per year on medical waste management and radiation control. Standardized
  disposal of medical waste was verified. The World Bank conducted regular supervision and facilitated
  knowledge sharing on environmental and social practices between higher-performing facilities and remote
  facilities where the management of medical waste was weaker. Also, the Bank Team regularly highlighted
  the importance of continuous engagement with various stakeholders, including environmental authorities
  and local governments, to improve and maintain adequate medical waste management.

  In terms of social risks, the two provinces submitted public participation plans to the Bank, and public
  participation and information disclosure activities took place in both provinces thereafter. Implementation
  aspects were reported in semiannual progress reports. In Anhui, all medical facilities at the secondary level
  and above incorporated a public participation column on their official websites, and an "interaction with the
  public" column was set up on the website of the Provincial Health Commission for feedback from the public.
  In Fujian, "deepening health reform" and "public participation" columns were set up on the official website of
  the Provincial Health Commission, and a Health Reform Knowledge Sharing Center was founded in
  Sanming, in Fujian Province.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  At appraisal, a fiduciary assessment of procurement, financial management, and governance was carried
  out and assessed to be of Substantial risk, and corresponding mitigation actions were taken.

  From a procurement perspective, the approach to mitigating the risks of hiring barred firms and limiting the
  use of contractors with a history of fraud was effective, and both provinces issued updated lists and
  guidance on barred firms to all agencies concerned. To mitigate the risk of fraudulent contractors being
  hired, the contracting process was adapted to include a qualification criterion on previous experience.
  Some of the procurement issues that were encountered during implementation were related to the fixed
  budgeting process. Procurement assessments for medical equipment were often undertaken one to two
  years in advance of actual procurement, and market prices often changed. The norm of accepting the
  lowest-priced bidder and the limitations of preset budgets made it challenging to ensure equipment quality
  even when a market study was conducted shortly before contracting.

  Nevertheless, the Program’s overall fiduciary performance was rated satisfactory throughout
  implementation. All financial management reports were submitted on time and were of adequate quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)



   None reported.



d. Other
   The ICR reported that the Program likely contributed to climate co-benefits by promoting the use of
   technology for primary care consultations, including through increased virtual sessions with reduced travel
   times of patients. Related contributions were not directly estimated (ICR, p. 23).



10. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               This ICR Review rated Quality-
                                                                               at-Entry as moderately
                                                                               satisfactory because of
                                                                               shortcomings in Program design
                                                                               and DLIs, as they lacked a focus
                                                                               on demand-side drivers and on
                                                                               patient satisfaction. The theory
                                                                               of change had clarity gaps. Also,
                                                                               the Client’s lack of clarity about
                                                                               fund flows and allocation
                                                                               processes impacted
                                                                               implementation readiness. This
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               ICR Review rated the Quality of
                                                                               Supervision as satisfactory in
                                                                               view of the extent to which the
                                                                               Bank proactively identified and
                                                                               resolved threats to the
                                                                               achievement of development
                                                                               outcomes and the Bank’s
                                                                               fiduciary role. The aggregation
                                                                               of both sub-ratings is consistent
                                                                               with a moderately satisfactory
                                                                               rating for overall Bank
                                                                               Performance.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


11. Lessons



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China Health Reform Program (P154984)



The ICR (pp. 33-34) offered several useful lessons and recommendations, including the following
lessons slightly adjusted by the IEG Review:

1. Ambitious reform programs can benefit from in-depth studies and the consensus of the
government, World Bank, and the World Health Organization. The Joint Health Study afforded
the reform agenda with a coherent and comprehensive technical plan that secured buy-in from
leading stakeholders in advance of Program preparation and implementation. The technical
background provided a shared vision for reform and enabled the selection of interventions that were
amenable to being addressed through the PforR. This provided a road map for engagement on
complex and demanding reforms.

2. The PforR instrument is an appropriate instrument for World Bank engagement in a
country with a strong commitment to health reform. As the first PforR in the health sector, the
Program represented a significant shift away from the use of input-based financing, but that was
possible only through close alignment with the government’s reform agenda and by strong
commitment from national and provincial stakeholders.

3. Complementary actions across distinct but interlinked sectoral areas facilitate large-scale
health sector reform. The Program was bolstered by a series of interlinked reform actions in the
development of medical alliances to support integrated service delivery, compensation of health care
workers, development and use of information technology, and pooling of health insurance funds.

4. When programs focus on the quality of health services, monitoring and measuring patient
satisfaction constitute integral parts of quality assessment. The Program’s high-level focus on
service quality could have been augmented with indicators that were focused on the perceptions of
patients and their experiences. This is particularly relevant because a key feature of the quality of
health care is how a patient perceives the value of services, which in turn becomes an important
determinant in building trust in healthcare and prevention aspects.

In addition, the following lesson was identified by the Borrower (ICR, p. 54):

5. Using domestic health reform planning and modalities enhances ownership and facilitates
operational applications, potential achievement of desired results, and sustainability. The
Program integrated international experience with local innovation and health reform with domestic
characteristics as a pathway to promote the transformation and dissemination of health reform
achievements, which can also facilitate replication to help the development of China’s health care.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough overview of the Program. Its narrative supported the outcome rating and available
evidence. It was candid, accurate, and aligned to development objectives. The evidence and analysis were

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Health Reform Program (P154984)



aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. The ICR referred to the Program’s theory of change, which helped
the reader to understand how the ratings were reached, and aptly identified some clarity gaps in the results
chain as well as DLI gaps in patient-centered aspects and demand-side drivers. The ICR offered specific
lessons derived from Program experience. It was reasonably concise and followed guidelines. The ICR had two
lapses: first, it should have conducted the assessment of relevance for each DLI, resulting in
separate rationales and ratings. Second, the ICR was inconsistent in DLI numbers and titles between the text
and DLI annexes [Annex 5A (ICR, pp. 55-58) and Annex 1B (ICR, pp. 44-47)] that were based on an up-to-date
version, but the Task Team clarified on June 14, 2022 that the ICR text used DLI title numbers that were in the
portal. Nevertheless, within the larger spectrum of criteria indicating a high level of ICR quality, the above
lapses were considered to be substantively minor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
