     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023002

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132742                                    Second Skills Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8340                                                                                      38,850,263.65

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 19-May-2013                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                                45,136,192.60                                           0.00

 Actual                                            38,850,263.65                                           0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 4), the project's objective was to "increase the potential for
   employment and higher earnings of graduates from technical and vocational education and training (TVET)
   schools and institutes through improvements in the skills delivery system."

   At a June 2017 restructuring, the objective was revised to "improve TVET teacher competencies and
   curriculum in selected priority trades."


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



   This ICRR will therefore perform a split rating assessment. At the time of restructuring, US$30.29 million, or
   78 percent of Bank financing, had been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was approved with four components:

   1. Strengthening of the TVET institutional system (appraisal: US$8.5 million; actual US$3.4 million) was
   to provide technical assistance for the formulation of a detailed TVET strategy, plan, and implementation
   program, engaging a wide range of relevant stakeholders; development of quality standards for skills
   delivery, accreditation, and certification of student skills; design and implementation of a labor market
   information system and an overall management information system (MIS) for TVET; building of capacity
   among monitors and inspectors of schools and institutes accredited by the DMTVET (Deputy Ministry of
   TVET within the Ministry of Education); and conducting of certification examinations for TVET graduates.
   This component was dropped at the June 2017 restructuring, as it received little political support, the
   technical skills to implement it were lacking, and there was poor coordination with the International Labor
   Organization, which was to have assisted with implementation.

   2. Improving the performance of TVET schools and institutes (appraisal: US$26.8 million; actual:
   US$16.43 million), was to be implemented in two steps. The first would recognize schools and institutes that
   had already improved academic management, reformed school administration, improved student
   placement, established linkages with local industry, reformed curriculum, or taken other steps to meet
   student needs, with "recognition grants" of US$30,000. The second would provide development grants of up
   to US$400,000 to approximately 15 institutes that had produced credible development plans to sustain and
   further extend reform efforts. All public and private institutions accredited by DMTVET (210 public and 47
   private), plus any that were accredited during the project's lifetime, were to be eligible for support under this
   component. Each institute that received a development grant was required to set up a governing council,
   with representatives from the private sector, as a condition for disbursement. The component was also to
   fund a voucher program for about 1,000 exceptional students to pursue further professional certification.
   This component was partially dropped at the June 2017 restructuring, but its activities that were already
   under design, procurement, or construction to support seven selected institutes' infrastructure continued
   under the original project envelope, and the voucher program was continued to permit a small number of
   students at two institutes to complete their programs and graduate.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



3. Improving teacher competencies (appraisal: US$6.9 million) was to develop an infrastructure for in-
service training for technical teachers and for building a pool of master trainers. In this area, the project was
to collaborate closely with the German Agency for Technical Cooperation, which was already involved in
pre-service and in-service technical teacher training. By preparing approximately 750 teachers and 60
master trainers, it was envisioned that the component would enable the Technical Teachers Training
Institute (TTTI) to become sustainable in terms of faculty resources by the end of the project period. This
component was dropped at the June 2017 restructuring, with its activities redesigned under a new
component.

4. Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (appraisal: US$5.5 million; actual: US$7.26 million)
was to finance third-party monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of student learning outcomes, teacher
performance, and implementation of institutional development plans under the second
component; satisfaction surveys of private sector partners; tracer studies of graduates from project-
supported schools; and a public awareness campaign to sensitize high school student on TVET
opportunities. External impact evaluation studies were also to be financed by this component. At the June
2017 restructuring, the component was renamed to "project management and technical assistance,"
primarily to mobilize additional technical and operational staff to support the delivery of new disbursement-
linked indicator (DLI)-based activities (detailed below).

The 2017 restructuring also added a fifth component:

5. TVET sector reform (original: US$15 million; actual: US$4.7 million), to support delivery of priority trades
and upgrade TVET teacher competencies. Planned activities included the operationalization of Lead
Institutes that would support (i) TVET teacher assignments in priority trades, (ii) domestic in-service
teacher training, (iii) implementation of revised curricula in partner institutes in priority trades, (iv) increases
in the share of practical training in the teaching-learning process in partner schools, and (v) strengthening of
industry linkages and engagement of practitioners in the classroom. The component was also to support
teacher policy development and implementation, curriculum reform for grades 13-14 in priority trades, and
teacher assessment.

A 2018 restructuring added a sixth component:

6. Financing of teacher salaries at the National Institute of Management and Administration (NIMA)
and Afghanistan National Institute of Music (ANIM) (original: US$1.57 million; actual: US$1.57 million)
was to finance teacher salaries at the two specified institutes on a declining basis, as the government
progressively scaled up civil service staff in each institute.

A 2019 restructuring added a seventh component:

7. Infrastructure upgrades at the Kabul Auto Mechanic Institute (KAMI) and three lead institutes and
measures to mitigate gender-based violence (GBV) risks (original: US$2.5 million; actual: US$2.5
million) was to support safety and security upgrades at KAMI and Lead Institutes, and to add mitigation
measures for GBV.

A 2020 restructuring added a COVID-19 response component:

8. Supporting COVID-19 response through an Alternative Learning Program (ALP) (US$7.8 million;
actual: US$7.8 million) was to establish a distance learning platform, develop and deliver multi-channel


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



   content to reach students via a variety of methods during pandemic-related restrictions and lockdowns, and
   disseminate digital content.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$55 million Grant from the International Development Association.
   The government was to contribute US$5 million for salaries of some staff and technical teacher trainees,
   and the original budget included US$4.1 million in incremental operating costs and US$3.2 million in
   contingencies, bringing the total planned costs at appraisal to US$60 million. Actual disbursement was
   US$38.85 million. US$9.98 million was cancelled.

   The project was approved on May 19, 2013 and became effective on June 12, 2013. Its mid-term review
   took place in October 2015. The project closed on June 30, 2021, three years later than its original closing
   date of June 30, 2018. It was restructured five times:

         June 7, 2017: This restructuring responded to the new human capital priorities of a new government,
            focusing on a critical set of outputs included in the original project that were anticipated to contribute
            most directly to employment-focused outcomes: teacher training, strengthening of select TVET
            institutes (Lead Institutes), and enhancing linkages with the private sector. It introduced a results-
            based financing approach leveraging DLIs.
           October 4, 2018: This restructuring updated the implementing agency to the newly established
            TVET Authority (TVETA), introduced by government decree on April 21, 2018. In addition, a new
            component was introduced to reallocate unused funds to finance salaries for NIMA and ANIM, as
            well as other activities geared toward strengthening TVETA capacity.
           December 18, 2019: This restructuring addressed social and environmental safeguards issues that
            had arisen at NIMA and KAMI. It also expanded the voucher program to include 50-80 additional
            students, and established a Youth Connecting Hub at TVETA. Financing was adjusted for some
            DLIs.
           July 25, 2020: This restructuring responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by introducing condensed
            procedures for implementation of distance learning plans. It also reduced the DLI envelope from
            US$10.7 million to US$4.7 million and dropped several DLIs, allocating that US$6 million to the ALP,
            given that several of the anticipated training and assessment activities were no longer possible
            under lockdown restrictions.
           June 28, 2021: US$9.98 million in project financing was cancelled because of activities that could
            not be completed due to COVID-19-related delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were responsive to country context at appraisal. In the decade preceding the
project, Afghanistan had experienced rapid economic growth and steady growth of the formal sector. Even

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



though the official unemployment rate was low (8.2 percent in 2012), around 77 percent of workers were
underemployed and earned low salaries. There was a growing need for skilled labor. In a 2012 survey of
small and medium enterprises in six major cities of Afghanistan, 53 percent of employers said they wanted
to hire new employees, but 36 percent viewed lack of skills as a bottleneck, and 26 percent said they were
never able to find employees with the right set of skills and adequate training. The TVET system was
enrolling a growing number of students -- from 20,000 in 2007-08 to 70,000 in 2012-13 -- but a large
proportion of the 10,000 graduates annually were not able to find jobs. This mismatch between supply and
demand was due to the low quality of TVET delivery stemming from systemic deficiencies and low capacity
of TVET service providers. According to the Emergency Project Paper (EPP, pp. 5-6), the critical barriers to
reform of the TVET system were the absence of a robust institutional system for the sector, which was
excessively fragmented; poor quality of education, including lack of standardized curricula and training
materials; the absence of a reliable labor market information system; and poor linkages between the labor
market and the TVET sector, with no mechanisms available for TVET providers to interact with industry.
The project was intended to address this circular problem, where policies for economic development could
not be implemented fully because the needed skills were nonexistent, and there was little investment in
skills training because of insufficient motivation and pathways for industry to engage.

At the same time, Afghanistan was and remains a highly volatile political and security environment. At the
time of project preparation, the country was anticipating presidential election and a security transition when
international forces were scheduled to depart in 2014. With potential economic turbulence expected as part
of that transition, the project aimed to focus on intensive capacity-building measures, especially for civil
servants and technical teachers, so that these human resources would be available in the post-transition
period.

This project's objectives were considerably less ambitious than those of its predecessor project. The
Afghanistan Skills Development Project (US$15.25 million, 2008-2014, P102573) aimed to increase the
number of immediately employable graduates by building, in stages, a high-quality TVET system that is
equitable, market-responsive, and cost-effective. That project's outcome was rated Moderately Satisfactory
by its ICR and by IEG, as it reached downwardly revised targets for graduates and their employment,
but key legislation was not passed during project implementation to enable planned institutional reforms in
the sector. It was therefore reasonable for this project to have crafted objectives that focused on more
fundamental elements of institutional reform.

The project was relevant to government strategy across its lifetime. The Afghanistan National Development
Strategy at appraisal (2009-2013), if successfully implemented, would have led to a significant increase in
local demand for skilled labor. The project aimed to enable the TVET system to meet this demand through
institutional reforms. Among other national education plans, the National Priority Program One, under its
Labor Program (Sustainable Decent Work Through Skills Development and Employment Policies for Job
Rich Growth), focused on development of human resource capacity to meet the skill demands of the
market; it emphasized that the government, private sector, and civil society should work together to form a
coherent approach to the development of human resources capacity. The National Education Interim Plan
(2011-2013) proposed increased access to TVET through the opening of new TVET centers in districts, as
well as quality improvement in TVET delivery. Overall, the project was intended to improve the institutional
environment in the institutes providing skills training, filling a critical link between supply and demand for
labor market-relevant skills.

The project was also relevant to Bank strategy. One of the three pillars of the Bank's Afghanistan Interim
Strategy Note (ISN, 2012-2014) focused on inclusive growth and jobs. The project also supported the ISN's

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



               cross-cutting agenda of gender mainstreaming by targeting government-run schools and institutes, which
               not only catered to economically disadvantaged youth from distant and insecure provinces by giving them
               free education, but also operated under a government policy that required at least 30 percent female
               representation. The objectives continued to be relevant to the Bank's most recent Country Partnership
               Framework (2017-2020), which contained pillars on (i) building strong and accountable institutions to
               enable the state to fulfill its core mandate to deliver basic services to its citizens, (ii) supporting inclusive
               growth, and (iii) deepening social inclusion. The Bank's forward-looking "2020 Priorities for Inclusive
               Development in Afghanistan" called for increasing attention to TVET and skills development, with a focus
               on demand-driven skills that are targeted to emerging needs in the private sector.

               The objectives as revised in 2017 remained relevant to country context and Bank strategy, and they
               responded directly to an evolving government strategy that increased focus on teacher competencies and
               strengthening of TVET institutional capacity. However, the move away from engagement with the private
               sector, prompted by lack of systematic information on potential employers (ICR, p. 25), decreased the
               relevance of the revised project.

               The EPP (p. 6) noted that formal and informal TVET systems in Afghanistan fell under two different
               institutional jurisdictions: the former with DMTVET and the Ministry of Education, and the latter with the
               Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs and Martyred and Disabled. Given the high transaction costs and potential
               coordination issues of working with two different ministries, the Bank prepared a separate project for
               informal TVET.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the potential for employment and higher earnings of graduates from technical and vocational
                             education and training (TVET) schools and institutes through improvements in the skills delivery system

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that formulation and implementation of a sectoral strategy, a
                             teacher policy, and information systems covering both the labor market and the overall TVET system would
                             strengthen the institutional capacity of TVET. The provision of grants to TVET institutes and schools to update
                             and implement their development plans, supported by upgraded infrastructure at some institutes, the
                             involvement of private sector representatives in TVET institute governance, capacity-building for monitors,
                             inspectors, and administrators, certification of graduates' competencies against international standards, and
                             provision of vouchers for students would lead to improved performance of TVET schools and institutes. In-
                             service training for TVET teachers, rehabilitation and equipping of the Teacher Training Institute, and
                             regular assessment of teacher competencies would lead to improvement in TVET teacher competencies.

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



These intermediate outcomes -- strengthened institutional capacity of the overall TVET system, improved
performance of TVET schools and institutes, and improved teacher competencies -- would constitute
improvements in the skills delivery system, which would increase the potential for employment and higher
earnings of TVET graduates. Critical assumptions underlying this theory of change included the feasibility of
engaging representatives from the private sector, the utility of international benchmarking for occupational
skills standards, the extent to which institutional development grants would facilitate change and reform in
TVET institutes, the continuity of government support for reforms, and ongoing demand for skilled workers.



Outputs

Outputs related to teacher training:

A draft teacher management policy framework was approved by the government's Human Capital Committee
and disseminated (a DLI), meeting the target. The framework outlined recruitment criteria for TVET teachers,
ensuring that prior industry expertise and experience would be valued in the hiring process, and specified
supervision and mentoring modalities and performance assessment processes. The policy was under
implementation by the end of the project period.

Three institutes were designated as Lead Institutes to support delivery of priority trades and met all the
criteria for Lead Institute Operationalization, meeting the target. These institutes reformed their curricula and
piloted competency-based modules, increased the share of practical training and participation of private-
sector representation in their governance councils, and completed GBV and safety assessments (with
mitigation measures).

The number of TVET institutes implementing revised competency-based curricula for priority trades (a DLI)
increased from one in 2017 to 17 in 2021, surpassing the target of nine institutes. The project team noted that
1,763 teachers participated in various forms of teacher training as part of the piloting and rollout of the new
curricula or through overseas training; 319 of those teachers were female.1,189 registered TVET teachers
were assessed to evaluate minimum competencies, not reaching the target of 1,500. The assessments were
interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The percentage of TVET teachers who attained minimum
competencies in priority trades increased from 15 percent in 2017 to 100 percent in 2021, surpassing the
target of 70 percent. This teacher competency result is based on the 42 teachers who completed international
training at two institutes in India (see below); it is unlikely that this was a representative sample of teachers. A
planned, more comprehensive assessment of teacher competence (a DLI that was eventually dropped) was
not undertaken.

42 teachers received international training in priority trades, meeting the target (this was initially a DLI with a
target of 300 teachers, revised to 200 teachers; the DLI was eventually dropped). These 42 teachers had
passed their initial assessments and enrolled in teacher training institutes at two Indian universities to further
upgrade their technical competencies. No teachers who had passed their initial assessments furthered their
training at domestic training institutes (a DLI), not reaching the target of 400 teachers furthering their training
in-country, because of COVID-related delays and lockdown of the TTTI training site.

The share of female teachers was 43 percent in 2021, not achieving the target of 50 percent.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



206 teachers were engaged in distance learning activities at project closure, exceeding the target of 200.
These teachers produced 550 online practical training videos. 41 percent of teachers who supported distance
learning activities were female.

79 percent of teacher grievances were responded to or resolved within the stipulated time, exceeding the
target of 70 percent.



Other outputs:

A TVET Strategy and Plan for 2013-2018 was developed in 2013 and approved by DMTVET, meeting the
target; however, DMTVET did not incorporate suggestions made by the Bank. The strategy was under
implementation until the establishment of TVETA in 2018. The project team later added that the project also
supported the development of a comprehensive national TVET sector strategy (2019-2024); a TVET
institutional reform plan (2019-2021), from which three-quarters of recommendations were implemented by
the end of 2021; and a new TVET law that was endorsed by parliament in 2021 and is in the process of
finalization.

Recognition grants worth US$30,000 were provided for 15 selected schools and institutes in a first selection
round. However, further scheduled rounds were not implemented due to lack of necessary technical capacity
at the institutes, causing delays in development of business plans, and poor financial management capacity
of the government, which delayed disbursements.

100 National Occupational Skills Standards were benchmarked to international standards, not meeting the
target of 140 standards.

336 students were awarded vouchers to cover TVET course fees and reading materials, not reaching the
target of 1,200 students. 4,169 total students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning, not
reaching the target of 5,000 students. This result represents students who benefited from new curricula
piloted in six trades. Of these, 1,732 were female, exceeding the target of 1,500 female students.

1,216 students and 85 teachers were trained in a code of conduct, not reaching the target of 1,400 students
and 100 teachers. A final scheduled round of training was not possible due to pandemic-related school
closures.

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the project assisted with the development of an Alternative Learning
Plan that encompassed a wide range of digital and distance education services tailored to Afghanistan's
context. Activities included preparation and distribution of 2,064 sets of chapter notes for the project-focused
priority trades; production of 7,550 video tutorials illustrating practical elements of TVET course work; and
development of the country's first-ever online skills-related portal to act as a repository for the public on the
newly developed skills-related curriculum.

TVET awareness campaigns were conducted in 11 provinces, not meeting the target of 20 provinces. These
campaigns included job fairs, voucher programs, and recognition grant workshops.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



There were 42,724 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 40,500 beneficiaries. Of those, 788
were female, exceeding the target of 220.



Outcomes

The number of students who sat for certification examination administered by international certification
providers increased from 1,058 in 2015 to 1,609 in 2016, not reaching the target of 18,000 students. The
share of students who passed the certification examination remained stagnant at 68 percent, not reaching the
target of 75 percent. Learning outcome data is presented for only one institute, NIMA, where scores improved
at a level of 5 (on a scale of 1-10), not meeting the target of 7.

The share of students from supported TVET institutions who were employed within six months after
graduation increased from 52 percent in 2015 to 60 percent in 2016, not reaching the target of 62 percent. No
more recent data or relevant earnings data are available.



Achievement of the original objective is rated Modest. Although the project's interventions plausibly improved
the skills delivery system through its interventions related to teacher training and curriculum, data on
outcomes related to student skills (a proxy for potential for employability) and wages were unavailable beyond
2016.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve TVET teacher competencies and curriculum in selected priority trades

Revised Rationale
The "Outputs Related to Teacher Training" listed under the first objective are the outputs and outcomes
relevant to this objective, and the elements of the original theory of change related to teacher training and
curriculum development apply here. The key outcomes related to improved TVET teacher competencies and
curriculum were:

      The number of TVET institutes implementing revised competency-based curricula for priority trades (a
       DLI) increased from one in 2017 to 17 in 2021, surpassing the target of nine institutes. The 17
       institutes that piloted and/or adopted the new curricula were the three Lead Institutes and 14 others.
      The percentage of TVET teachers who attained minimum competencies in priority trades increased
       from 15 percent in 2017 to 100 percent in 2021, surpassing the target of 70 percent. However, the
       teacher competency result is based on 42 teachers who graduated from two institutes in India; this is
       likely not a representative sample of all teachers trained under the project.


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



                              Achievement of the revised objective is rated Modest, based on the information on improved teacher
                              competencies being taken from only a small number of teachers who attended two international
                              training institutes.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            With achievement of the single original objective rated Modest, overall efficacy under the original objectives is
                            also rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Insufficient evidence
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            With achievement of the single revised objective rated Modest, overall efficacy under the revised objectives is
                            also rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   The cost-benefit analysis at appraisal (EPP, Annex 10, pp. 98-103) estimated direct and indirect benefits
   through improvements in the internal efficiency of TVET schools, producing increased graduation rates and
   trade certification, and in external efficiency through increased skilled employment and better earnings of
   graduates as a result of higher productivity. It assumed a 30 percent earnings premium and 20 percent higher
   probability of employment for TVET graduates with trade certification relative to other students in the TVET
   system. The project was also assumed to create positive externalities, with more firms interested in hiring newly
   trained students with relevant skills. Based on a ten percent discount rate and 25-year time horizon, the analysis
   found a net benefit of US$51.7 million and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 23 percent.

   The analysis at closing found a net present value of US$2 million and IRR of 14 percent. The lower IRR at
   closing is not surprising, given the project's reduced ambition at restructuring, though it still exceeded the
   opportunity cost of capital. A 14 percent IRR is comparable with other skills development projects; a Bank-


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



financed project in North Macedonia was rated as substantially efficient with an IRR ranging from seven to ten
percent, and one in Punjab was rated as substantially efficient with an IRR of 16-20 percent (ICR, p. 47).

The ICR (p. 22) notes that implementation was "inefficient" and project management "less than effective" prior to
the 2017 restructuring, after which the project "adapted and adjusted," increasing the efficiency of
implementation. Inefficiency prior to restructuring was driven by weak leadership and ownership by DMTVET,
problematic implementation arrangements, high costs of engaging international experts, and lack of effective
strategy and incentives to encourage teachers to attend TVET training. Although there were improvements from
2017 forward, stemming from TVETA's strong commitment to overall sector reform and strengthening of the
project management unit, there were still shortcomings that affected achievement of outcomes. The TTTI could
not fully resume teacher training programs because of the COVID-19 lockdown and delays in allocating training
budgets, which "negatively affected the project's progress in teacher training-related indicators" (ICR, p. 24).
Financial management capacity was weak, largely due to inadequate staffing and difficulty in adjusting to
results-based financing (which was new to the Ministry of Finance and other counterpart entities), leading to
ineligible expenditures that were unresolved until just before project closing. The ICR describes TVETA leaders
and project management staff as inadequately informed about the results-based financing modality, "confused
about the status of the project's available financing for different components, which delayed several critical
project activities and complicated the clearing of ineligible expenses" (ICR, p. 24). Funds were not fully
reconciled until June 2021, the month the project closed, at which point the financial management rating was
upgraded from Moderately Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory. Similarly, procurement performance,
although improved in the spring of 2018, experienced delays in preparing technical specifications and
processing during and following the pandemic.

In March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, more than 300 TVET institutions involving 60,000 students and
3,800 teachers were closed. The emergency response plan, the ALP, was efficiently implemented, including
preparation of chapter-note learning materials and their wide digital distribution; deployment of teachers to
develop self-study guides; production of 7,500 competency-based video lectures; and establishment of an on-
line portal to serve as a repository for curriculum and content. However, all of the allocated ALP budget could
not be spent because of uncertainties around the duration of school closures, the need to revise and adapt
implementation plans to rapidly evolving circumstances, and delays due to government-required mandatory
secondary review of all COVID-19 response projects.

Given significant implementation inefficiencies, some of which persisted following the 2017 restructuring and
impacted achievement of results, project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                23.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                               14.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were substantially relevant, with the revised objectives remaining relevant to country
context and Bank strategy, and adapting appropriately to shifting government priorities; however, relevance
decreased somewhat at the 2017 restructuring with the move away from engagement with the private sector.
The original objective to increase the potential for employment and higher earnings of graduates was modestly
achieved, due to a combination of poor outcomes and lack of data on improved skills, employment, or earnings.
The revised objective to improve teacher competencies and curriculum was also modestly achieved, with the
number of institutes implementing revised competency-based curricula surpassing targets, but teacher
competency data provided for only a small, non-representative sample of teachers. Efficiency is rated modest
due to evidence of significant implementation inefficiency.

With substantial relevance, modest efficacy, and modest efficiency, outcome under both the original and revised
objectives is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Overall outcome is therefore Moderately Unsatisfactory, reflecting significant shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project supported important investments in institutional strengthening and capacity building for TVETA,
as well as revised curricula for priority trades, systems for teacher assessment, and GBV measures that had
sufficient support to be sustained. Under the ALP, the developed capacity for distance learning could be an
important resource to meet the needs of remote and underserved populations. However, following the
August 15, 2021 political crisis and change in government, the project's outcomes are at high risk. Key
TVETA senior leaders and technical specialists fled the country. There is no information on how many
trained teachers remained in the country, especially considering the new administration's difficulties paying
civil service salaries. The project's efforts to train female teachers and students are especially at risk, given
new gender segregation policies and norms that limit women's participation in the job market and in daily life.
In addition, considering the suspension of most development assistance, the economic situation in the
country has degraded significantly; the resulting closure of small and medium enterprises will reduce the
demand for skilled TVET graduates.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared on an emergency basis given the imminent transition in 2014. It addressed key
  development challenges. Lessons learned from the predecessor project included the need to focus on
  the market for skills, the importance of developing a strategic vision for TVET, the need to decentralize
  school administration, the key role of training for technical teachers, the likelihood that the private sector
  would respond positively to opportunities for involvement with governance of TVET institutions, and the
  importance of certifying TVET institutions.

  No new Program Implementation Unit (PMU) was initially set up for the project. The project team later
  confirmed that this decision was in response to a government-wide goal to avoid parallel
  structures. Given the need to move forward quickly, the existing Skills Team within the DMTVET was to
  be responsible for overall implementation, including administration of sub-grants to schools and institutes.
  Financial management and procurement were also to be carried out through the Skills Team,
  with capacity assessed in December 2012 and found to be adequate. An Implementation Support Plan
  was put in place (EPP, pp. 23-24). Overall implementation risk was rated Substantial, based on
  uncertainty surrounding the upcoming 2014 transition and the possibility that a new government
  might de-prioritize or change the focus of the project; governance issues related to transparency in
  personnel management and rent-seeking; and weak implementation and monitoring capacity across the
  TVET system, creating openings for poor governance and fraud. Mitigation measures included the
  appointment of a Project Steering Committee to oversee and monitor progress, as well as close
  supervision by the Bank team (especially of personnel recruitment).

  Ultimately, implementation arrangements were found to be inadequate, as the counterpart lacked
  adequate procurement and financial management capacity. The results framework lacked indicators with
  adequate baselines and realistic targets. Under unusually difficult fragility, conflict & violence (FCV)
  circumstances where some preparatory and readiness steps cannot be fulfilled by task teams, these are
  considered to be moderate shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Despite ongoing security concerns and restrictions posted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank team held
 in-person or virtual supervision missions twice annually. The 2017 restructuring kept the project aligned
 with the government's policy priorities and introduced the results-based financing modality. Further
 restructurings addressed other issues as they arose, including safeguards and GBV issues. According to
 the project team, a stand-alone PMU was eventually created prior to 2018, functioning within and at the
 direction of TVETA. The ICR does not mention whether the project's planned steering committee was ever
 constituted or met, but the project team confirmed that it met on an as-needed basis when significant
 decisions were required. Technical supervision and support was provided to TVETA on its own internal



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



 institutional reforms, based on a Bank-supported institutional assessment and subsequent development of
 a comprehensive institutional reform plan.

 However, as the ICR (p. 27) notes, the DMTVET, TVETA, and PMU lacked the necessary capacity to
 handle financial management and procurement responsibilities as well as the results-based financing
 modality, and safeguards compliance fell short for the majority of the project period. It was incumbent on
 the Bank team to provide additional support for counterparts, from the senior level to line staff, to enable
 compliance with Bank policies and smoother implementation. For example, it is an important shortcoming
 that the "task team found about TVETA's misunderstanding of the results-based financing modality towards
 the end of the project, which limited its ability to react effectively" (ICR, p. 28); appropriately attentive
 supervision would have detected and dealt with this issue in a more timely manner. Nonetheless, in a
 difficult FCV context, the Bank team pushed back on overambitious goals set by TVETA during the second
 half of the project (ICR, p. 28) and continued to address weaknesses in implementation capacity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The DMTVET Skills Team was responsible for project M&E. The initial M&E system was set up around
 monitoring of physical and financial progress; monitoring of indicators through major surveys at baseline,
 mid-term, and completion, and smaller annual surveys in interim years; participatory monitoring; and impact
 evaluation studies and special thematic studies. The project planned to develop a digital MIS, in
 collaboration with UNESCO, to cover all aspects of the project, and also to develop a separate Labor
 Market Information System to strengthen the links between skills training and the market for graduates.

 The initial results framework specified outcome, intermediate outcome, and output indicators that were
 logically linked and effective measures of achievement of the objectives. Most baselines were to be
 determined during the first phases of implementation, once participating schools and institutes were
 selected. A number of the originally-set output and outcome indicator baselines (for percentage of
 graduates employed within six months and share of female beneficiaries) that had been based on
 administrative data were later found to have been inaccurate during the mid-term review; the targets were
 re-set accordingly, retaining the originally targeted percentage change.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was modified during each restructuring (except the final restructuring in 2021) to
  adjust output indicators as activities evolved. Outcome indicators were revised at the June 2017
  restructuring to accommodate the project's narrowed focus and reduced scope. A comprehensive, user-

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



  friendly MIS was developed as planned. Prior to restructuring, the project did not provide regular updates
  on some key outcome indicators, including student placement, and learning outcome data were collected
  only once. Surveys were limited to NIMA and did not include other participating institutes, and no data
  were collected on the earnings of graduates. After 2017, data collection improved significantly, with
  regular updating of key indicators and external verification of most DLIs in 2017-2020. The ICR does not
  clearly explain the impact of the adoption of results-based financing or the DLIs on the measurement and
  interpretation of results.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 26) notes that M&E data were "underutilized" to inform management decisions prior to the
  2017 restructuring. The ICR reports that, after 2017, TVETA used available M&E data to inform the
  development and implementation of the national TVET strategy, TVETA institutional reform plan, and the
  APL. However, the extent to which this was actually the case is uncertain, given the ICR's other
  statements about the extent to which counterparts struggled to understand the results-based financing
  modality.

  Overall, in view of substantial shortcomings in M&E implementation and utilization, overall M&E Quality
  is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered OP 4.01 on
   Environmental Assessment. Civil works were expected to have limited environmental impacts because they
   entailed renovation of existing schools. Any new small buildings were to be constructed on land already
   owned by the Ministry of Education. An Environmental and Social Management Framework was developed,
   with environmental guidelines and checklists for contractors. Six site-specific environmental and social
   management plans (ESMPs) were prepared for sub-projects at each of the six institutes originally
   envisaged to participate in the project. An environmental focal person was to be recruited by the Skills
   Team to ensure implementation of safeguards.

   Safeguards performance was rated satisfactory by Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) until September
   2017, when the rating was downgraded to moderately satisfactory due to general low capacity and the lack
   of a dedicated safeguards specialist. The ISR in April 2018 further downgraded safeguards performance to
   moderately unsatisfactory because of delays in the recruitment process for this specialist and lack of
   attention to social safeguards-related requirements. The project had issued contracts for the Blind School
   without appending cleared ESMPs, a clear instance of non-compliance with the Bank's safeguards policies.
   The ICR did not state whether or how this issue was resolved, and the project team could not provide
   further information.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



   In 2019, an assessment of the physical and institutional capacity of the thee Lead Institutes and KAMI
   flagged two critical safeguards issues: allegations of 3-4 fatal incidents at KAMI and of GBV at NIMA. At
   KAMI, the project conducted extensive technical assessments, developed initial specifications, and
   prepared initial procurement plans to rectify shortcomings. However, given the unexpected scope of these
   works, there was not sufficient time to identify contractors and initiate construction under the auspices of the
   project. GBV risks were proactively addressed. An Action Plan was developed, and all of its provisions were
   implemented: formal GBV-related policies, procedures, and codes of conduct were prepared; 1,300
   students, teachers, and staff were trained on these new standards; formal, safe, confidential reporting
   mechanisms were developed; relevant staff supervision and management was strengthened; and
   infrastructure was improved to address student well-being and safety.

   The project's safeguards rating was upgraded to moderately satisfactory in the October 2020 ISR. The ICR
   did not provide a statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies. The project team later
   confirmed that the project was in compliance at closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   As described in Section 5, financial management capacity was weak. After the 2017 restructuring, the
   financial management rating was downgraded from moderately satisfactory to moderately unsatisfactory
   because of ineligible expenditures. The rating did not improve until project closing in June 2021, when it
   was raised to moderately satisfactory. The ICR does not report on audits. The project team later confirmed
   that, by project closing, clean audits were completed and accepted by the Bank's financial management
   team.

   As described in Section 5, low procurement capacity led to significant implementation delays. The
   procurement rating was satisfactory until February of 2015, at which time it was downgraded to moderately
   satisfactory; it was again downgraded to moderately unsatisfactory in June 2016 and to unsatisfactory in
   December 2016. The downgrades were primarily related to significant wait times for Ministry of Education
   finalization and approval of contracts. The rating was upgraded to moderately satisfactory in April 2018
   after the project awarded three contracts and hired two competent procurement staff. The rating remained
   at moderately satisfactory through project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Skills Development Project (P132742)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Both the original and revised
                                Moderately            Moderately                  development objectives were
Outcome
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              modestly achieved, and
                                                                                  efficiency was modest.
                                                                                  There were moderate
                                                                                  shortcomings with the project's
                                                                                  initial results framework and
                                                                                  implementation arrangements.
                                                                                  The Client lacked understanding
                                                                                  and readiness to undertake
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory     results-based financing. As
                                                                                  implementation progressed, the
                                                                                  Bank team did not provide
                                                                                  adequate support to ensure
                                                                                  compliance with safeguard and
                                                                                  other key policies, and to
                                                                                  facilitate smooth implementation.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 27-28) offered several insightful lessons, including:

Successful implementation of technical and vocational education projects hinges on design
that matches ambition with realities of project context. In this case, even though the Ministry of
Education had limited capacity and the DMTVET was struggling to deliver basic services, the
original project set higher-level goals for accreditation, certification, and demonstrating increased
earnings of TVET graduates. Setting the bar too high can dilute a project's focus on more
fundamental, achievable results.

Introduction of results-based financing can produce desired results only when the
counterpart fully understands the modality. In this case, capacity at all levels was insufficient to
benefit from the RBF incentive structure, a situation that deteriorated even further when the project
came under new institutional arrangements and leadership.

Institutional capacity building can be usefully incorporated as a TVET project objective in
contexts where the skills development sector is relatively new and the foundations for
sectoral development are not yet set. In this case, capacity was overestimated at the outset, and
the project struggled throughout its lifetime to match capacity with planned activities and outcomes.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Second Skills Development Project (P132742)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was prepared after the August 15, 2021 political crisis. Given the authorizing environment at the time,
the ICR team could not interact with the counterpart, project management unit, or other partners involved in
project implementation. As a result, the TVETA could not develop its own Borrower's Report or provide
comments on the draft ICR. The ICR was therefore based on a review of project documents and relevant Bank
staff and TVET development partners.

The ICR was clear, internally consistent, and results-driven. It carefully laid out the project's restructurings, the
critical assumptions underlying the original project's theory of change, and the evolution of the project across its
lifetime. It provided useful tables with additional detail on outcome indicators to supplement the information
presented in the regular data sheet.

However, key information and analysis were missing. The relationships between the planned outputs and
intended outcomes were not always made clear. The ICR did not provide a complete list of DLIs, making it
difficult to understand the planned or actual functioning and impact of results-based financing after the 2017
restructuring. There was insufficient detail on implementation efficiency, safeguards, financial management,
and procurement. Annex 3 on Project Costs did not provide amounts at approval. The ICR appropriately opted
for a split rating methodology, given the revision of the objectives, but it applied that methodology incorrectly,
assessing the project in phases rather than against the original and the revised objectives across the project's
entire lifetime.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                       Page 18 of 18
