     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023016

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P156363                                    Nai Manzil Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57380                                  30-Jun-2021                                          49,569,315.57

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Oct-2015                                30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             49,569,315.57                                               0.00

 Actual                                         49,569,315.57                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shiva Chakravarti           Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Sharma                                                   Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO is to improve completion of secondary education and market-driven skills training for targeted youth
   from Minority communities (Financing Agreement, p.4).

   Explanatory note on Minority communities: According to the PAD (p.1), the Government of India classifies six
   religious communities, viz. Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, and Zoroastrians (Parsis) as
   Minorities. Together, Minorities comprise almost 18 percent of India’s population, or about 225 million people.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



   This ICR Review applied a split rating because associated outcome targets were revised downward during
   implementation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Oct-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Results Based Financing for Increased Education Attainment and Market-Driven
   Training (Approval: US$45 million; Actual: US$48.33 million): The component aimed to provide support
   to members of minority communities who had discontinued their education and did not have a formal
   education certification for Grade 8 or 10. The main aspect of the project was to support hiring of Project
   Implementing Agencies (PIAs). The key implementing instrument was “Results-oriented Performance
   Agreements” between the Ministry of Minority Affairs (MoMA) and the PIAs and the funds disbursed to PIAs
   were based on agreed standards on education and labor market outcomes. The PIAs provided
   nonresidential integrated education and skill training for 9 to 12 months of which a minimum of 3 months
   were devoted to skill training compliant with the National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF). PIAs also
   provided support to beneficiaries to acquire employment after the completion of the integrated program.
   Beneficiaries received a monthly stipend for the duration of the program: INR 1,000 for six months of
   education, INR, 1,500 for the three months of skills training, and INR 2,000 for two months of work
   placement activities.

   Component 2: Technical Assistance for Implementation of the Nai Manzil Scheme (Approval: US$5
   million; Actual: US$1.67 million): This component aimed to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
   Minority Affairs for project implementation, planning and policy development. The specific areas of support
   included the creation of Program Management Unit (PMU) for day-to-day activities, hiring of an Independent
   Verification Agency (IVA) to validate the performance agreements, hiring of M&E agency, and hiring of a
   communication firm to document and disseminate best practices.

   Explanatory Note: “Nai Manzil” Scheme or “New Horizons” Scheme was launched in 2015 and aims at
   improving labor market outcomes of Minority youth by offering an integrated program for education and
   market relevant skill training (PAD, p.4).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



   At appraisal, the project was estimated at US$100 million, out of which US$50 million were financed by the
   World Bank through an IDA credit and US$50 million were borrower contributions. All the amount was
   disbursed by the end of the project.

   The project became effective on October 29, 2015, and closed on June 3, 2021. The project underwent four
   restructurings.

   1. The first restructuring of June 8, 2019, made changes to financial management.

   2. The second restructuring of October 29, 2019, revised the results framework. The PDO indicator, “Share
   of enrolled targeted beneficiaries who receive a secondary education (Grade 10) certificate through open
   schooling,” from a target of 66 percent to 35 percent (ICR, p.49).

   3. The third restructuring occurred on August 26, 2020, and changed two PDO indicators. The indicator,
   “Share of targeted beneficiaries who obtain employment within 6 months after completing the integrated
   program,” was modified such that the requirement of 6 months to get employment was removed and the
   employment rate was calculated for the whole project period. The target was also changed from 52 percent
   to 38. The other indicator, “Share of targeted beneficiaries who are enrolled in further professional
   qualification in education or skills training within 6 months after completing the integrated program,” was
   also modified such that 6 months to enroll in the professional program was removed as a project
   requirement and the education rate was calculated for the whole project period. The target was changed
   from 23 percent to 13 percent.

   4. The final restructuring took place on March 15, 2021. The restructuring reallocated US$3.3 million from
   Component 2 to Component 1.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Nai Manzil or New Horizon scheme sought to improve skill development and educational outcomes of
minority communities that have lower labor market outcomes compared to national averages in
India. The project also set some targets for women, indigenous communities, and minorities with
disabilities. The project was aligned with the Government of India's policy efforts and reforms to support
educational and skilling outcomes for minority communities (ICR, p.6). The project was also aligned with
the CPF (FY 2013-2017) during preparation. Specifically, the project was aligned with Outcome 1.3,
Improved demand-driven skills for productive employment; Outcome 3.4, Improved access and quality of
education along with a specific focus on gender. The project was in line with the diagnosis of the 2018
Systematic Country diagnostic that emphasized the importance of “inclusive growth creation” through
“better and faster job creation (SCD, p.79)”. The project continued to be aligned with the country strategy
at closing (CPF FY 2018-2022). Specifically, the project was aligned with Objective 2.4, Increase access
to quality, market-relevant skills development; Objective 2.5, Enabling access to more quality jobs for
women; and Objective 3.2, Improve the quality of education in schools and colleges.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



               The second component of the project focused on institutional strengthening activities for the Ministry of
               Minority Affairs and introduced the results-based-financing instrument. Both components,
               integrated education and skills component and the capacity building component were aligned with the
               World Bank Group’s global experience (ICR, p.6). The project specifically targeted minority communities
               through both demand and supply-side interventions. On the supply side, the results-based financing
               provided an integrated educational and skills program. On the demand side, mobilization activities
               tailored to the specific context and financial incentives addressed unique constraints faced by minority
               communities (Impact Evaluation, p.48).
               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve completion of secondary education for targeted youth from minority communities

                             Rationale
                             The ICR constructed a theory of change ex-post using the project’s results framework. The Theory of change
                             of the project was clear and convincing. To improve the completion of secondary education and market-driven
                             skills, the project supported MoMA to hire Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) that provided an integrated
                             education and skills program to beneficiaries in areas with a high minority population. The PIAs also
                             supported the beneficiaries in enrolling with institutions to acquire their formal certifications at Grade 8 or
                             Grade 10 level and provided employment placement support. The funds disbursed to PIAs were based on
                             beneficiary outcomes through Results-based financing.

                             The expected outcomes included (i) improved secondary education completion rates among beneficiaries that
                             complete their certification through open schools (ii) improved skills certification rates among beneficiaries (iii)
                             improved employment rates among beneficiaries (iv) improved enrollment rates in further professional
                             qualification in education or skills training. This process change was underlined by institutional strengthening
                             activities to facilitate implementation and monitoring activities along with increasing the Ministry’s capacity to
                             support minority communities through future initiatives. The final expected impact was the “Empowerment of
                             youths from minority communities.”

                             The main assumption underpinning the theory of change was that youth in minority communities lack access
                             to secondary education opportunities, and therefore, educational training along with support for achieving a
                             formal certification would lead to better educational outcomes. This gave the beneficiaries a second chance to
                             complete their secondary education through the National Institute for Open Schooling (NIOS) or State
                             Institute for Open Schooling (SIOS). The hired PIAs conducted extensive and culturally sensitive outreach
                             following the guidelines provided by MoMA and validated by WB safeguard specialists to ensure that the
                             intended beneficiaries were included in the project. Community engagement such as that with religious
                             leaders, NGOs, CSOs, and local activities benefitted the recruitment effort. The project also accounted for the


                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



beneficiaries’ financial constraints by providing them with a monthly stipend during the program to pay for
expenses such as transportation.

Another key assumption underlying the theory of change is that the performance agreements with PIAs would
lead to expected outcomes. The PIAs were selected competitively and based on their history of executing
similar programs along with the quality of other parameters such as instructor quality and existing
arrangements with employers (ICR, p.22). The PIAs also conducted a comprehensive skill gap assessment at
the start of the program (Impact Evaluation, p.8). Yet, there was variability in implementation capacity across
PIAs where some PIAs performed better than others. The project implementation illustrated that the targeted
beneficiaries were a unique subset of the population and required additional support (ICR, p.9). Some of
these issues were addressed through a capacity-building workshop and the engagement of the Ministry with
two additional agencies to improve some outcomes (ICR, p.40).

The instrument of ‘Results-based financing’ was operationalized using performance agreements between
MoMA and PIAs. These agreements included five disbursement-linked indicators (DLI): (i) Number of student
enrolments (ii) Number of students successfully completing the education component, (iii) Number of students
successfully completing the skills component, (iv) Diversity of content offered by the PIAs and their reach in
the most under-served geographic pockets, and (v) Verification of the effective implementation of Nai Manzil
by an independent verification agency. The independent verification agency was a crucial actor in project
implementation because it reported on the compliance of performance agreements.

Thirty-eight competitively selected project implementation agencies (PIAs) implemented the scheme in
development blocks (administrative units) that had a minority population above 25 percent. Once the
geographical areas were selected, the PIAs conducted needs assessments to understand the skill and
education gaps of the beneficiaries, in addition to the local market dynamics to finalize the list of courses for
the training program. Second, PIAs followed uniform guidance prepared by MoMA and validated by WB
safeguard specialists on outreach for recruitment of beneficiaries (Communication Strategy for Project
Implementing Agencies, p.5). Outreach activities included door-to-door visits, newspaper advertisements, and
community engagement activities with key influencing leaders such as religious leaders, activists, and self-
help groups. Religious leaders played a particularly key role in the recruitment of Muslim youth and
women (TTL interview, August 24, 2022). Finally, counseling sessions and aptitude tests were used for the
selection and enrollment of beneficiaries (Impact evaluation, p.56).

The targeted beneficiaries received education training at grade 8 or grade 10 level along with skills training
based on nationally recognized standards. The PIAs supported the students in enrolling with the National
Institute for Open Schooling (NIOS) or State Institute for Open Schooling (SIOS) to obtain their formal
educational certifications. The PIAs also provided employment placement support and tracked the students
for one year after graduation from the Nai-Manzil program to ensure sustainable outcomes. These activities
were expected to improve either employment or enrollment in further formal education. The beneficiaries
received a stipend of INR 1,000 per month for the educational training, INR 1,500 per month for the skills
development training, and INR 2,000 per month for work placement activities to address constraints such as
transportation costs (Impact evaluation, p.83).

Outputs

      21,684 beneficiaries received a Grade 10 certificate
      49,082 beneficiaries received an education certificate (Grade 8 or 10)


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nai Manzil Project (P156363)




      25,556 women received an education certificate (9,930 received Grade 10 certification and 15,626
       received Grade 8 certification)
      98,697 beneficiaries were enrolled in Nai Manzil.
      49,813 of the total beneficiaries were female.
      40,515 enrolled beneficiaries were from Minority Concentrated Blocks



Intermediate results

63.18 percent of enrolled beneficiaries received a Grade 8 certification for a baseline of 0 in 2016, short of the
target of 66 percent.

41.05 percent of enrolled beneficiaries were from minority concentrated blocks for a baseline of 0 in 2016,
exceeding the target of 30 percent.

An annual report with information including placement, enrolment, and certification was prepared and shared
online in 2021

A Web-based Management Information System was in place at the end of the project in 2021

98,697 beneficiaries benefitted from direct learning interventions a baseline of 0 in 2016, exceeding the target
of 70,000.

98,697 beneficiaries benefitted from direct interventions to enhance learning for a baseline of 0 in 2016,
exceeding the target of 70,000.

49, 813 beneficiaries benefiting from direct interventions to enhance learning were women for a baseline of 0
in 2016, exceeding the target of 30,000.

Outcomes

The PIAs were able to reach out and recruit intended beneficiaries as indicated by the impact evaluation and
intermediate indicator 2. Forty-one percent of the enrolled beneficiaries were from minority concentrated
blocks, exceeding the target of 30 percent. The PIAs were able to deliver on disbursement-linked indicators
as indicated by the outputs and intermediate indicators. The Ministry of Minority Affairs benefitted from a web-
based monitoring system that upgraded the ministry’s existing portal to manage data from several projects
including Nai Manzil. There are limited indicators to assess the ministry’s enhanced capacity, but anecdotal
evidence suggests that the ministry was able to capitalize on the MIS and the project facilitated relationships
between the ministry and other relevant stakeholders (TTL interview, August 24, 2022).

The evidence for achievement of expected outcomes comes from three sources: the Project Management
Information System, independent baseline and end line surveys carried out by an M&E agency, and an
independent evaluation carried out by a separate firm (ICR, p.11). According to the project MIS, the project
achieved modest efficacy: 39.19 percent of the beneficiaries received their secondary certificate, falling short
of the target of 66 percent. According to the baseline and end-line survey results, 54% of the beneficiaries



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



reported receiving secondary education. The ICR points out that these surveys and the independent
evaluation seem to “suffer from response bias” and showed more positive results than the project MIS.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve completion of secondary education for targeted youth from minority communities

Revised Rationale
There were no changes to the PDO. The target for the indicator attached to this objective was revised from 66
percent to 35 percent. The original target was set according to the average national pass rates for the
National Institute for Open Schooling (NIOS) which were 40-50 percent because data for disaggregated
minorities were not available at the start of the project. The targets were revised according to the data
collected by the project MIS (ICR, p.9). The Theory of change can be seen under Objective 1.

In addition to the results discussed under the original objective above, 39.19 percent of beneficiaries received
a secondary education certificate through open schooling for a baseline of 0 in 2016, exceeding the
revised target of 35 percent. The surveys with a control group also showed a wide difference between the
achievement of Grade 8 or 10 certificates among the treatment group (73 percent from a baseline of 14
percent) and the control group (24 percent from a baseline of 19 percent), though the ICR points out that
these results suffer from response bias.

Under the revised outcome target, the objective was fully achieved.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve completion of market-driven skills training for targeted youth from minority communities

Rationale
The Theory of change can be seen under Objective 1.

The Theory of Change was closely aligned with the same underlying key assumptions, with the main
assumption that youth in minority communities lack market-driven skills and provision of an integrated
program would improve outcomes for skill development among minority communities.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



Overall, the project expected that the positive results from higher completion rates of secondary education
(Objective 1) and higher completion results for market-driven results (Objective 2) would lead to higher
employability and/or continued enrollment in formal education.

Outputs

      93,485 beneficiaries, of whom 47,497 were female, received a skills certificate
      42,257 received certification for a Category 1 trade/sector and 93,444 received NSQF Level 3 or
       above certification
      Female beneficiaries were more likely to receive a skills certification for a Category 1 trade/sector
       (23,118 versus 19,139) and/or a Level 3 or above certification (47,496 versus 45,948).
      98,697 beneficiaries were enrolled. 49,813 were female.
      40,515 enrolled beneficiaries were from Minority Concentrated Blocks



Intermediate results

45.4 percent of beneficiaries were awarded skill certifications in Category 1, exceeding the target of 30
percent.

99.96 percent of the skills certificate beneficiaries were awarded skill certifications for NSQF Level 3 or
above, exceeding the target of 50 percent.


Outcomes

The evidence for the completion of results was compiled using three evidence sources (see objective 1 above
for details). 94.72 percent of beneficiaries completed their skills certification from a baseline of 0, exceeding
the original target of 83 percent. The outcomes for the other two indicators were not achieved. 47 percent of
beneficiaries obtained employment post-graduation from the program from a baseline of 10 percent in 2016.
This was moderately below the target of 52 percent. Finally, 9.14 percent of beneficiaries were enrolled in
further professional qualification in education or skills training after completing the program from a baseline of
0 in 2016. This was well below the original target of 23 percent.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve completion of market-driven skills training for targeted youth from minority communities

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



                              The overall rationale was the same as under the original objective above. There were no changes to the
                              PDO. The targets for the indicators attached to this objective were revised.

                              Outcomes

                              94.72 percent of beneficiaries received a nationally recognized skills certificate for a baseline of 0 in 2016,
                              exceeding the original target of 83 percent (no revision).

                              52 percent of beneficiaries were employed after completing the integrated program for a baseline of 10 in
                              2016, exceeding the revised target of 38 percent.

                              9.14 percent of beneficiaries were enrolled in further professional qualification in education or skills training
                              after completing the integrated program for a baseline of 0 in 2016, falling short of the revised target of 13
                              percent.

                              The impact evaluation supported these results and found a positive impact in several aspects. According to
                              the evaluation, 68 percent had found their first job. In addition, 94% of respondents noted broader positive
                              impacts of the scheme, including an increase in self-confidence and self-worth (62% of beneficiaries); an
                              increase in income (37%); and an improvement in family lifestyle (37%) (ICR, p.12).

                              The objective was almost fully achieved based on the revised targets.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The two objectives to improve completion of secondary education and market-driven skills training for
                            targeted youth from Minority communities were partly achieved. The achievements are consistent with a
                            modest efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                       Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The objective to improve completion of secondary education for targeted youth from Minority communities
                            was fully achieved, and the objective to improve market-driven skills training for targeted youth from Minority
                            communities was partly achieved. The achievements are consistent with a substantial efficacy rating.


                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Nai Manzil Project (P156363)




         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         The objective to improve completion of secondary education for targeted youth from Minority communities
         was fully achieved, and the objective to improve market-driven skills training for targeted youth from Minority
         communities was almost fully achieved. The achievements are consistent with a substantial efficacy rating.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD projected that, with an employment rate of 65 percent -70 percent, the Net Present Value would be
$US22 million - $US27 million with an internal rate of return of 3 percent – 4 percent. The ICR, on the other
hand, calculated the Net Present Value of the entire project to be US$205 million with an internal rate of return
of 25% and external rate of return at 15% based on employment rate of 47%. The ICR states that this
discrepancy can be attributed to the “larger than expected beneficiaries of the project,” which were almost twice
than initially intended. The ICR uses the mean wage increments based on the independent evaluation’s sample
survey to calculate the estimates. The estimates in PAD and ICR are based on a discount rate of 12 percent.

The implementation efficiency was affected by lower-than-expected placement rates. The ICR notes that the
CoVid pandemic may be a factor behind the lower placement rates due to lockdowns and other economic
disruptions. Nonetheless, the lower-than-expected placement rates were compensated by larger-than-expected
beneficiaries (ICR, p.36). There were no significant delays that impacted project implementation, besides a
delay in developing a web-based MIS. Though the web-based MIS was delayed, the project maintained an
excel-based MIS throughout the project implementation (TTL interview, August 24, 2022).

The ICR notes some moderate efficiency issues related to institutional capacity that resulted in delays in hiring
of PMU staff and M&E agency (ICR, p.16). Other efficiency issues noted by ICR include lack of coordination
between PIAs and the NIOS. While some of these issues were addressed by establishing a contact person for
NIOS, several of these issues continued till the end of the project. Though the PIAs were competitively hired,
there was a variation in capacities across PIAs. Some PIAs were better at data management, tailoring project
activities to students’ needs, and engaging with the NIOS.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                           Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nai Manzil Project (P156363)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
Appraisal                                                 4.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                              15.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objectives is rated High throughout the project duration, as the objectives were aligned
at project closing with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for India (FY 2018-2022) and the
government's policy efforts and reforms to support equitable development of minority communities. Efficiency is
rated Substantial throughout the project duration based on the cost-benefit analysis and moderate
implementation efficiency issues.

Project under original targets – Moderately Unsatisfactory

Efficacy is rated Modest, as the project partly achieved its development objectives of improving the completion
of secondary education and market-driven skills training of targeted youths from minority communities.

Project after first Revision – Satisfactory

Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the project fully achieved its development objectives of improving the
completion of secondary education and partly achieved its objective of market-driven skills training of targeted
youths from minority communities.

Project after second Revision – Satisfactory

Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the project fully achieved its development objectives of improving the
completion of secondary education and almost fully market-driven skills training of targeted youths from minority
communities.

                                                             Objectives after first      Objectives after
Rating Dimension                       Original Objectives
                                                             revision                    second revision
Relevance objectives              High
Efficacy
Objective 1. To improve
completion of secondary
                                  Modest                     High
education for Targeted Youth from
Minority communities


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



Objective 2. To improve
completion of market-driven skills
                                   Modest                                                 Substantial
training for targeted youth from
minority communities
Overall Efficacy                   Modest                    Substantial                  Substantial
Efficiency                         Substantial
                                   Moderately
Outcome Rating                                               Satisfactory                 Satisfactory
                                   Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value               3                         5                              5
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)     12.42                     18.66                        18.92
Disbursement (%)                   25%                       37%                          38%
Weight Value                       0.75                      1.85                          1.9
Total weights                      4.5 (rounds up to 5)
Overall Outcome Rating             Satisfactory



The project's overall outcome rating is Satisfactory, indicating essentially minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR rated the risk to development as Moderate because of a) Government ownership: There is
government ownership of the project as evidenced by the continuation of the project through government
funding from April 2022. b) Capacity building activities: The project strengthened the Ministry of Minority
Affairs’ capacity, which will help in implementing new projects. Though there are limited indicators to assess
the ministry’s enhanced capacity, anecdotal evidence suggests that the ministry was able to capitalize on the
web-based MIS that was developed under the project and upgraded the ministry’s current system of data
processing. The project facilitated relationships between the ministry and other relevant stakeholders through
project platforms such as the steering and advisory committee. The project helped transfer the know-how of
the results-based financing approach that replaced the input-based approach of the ministry (TTL interview,
August 24, 2022). The ICR points out that the main risk to development outcome is the disruption caused by
lockdowns because of CoVid that resulted in economic contractions and loss of livelihood.

Overall, there is sufficient evidence to suggest that the project beneficiaries acquired formal educational and
labor market skills including soft skills that will sustain outside of the project (Impact evaluation, 2021).




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was aligned with the country partnership framework (FY2013-2017) at entry. The project had
  a particular focus on targeting youths from minority communities, who have lower educational and labor
  market outcomes than the national average. A focus on minority communities thus has particular
  significance for inclusive and sustainable development. There were specific targets earmarked for
  women, low caste, and indigenous peoples. The recruitment efforts paid particular attention to
  engagement with community leaders such as religious leaders and activists to induct Muslim and women
  beneficiaries (TTL interview, August 24, 2022; Impact evaluation, 2021). The outreach efforts by PIAs
  followed a uniform guideline set up by MoMA and validated by the WBG safeguard specialists. An
  indigenous people’s development plan was put it in place that included activities such as robust
  consultations and grievance redressal mechanisms. The aim of the consultations was to better prepare
  the project to include beneficiaries from these communities.

  The ICR states that the Bank team “identified, facilitated the preparation of, and appraised the operation
  so that it was most likely to achieve the planned development outcomes and was consistent with the
  Bank’s fiduciary role (ICR, p.20).” The Bank used appropriate lessons learned from past projects such as
  the need to combine educational activities with skills activities to have better labor market outcomes,
  high-quality training providers, and simplicity of project design in a first-generation project (PAD, p.8). The
  PIAs were competitively selected based on fixed criteria such as experience and quality of trainers (ICR,
  p.22). The project identified key risks such as the low capacity of the implementation agency and added
  activities to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Minority affairs.

  There was a minor shortcoming related to the lack of data to gauge appropriate targets. There was no
  data available at the national level that could be disaggregated for minority communities, which led to the
  lowering of three of the four PDO indicators. The project addressed this shortcoming by embedding a
  needs assessment in the project design and the project MIS was used to revise targets.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR states that the “Bank proactively identified and resolved threats to the achievement of Project
 development outcomes.” Some of these factors are outlined in the Implementation section: (i) There was a
 coordination issue between the NIOS (agency responsible for examinations) and the PIAs because the
 PIAs lacked an understanding of NIOS process and procedures. These were resolved by creating a point
 of contact between the project and NIOS, though some of these issues continued till project closing (ICR,
 p.17) (ii) There was a variation in the quality of PIAs. Some PIAs were able to better tailor their activities
 such as providing additional support for writing skills and using better monitoring systems than other PIAs.
 This was dealt with by organizing a regional workshop to orient the PIAs to design and monitor the project.
 (iii) The CoVid pandemic caused several implementation challenges for the project (ICR, p.17). The WBG
 team provided technical support using a situational analysis conducted between July 2020 and October

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



 2020. “Post the situational analysis, the task team identified several market leaders and innovators in
 connecting blue and grey collar workers to employment and facilitated a knowledge exchange between
 these agencies and the client. As a result, the client was able to sign MOUs with two of the agencies and
 connect them with PIAs and beneficiaries on the ground (TTL interview, August 24, 2022).”



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives of the project were clearly specified and reflected by appropriate indicators. The objective of
 improvement in completion of secondary education was to be measured by the percentage of beneficiaries
 completing formal secondary education certificates and the objective of improvement in market-driven skills
 was to be measured by the percentage of beneficiaries completing the skills certificate along with an
 indicator to indicate the percentage of beneficiaries that obtained employment. These PDO indicators were
 specific, time-bound, relevant, and measurable using the MIS data that collected information on the
 completion of secondary examinations and employment outcomes of the beneficiaries. The theory of
 change was clear and convincing. The baseline and end-line surveys and the independent
 evaluation included a counterfactual and were appropriate to measure attribution and quality of the training
 program through beneficiary surveys. There were no indicators to measure the efficacy of capacity-building
 activities.

 The project’s M&E comprised three sources: the Project Management Information System, independent
 baseline and end-line surveys carried out by an M&E agency, and an independent evaluation. For the
 Project MIS, the MIS was to track four PDO indicators, seven intermediate indicators, and five
 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). The information in the MIS consisted of all PIAs and beneficiaries
 (ICR, p.11). The DLIs were linked to results-based financing of the project and were to be validated by an
 independent Verification Agency (IVA). The baseline and end-line surveys followed a sampling procedure
 that followed 1,068 beneficiaries and 42 PIA centers over three years. These surveys included a control
 group consisting of 200 non-beneficiaries. Finally, the independent evaluation also followed a sampling
 procedure and collected data for 40 PIAs and 1,214 beneficiaries. The results from the surveys were
 beneficial in strengthening the results showed by the MIS.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes that the results from M&E activities were provided through periodic progress review on
  issues such as beneficiary satisfaction, targets, DLI reporting according to performance standards,
  additional surveys, and studies. The surveys carried out by the M&E agency and the independent
  evaluation suffered from “response bias that skewed their results (ICR, p.11).” This resulted in higher

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



  positive trends as compared to Project MIS. There were delays in the hiring of a firm to assist with
  Project’s MIS and the task was carried out by PMU. Though there were delays in establishing a web-
  based MIS, the project maintained an excel-based MIS throughout the life of the project (TTL interview,
  August 24, 2022). During implementation, the task team also decided to not create a separate MIS for the
  project and institutionally embedded the MIS within the Ministry of Minority Affairs portal. This enhanced
  the sustainability of the system and helped enhance longer-term capacity of MoMA.

  The DLIs were verified by an independent agency before disbursement to the PIAs. A capacity building
  workshop was conducted for the PIAs, and a focal point was recruited for coordination between PIAs and
  NIOS. Finally, an independent evaluation report was successfully carried out using a mixed methods
  assessment of the program through a stratified sampling of PIAs geographically. The implementation of
  the evaluation was constrained by Covid-19 and the interviews had to be carried out remotely (Impact
  Evaluation, 2021).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E was utilized in a consistent and regular manner to look at progress towards targets and update
  implementation such as the change in targets based on the needs assessment data. The M&E also
  highlighted the variability of capacity in PIAs and the coordination issues between PIAs and NIOS. The
  data from different sources, including the PIAs, independent M&E agencies and the verifying agencies
  were consistently utilized by the PMU and the Bank Team through mission documents, Aide Memoires,
  and progress reports. The M&E data from various sources “enabled MoMA leadership, the PMU, and
  the World Bank to closely track Project execution, review performance, identify challenges, and
  recommend next steps (ICR, p.14)”.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environment and Social safeguards: The project was classified as a Category C project because of the lack
   of risks related to infrastructure work. Therefore, no environmental assessment was undertaken under the
   project. A training module was prepared to provide guidance on safety norms in the workplace including first
   aid and hygiene. This module supplemented the skills training curriculum of the PIAs. The project also
   included indicators associated with environmental safeguards that were reported by the PIAs to the PMU.
   The project triggered Policy OP 4.10 pertaining to Indigenous People. The project prepared a Social
   Management Framework followed by an Indigenous Peoples’ Policy Framework to ensure the participation
   of indigenous peoples.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



   The entity responsible for the implementation and fiduciary compliance was MoMA that complied with
   Bank’s financial guidelines and procedures according to the ICR (p.20). The disbursement of project funds
   commenced without any significant delays. The initial audit report for the project was delayed because of
   the disconnect between the World Bank requirements and timeline with the official format and timeline of
   the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). The timeline was extended for the audit report and the
   ministry was able to submit audits within the agreed upon timeline. The ICR (p.20) reported that no
   accountability issues were reported.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

A strong outreach recruitment effort is crucial in ensuring appropriate youth participation:
The project undertook an extensive outreach effort that was crucial for the recruitment of intended
beneficiaries. The PIAs included a variety of activities, including mobilization camps, door-to-door
visits, and newspapers. The door-to-door campaigns were used to connect with families and
convince them of the safety of the program, especially for girls.

Community engagement with key local influencers promotes minority youth participation:
Engagement with local influencers such as religious leaders and social activists can have a
profound impact on the recruitment of religious minorities and women. Religious leaders played a
crucial role in enabling the participation of Muslim youth and women in the project.

Addressing Financial constraints is key to alleviating demand-side constraints for
disadvantaged beneficiaries: Under the project, financial support was crucial for ensuring
enrollment continuation of beneficiary participation. The targeted beneficiaries of the project were


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nai Manzil Project (P156363)



severely disadvantaged, and the stipends provided by the project helped address demand-side
constraints to participation such as transportation costs.

Thorough Needs assessment is key to ensuring quality design and implementation: For a
first-generation project, needs assessments are crucial to informing the design of the project and
M&E systems. The project embedded needs assessments in the design of the project that helped
tailor project activities to the needs of the minority communities. The implementation illustrated that
PIAs that were able to deliver higher positive results were the ones who could adopt stronger
strategies to address the needs of the beneficiaries such as poor writing skills.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, concise, and consistent with the OPCS guidelines overall. It was candid and provided
several key evidence points and lessons related to the project that were derived from implementation
experience. The theory of change was clear and logical and incorporated the results framework of the project.
The evidence provided was based on the results framework, but the ICR also adequately presented important
evidence from M&E outside of the Project MIS. The ICR’s split rating table was expected to illustrate efficacy
ratings based on two parsed objectives and not on a list of outcomes. The ICR lacked coherence in some
sections, and evidence was sometimes scattered across the document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
