     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022886

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P163983                                    Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-62180,IDA-D2930                        30-Sep-2019                                           22,929,081.92

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Nov-2018                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            24,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             24,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         22,929,081.92                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (p. 13), the Program Development Objective (PDO) for the Kyrgyz
Republic Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (DPO) was to strengthen macro-fiscal
foundations for growth; enhance transparency and anticorruption in the public sector; and boost private sector
competitiveness.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



For this ICRR, the operation will be assessed on the basis of the three separate objectives listed in the
PDO. They are further clarified by the pillars/policy areas set out below, which align with the PDO.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation was structured around three pillars/policy areas identical to the three objectives in the PDO,
each one underpinned by Prior Actions (PAs) listed in Section 3b:

Pillar 1: Macro-fiscal foundations for growth. Reforms under this pillar supported two policy objectives: (i)
enhanced budget discipline and transparency, and (ii) increased domestic revenue mobilization.

Pillar 2: Transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector. Reforms under this pillar also supported
two policy objectives: (i) improved integrity of government decisions, and (ii) enhanced efficiency and
transparency of public sector procurement.

Pillar 3: Boosting private sector competitiveness. Reforms under this pillar supported three policy
objectives: (i) promoting trade in the context of the Kyrgyz Republic's accession to the Eurasian Economic
Union (EEU), (ii) improving the local business environment, and (iii) supporting development of the digital
economy.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program costs and Financing. The DPO consisted of a US$12 million Development Policy Credit and a US$12
million equivalent Development Policy Grant. US$22.9 million of the total US$24 million was disbursed.

Dates. The program was approved on November 8, 2018 and became effective on December 7, 2018. Its
original closing date of September 30, 2019 was extended to December 31, 2019, at which time the program
closed.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The operation's objectives were aligned with government priorities and Bank strategy for the Kyrgyz Republic.
 The operation built on a prior DPO series that also was focused on improving governance and the business
 environment, but this time there was an added focus on fiscal management to address growing
 macroeconomic imbalances that the government was experiencing, and the need for coherent macroeconomic
 policy planning to support medium-term objectives. The introduction of expanded internet connectivity
 reflected concerns about climate change and environmental risks, and the need for effective communications
 that such eventual shocks are likely to require.

 The three objectives in the PDO all addressed country-specific priority challenges in governance that were
 identified in strategic national and external analyses:



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



      Objective one, with its focus on budget discipline and domestic revenue mobilization, was meant to
       tackle the effects of the country's sensitivity to external shocks, influenced by a narrow economic base,
       heavy dependence on remittances and foreign aid, and sometimes large discrepancies between
       planned and actual public spending.
      Objective two focused on the integrity of budget decisions and public procurement, as corruption in
       routine decision-making and procurement across the public sphere were recognized as key drivers of
       poor governance.
      Objective three focused on addressing the lack of a competitive private sector able to create good jobs,
       by improving the business environment and by promoting connectivity and trade through facilitating
       access to larger markets and reducing the costs of doing business.

All three objectives were fully aligned with the Bank’s FY18-22 Country Partnership Framework, which
includes increased engagement in private-sector led job creation, promotion of a rules-based macro-fiscal
environment, and improvements in governance and external competitiveness. The operation also reflected the
findings of the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic that identified macroeconomic management and
governance as priority areas for reform. The objectives were aligned with the government’s own reform
agenda embodied in its medium-term development plan for 2018-2022. That plan aims at strengthening the
macro-fiscal foundations for growth, transparency, and anti-corruption initiatives in the public sector, and at
raising private sector competitiveness. Finally, the operation complemented programs supported by other
development partners, including the Asian Development Bank, the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development, and the European Union.

The operation was coordinated with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), though in the absence of a
supporting IMF program. A three-year arrangement had been approved by the IMF in 2015, with
macroeconomic stability, fiscal and debt sustainability, financial sector health, and structural reforms signaled
as key policy areas. The most recent review in December 2017 noted that while significant risks remained,
debt and financial sector vulnerabilities had subsided, and the authorities remained committed to prudent
macroeconomic policies and structural reforms promoting higher and more inclusive growth.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1. Prior Actions by Objectives and Policy Areas

       Objective 1: Macro-fiscal foundations for growth
        - enhanced budget discipline and transparency
       Prior Action 1: The government of the Kyrgyz Republic approves and submits to its
       Parliament amendments to the Budget Code to:

              Introduce a fiscal rule that provides a debt anchor supplemented by an operational deficit
               target for the purpose of ensuring a sustainable fiscal policy; and
              Revise Article 115 to stipulate that any request to the Budget and Finance Committee of
               Parliament to pre-authorize unbudgeted expenditure shall be deficit neutral and compliant
               with fiscal rule parameters.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



       Prior Action 2: The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic has approved procedures requiring
       information on transfers, refinancing, and restructuring of budget loans for State-Owned
       Enterprises (SOEs) to be included in the Republican Budget Law, starting from the 2018 budget
       submission,
         - increased domestic revenue mobilization
       Prior Action 3: The Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic enacts amendments to the Tax Code
       increasing basic excise rates on tobacco by 16.7 percent, and the government of the Kyrgyz
       Republic adopts a Resolution increasing excise rates on alcohol by 25 percent.
       Objective 2: Enhance transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector
         - improved integrity of government decisions
       Prior Action 4: The Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic enacts the Law on Conflict of Interest, to
       define conflicts of interest and to provide mechanisms for their prevention and sanction.
         - enhanced efficiency and transparency in public sector procurement
       Prior Action 5: The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, through the Ministry of Finance, adopts
       an Order on the “Regulation on the procedure for the work of an Independent Complaints
       Review Commission,” which adopts procedures to strengthen the objectivity and transparency of
       complaints handling.
       Prior Action 6: The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, through the Ministry of Finance, adopts
       Standard Bidding Documents for pharmaceuticals and other medical products, as well as for the
       design, supply, and installation of plant and equipment, to streamline procurement while
       enhancing value for money.
       Objective 3: Boost private sector competitiveness
         - promoting trade in the context of the Kyrgyz Republic's accession to the Eurasian
       Economic Union
       Prior Action 7: The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic has approved and submitted to its
       Parliament the draft Law on Food Safety to strengthen the technical and institutional framework
       for quality controls and certification in respect to food safety.
          - improving the business environment
       Prior Action 8: The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic adopts a Resolution establishing a
       deadline for the nation‐wide roll out of the transfer of social insurance payments administration
       from the Social Fund to the State Tax Service in 2019.
         - supporting the development of the digital economy
       Prior Action 9: The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic has (a) adopted amendments to the Law
       on Electronic and Postal Communications to promote competition in the issuance of the radio
       spectrum resource for providing data transmission; and (b) adopted through its State Committee
       of Information Technologies and Communication a procedure for dispute resolution between
       electronic communications service providers.
       Prior Action 10: The Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic adopts laws to lay key governance
       foundations for the development of the digital economy and e‐service delivery.



Objective 1: Macro-fiscal foundations for growth

Given high levels of public debt and an economy susceptible to external shocks, prudent fiscal management is
essential to ensure macroeconomic stability, and is reflected in the three PAs supporting the objective: PA1

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



seeking enhanced budget discipline and transparency by adopting a fiscal rule and strengthening the budgetary
legal framework; PA2 seeking better budget transparency and oversight; and PA3 seeking means to increase
revenue mobilization.

PA1 was an essential element for strengthening the country's fiscal accounts and its budget process, and
improving fiscal discipline. It specifically addressed the adverse effects on fiscal management of shocks that
were transmitted through the country’s narrow economic base and its heavy dependence on remittances and
foreign aid. Such shocks often resulted in large deviations between planned and actual expenditures, with
consequent increases in public debt. The amendments introduced into the Budget Code by PA1 required a
fiscal rule and a debt anchor, as well as an operational deficit target, all building blocks toward better fiscal
discipline and a reduction in differences between planned and actual spending, and consequently, toward a
decline in public debt. However, following repeated political and policy shifts in the period preceding the
operation, the likelihood of the submission of these amendments to the Parliament being successful was
questionable. Given the track record of the authorities, submission of legislation was not a fully credible prior
action as it was not likely to lead to achievement of the intended objective.

(Relevance of PA1 = MS)

PA2 was designed to improve budget transparency and legislative oversight of SOEs. With a significant share
of government borrowing being on-lent as budget loans to SOEs, as well as the accumulation of own debt by
SOEs (which translated into implicit government debt), this increased unpredictability in budget management
created a potentially significant source of fiscal risk. Requiring information on such transactions would enable
better oversight of SOEs by the legislature and provide an additional means to reduce fiscal risk, if the
legislature acted on PA1. However, as noted in the ICR (p. 12), there was no provision for accompanying
regulations on implementation for PA2 to achieve sought-after results.

(Relevance of PA2 = MS)

PA3 was part of a broader effort by the government (in collaboration with the IMF and the Bank) to generate
additional revenues and set fiscal policy on a more sustainable path. Increasing excise tax rates on alcohol and
tobacco products (the former by 25 percent and the latter by 16.7 percent) was a legitimate but
quite modest revenue raising measure, estimated to raise 1 billion Kyrgyz Soms, or less than one percent of
total tax revenue (ICR, page 12). Over the longer term, PA3 was expected to reduce health spending by an
unspecified amount as a result of potential effects on reducing alcohol consumption. However, the PA left
unaddressed fundamental weaknesses in revenues: broadening of the base through elimination of exemptions
and revision of tax rates, improving the value-added tax refund mechanism, improving taxpayer segmentation,
and strengthening tax administration through improvements in e-filing, taxpayer registration, and risk-based
auditing.

(Relevance of PA3 = MS)

Objective 2: Transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector.

Corruption in public procurement and in routine decision-making are considered to be key drivers of poor
governance in the Kyrgyz Republic (PD, p.2), and a major constraint to doing business in the country. At the
time of project start-up, international surveys identified corruption as one of the most problematic factors for
doing business in the Kyrgyz Republic (PD, page 14). All three PAs are closely linked to the PDO, regulating
conflicts of interest of public officials, considered an underlying source of corruption among public officials


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



(PA4), and enhancing the efficiency and transparency of public procurement through an effective redress
mechanism and the application of standard bidding documents in public procurement (PA5, PA6).

PA4 was designed to eliminate conflicts of interest and improve the integrity of government decisions by
defining the concept of conflict of interest and providing mechanisms to tackle conflicts of interest among public
officials. That was to be done through declarations of personal interest by officials, as well as their review by
commissions of ethics created for this purpose in public agencies with a view to either prevent or sanction
violations.

(Relevance of PA4 = S)

PA5 and PA6. The absence of an effective complaints review mechanism was, according to a 2014 PEFA
assessment, the most important area for improvement in the country’s procurement system. This was to be
rectified when an independent complaints review mechanism was introduced under PA5 and complemented
with standard bidding documents (PA6), initially for pharmaceuticals and plant and equipment; previously only
simplified bidding had been available for procuring entities, where turnkey solutions were a more efficient and
effective way to proceed. The Program Document does not explain why pharmaceuticals and plant/equipment
were chosen as the specific areas for procurement reform.

(Relevance of PA5 = S; Relevance of PA6 = MS)

Objective 3: Private sector competitiveness

The PAs supporting this objective were aimed at facilitating the country's access to the EEU customs union, of
which it had recently become a member. This was to be done by measures promoting trade (PA7), improving
the business environment (PA8), and supporting development of the digital economy (PA9 and
PA10). Achieving those goals would allow Kyrgyz businesses access to larger markets, reduce compliance
costs, and improve private sector competitiveness.

PA7 was to promote trade by upgrading institutional and regulatory controls governing food safety, including
processing, storage, transportation, and sale of food products to facilitate access to EEU markets. While Kyrgyz
firms already had had access to and were exporting their goods to EEU markets, access took on new relevance
when neighboring Kazakhstan stepped up food quality controls at the border. PA7 provided the legal basis for
introducing new food safety requirements and inspection procedures that applied to both domestic trade and
exports. However, as the ICR notes (p. 12), firms exporting to or planning to export to EEU markets did not
require a law to raise food safety standards; PA7 was therefore likely to have more impact on food quality for
the domestic market than as a stimulant for exports. Key alternative measures that would have promoted EEU
exports, covering trade facilitation, standards beyond food, and energy sector reform, were not covered by the
DPO.

(Relevance of PA7 = MU)

PA8 was to contribute to improving the business environment by reducing the time and cost of paying
taxes. The Kyrgyz Republic is considered the least competitive of the Central Asian countries, but complicated
tax administration is a relatively minor factor; the latest Doing Business report points to registration, permits,
utility connections, and access to credit as more important constraints facing businesses. The IFC estimates
that the transfer of the social insurance administration to the state tax services could generate a relatively
modest US$1.3 million equivalent in compliance savings for businesses, resulting from a reduction in time spent
from 225 hours/year to 205 hours/year. The ICR (p. 13) notes that the Bank had engaged in prior work in the

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



 Kyrgyz Republic on other "critical elements" for improving the business climate -- unjustified inspections, poor
 practices related to corporate and value-added tax payments, lack of finance for small and medium enterprises,
 incentives toward informalization, and unreliability of utilities -- none of which were covered by this DPO.

 (Relevance of PA8 = MU)

 PA9 and PA10 focused on developing the digital economy, noting the narrow use of digital technology across
 government and business operations, and the adverse impact of its absence on efficiency and competitiveness
 in the business environment. Its absence in rural areas rendered timely interventions in case of natural hazards
 difficult. PA9 would encourage greater competition in the sector by setting market rules (for issuing radio
 spectrum and dispute resolution), plausibly leading to a measurable increase in international bandwidth and
 progressively expanding access to broadband internet. It was also expected to improve disaster preparedness
 through better early warning systems. PA10 focused on providing legislation that was to create incentives for
 further development of the digital economy and e-services, but it provided no specificity on the laws or other
 governance mechanisms that were to be passed.

 (Relevance of PA9 = S; Relevance of PA10 = U)



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

 Table 2. Results Indicators




                                                                                     Actual
                                          RI                                                  RI Efficacy
RI                        Assoc. PA             Baseline      Target     Actual    change vs.
                                      relevance                                                 Rating
                                                                                     target
 Objective 1: Macro-fiscal foundations
 - enhanced budget discipline and transparency
 RI1:
 a. Improvements in the
PEFA indicator PI-2 on
“composition of
                            PA1        S    D+ (2014)        B (2019) D+ (2020)        0%:       Negligible
expenditure out-turn
compared to original
approved budget"


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



 b. Decreased variance                          54%         10%      15.2%
in functional composition    PA1      S                                           89%       Negligible
of expenditure out-turn                        (2016)     (2019)     (2020)
 c. Fiscal deficit as % of                                             1%
                                                            2.5%
GDP (excluding on-                              3.3%                (2018),
                             PA1      S                    (2018,               >100%       Negligible
lending) for 2018 and                          (2017)                  0%
                                                           2019)
2019                                                                 (2019)
 - increased transparency and domestic revenue
 RI2: Enhanced public
scrutiny by the
legislature and the public
over the operations of
SOEs operating in the                                                 None
                             PA2      MS        None    One (2019)                0%        Negligible
energy sector, as                                                    (2020)
measured by the number
of Parliamentary
hearings on the issue (at
least once a year)
 RI3: Increase in excise                                            6.73 bln
taxes collected from                                    1 bln KGS     KGS
                                              5.75 bln
tobacco and alcohol by                                   increase    (2018)
                             PA3      MS        KGS                              100%         Modest
at least KGS 1 billion in                                  (2018,   6.70 bln
                                               (2017)
2018 and 2019 relative                                     2019)      KGS
to 2017                                                              (2019)
 Objective 2: Transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector
 - improved integrity of government decisions
 RI4: Increase in the
percentage of
declarations of personal
interests of public
officials reviewed and
verified by the              PA4      S       0 (2017) 15% (2019) No data       No data     Negligible
Commission on Ethics to
identify potential conflicts
of interest from 0% in
2017 to 15% of all filed
declarations in 2019
 - enhanced efficiency and transparency in public sector procurement
 RI5:
 a. Increase in PEFA PI-
19 sub-score on
procurement complaints       PA5      S       D (2014)    C(2019    A (2020)    >100%       Negligible
management based on
2011 PEFA methodology
 b. Increase in the PEFA     PA5      S       B (2014) B+ (2019 A (2020)        >100%       Negligible
PI-19 sub-score on
competition, value for

                                                                                              Page 8 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



money, and controls in
public procurement
 c. Reduction in the
average processing time                         10 days    7 days    7 days
                            PA5         S                                        100%       Negligible
for review of cases by                           (2017)    (2019)    (2019)
the ICRC
RI6:
 a. Increased uptake of
the new standard bidding
                                                                         0%
document by procuring       PA6         S     0% (2017) 50% (2019)                0%     Negligible
                                                                       (2020)
entities in the health
sector
 b. Gradual uptake of the
new standard bidding
documents for large         PA6        MS       No use     In use     No use      0%     Negligible
procurement requiring
turnkey solutions
 Objective 3: Boosting private sector competitiveness
 - promoting trade in the context of the Kyrgyz republics accession to EEU
 RI7:
 a. Increase in the
number of firms
implementing Hazard         PA7        MU      9 (2016) 24(2019       31 (2021)  >100%    Modest
Analysis Critical Control
Point principles
 b. Increase in the
number of firms included
in the EEU register of
                            PA7        MU      43 (2016) 54 (2021) 188 (2021) >100%       Modest
food business operators
and allowed to export to
the EEU
 - improving the business environment
 RI8:
 a. Increase in the share
of firms filing reports on
social contributions with                      Two pilot 100% of tax 100% of tax
                            PA8        MS                                        100%      High
the state tax service to                      tax offices  offices      offices
100% by end-December
2019
 b. Reduction in tax
compliance cost
measured by Doing
Business (DB) “paying       PA8        MS     225 (2016) 205 (2019) 220 (2018) 25%(2019) Modest
taxes” indicator from 225
hours per year in 2016 to
205 in 2019

                                                                                              Page 9 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



 - supporting the development of the digital economy
 RI9:
 a. increase in
the International                                                  203329
                                              5006 Mbps 6500 Mbps
Telecommunications           P9        S                             Mbps             >100%        Modest
                                                (2016)    (2019)
Union internet bandwidth                                            (2019)
indicator
 b. Dispute resolution
mechanism between
electronic                   P9        S         None Operational Operational          100%          High
communications service
providers is operational
 RI10: Increase in the
                                                 None    100000    161700
number of visitors to the   PA10      MU                                              >100%        Modest
                                                (2019)    (2021)    (2021)
state portal for e-services

 1. Macro-fiscal foundations for growth

 Reforms under this objective supported: (i) enhanced budget discipline and transparency (RI1 and RI2);
 and (ii) increased domestic resource mobilization (RI3).

 RI1 was designed to measure the likely impact on budget discipline of implementing PA1. RI1a was to
 monitor deviations between planned and actual budget expenditures; RI1b monitored variances in the
 functional composition of expenditure outturn; and RI1c monitored the evolution of the budget deficit. In
 conjunction with RI2 below, the indicators allowed monitoring fiscal discipline and deviations from set
 targets. Baselines and targets were clear, drawing on PEFA assessments and routinely collected public
 sector financial data.

 (Relevance of RI1a = S; RI1b = S; RI1c = S )

 RI2 was to monitor fiscal risks arising from budget loans to SOEs by measuring the exercise of oversight
 by the legislature of budget loans to SOE operations, drawing on PA2 which stipulated that such
 information be included in the annual budget law. However, the effectiveness of the oversight function is
 dependent on the quality of the information about SOE liabilities submitted to the legislature in the
 explanatory notes to the budget. A PEFA update from 2020 provides some assurance on this quality of
 information.

 (Relevance of RI2 = MS)

 RI3 measured the effects on government revenues of increases in excise taxes for tobacco and alcohol.
 While the RI adequately measured the impact of PA3, as noted above, this was a relatively modest
 revenue source, expected to contribute only 0.9 percent of tax revenue. RI3 was therefore a good
 measure of a PA that contributed relatively little to the objective of domestic revenue mobilization.

 (Relevance of RI3 = MS)

 2. Transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



Reforms under this objective supported (i) improved integrity of government decisions (RI4); and (ii)
enhanced efficiency and transparency of public sector procurement (RI5 and RI6).

RI4 measured the extent of reported potential conflicts of interest among public officials making regulatory
decisions on business transactions. It supported PA4, which defined conflicts of interest and
provided mechanisms for their prevention and sanction. Review and verification of submitted declarations
by a Commission on Ethics was an important measure of improved transparency in the public sector.

(Relevance of RI4 = S)

RI5 measured the effects of the redress system introduced under PA5. It measured the performance of
the Independent Complaints Review Commission introduced under PA5, using the PEFA
indicator for “independence” of the commission (RI5a), and for competition, value for money and controls
in public procurement (RI5b), as well as average processing time (RI5c). Baselines and targets were
clear.

(Relevance of RI5a = S; RI5b = S; RI5c = S)

RI6 was a straightforward measure of the uptake of standard bidding documents introduced under
PA6. The sub-indicators separately addressed pharmaceutical procurement (RI6a) and procurement of
large plant and equipment (RI6b). They were measurable and relevant to improving transparency in
contract awards, though the indicator for plant and equipment was non-specific (a binary "no use" or "in
use" of new standard bidding documents).

(Relevance of RI6a = S; RI6b = MS)

3. Boosting private sector competitiveness

Reforms under this objective supported: (i) trade promotion in the context of accession to the EEU (RI7);
(ii) a better business environment for firms (RI8); and (iii) development of the digital economy (RI9 and
RI10).

RI7 included two indicators of improved food safety. While the implementation of Hazard Analysis Critical
Control Points principles (RI7a) may have resulted from the PA (passage of the law on food safety), as
noted above, the connection to trade with the EEU is unclear. Similarly, food business operators who
wished to export to the EEU (RI7b) were already taking measures to meet EEU standards, and it is
unclear how the PA would have further supported those firms to be included in the EEU registry. As a
result, RI7 measured the impact of a PA that was modestly relevant, at best, to achievement of the
objective.

(Relevance of RI7a = MU; RI7b = MU)

RI8 included two indicators to measure the impact of transferring filing of social insurance payments to the
state tax service (STS in accordance with PA8. RI8a measured changes in the share of firms filing with
the STS); while RI8b measured changes in tax compliance costs as a result of RI8a. Together they
adequately measured the impact of the PA: an indicator measuring the increase in the number of firms
filing is more relevant when also measuring the effects of lower compliance costs. While both were



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 19
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



               measurable and in combination relevant, the PA they measured was not central to the objective of
               improving the business climate.

               (Relevance of RI8a = MS; RI8b = MS)

               RI9 included two indicators to developing the digital economy: RI9a measured the expansion of wireless
               network coverage, and RI9b the establishment of a dispute resolution mechanism for service
               providers. Both responded to PA9's aims to promote competition over data transmission and
               introduce dispute resolution procedures.

               (Relevance of RI9a = S; RI9b = S)

               RI10 monitored the number of visitors to the state portal for e-services, measuring the impact of PA10
               (which set out the key governance foundations for the development of a digital economy). The RI was
               measurable, with a clear baseline and target. However, without specificity of the PA on what laws or other
               governance measures were to be enacted, the connection between the objective, PA, and result was not
               clear.

               (Relevance of RI10 = MU)



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Strengthen macro-fiscal foundations for growth

                Rationale
                Supported by PAs 1 – 3; progress measured by RIs 1 – 3

                RI1 included three sub-targets, one of which was achieved, but for reasons exogenous to the project. The
                fiscal rule providing the structure for setting a debt anchor supplemented by an operational deficit target was
                introduced into Parliament in 2018 but was then withdrawn with the stated intent of re-submission in a new
                budget code in 2022; however, measures submitted to Parliament in late 2021 did not include the fiscal rule
                or an amendment relating to expenditure variance. Effectively, according to the ICR (p. 13), "the prior actions
                have been totally reversed." As a result, the PEFA indicator on variance of expenditures remained at D+, and
                the fall in expenditure variance did not reach the targeted 10%. The indicator on a declining deficit path was
                met in 2018 and 2019, but largely due to gold exports and related revenues, and the deficit rose sharply
                beyond 2019 as revenues fell and spending increased because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Achievement of
                the three RI:s is therefore each rated negligible.




                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



RI2 was the results indicator on enhanced public scrutiny of the operations of SOEs (an important and
unpredictable cost item), but Parliament has not scheduled the relevant hearings. Achievement is rated
negligible.

RI3 on increased excise tax collection for alcohol and tobacco was achieved. However, while the target was
met, the indicator's relevance to the objective could have been enhanced by focusing on other revenue
sources, especially electricity tariffs, characterized by the ICR as the Achilles heel of the economy and
massively subsidized through the budget. As the indicator measured an outcome that was only modestly
relevant to achievement of the objective, achievement is rated modest.



Rating

Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector

Rationale
Supported by PAs 4 – 6; progress measured by RIs 4 – 6

The target for RI4, oversight of conflicts of interest, was not achieved. According to the ICR, "the law on
conflict of interest is not being enforced in the manner necessary to root out corruption and establish
transparency in the public sector." Declarations by public officials, although submitted in some cases, are not
being properly reviewed or verified by the Commission on Ethics. Measures for prevention and sanction of
conflict of interest as specified under the law are therefore not functional. Achievement is rated negligible.

RI5, monitoring complaints management and processing times for public procurement, showed steady
improvement over time with stated results meeting or exceeding targets (as measured through PEFA scores
and case processing times). However, according to the ICR, the good practice public procurement law was
gutted through the passage of amendments that removed the obligation to use e-procurement portals,
introduced paper procurement, and raised ceilings on procurements exempt from ceilings to "unreasonable
levels" (ICR, p. 14). The ICR notes that these amendments were "not based on any consideration of possible
shortcomings in the procurement law," but instead "introduced high risks of malfeasance." As a result, "the
prior action relating to the complaints commission is rendered nugatory" (ICR, p. 14). Reported progress
toward the three RI targets were therefore exogenous to the operation. Achievement for all three RI5 targets
is therefore rated negligible.

Similarly, for RI6, standard bidding documents that had been adopted to international good practice standards
under earlier procurement reforms were abolished in 2019, and "current documents are of poor quality in
terms of appropriate allocation of responsibilities, risks, and liabilities, constituting a further reversal in total of
a prior action" (ICR, p. 14). The two RI targets were not achieved because they related to the use of earlier
bidding documents. Achievement of both is rated negligible.




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)




                      Rating

                      Highly Unsatisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Boost private sector competitiveness

                      Rationale
                      Supported by PA 7 – 10; progress measured by RIs 7 – 10

                      RI7 measured trade promotion. The target for number of firms implementing Hazard Analysis Critical Choke
                      Point principles (RI7a) was not met, but the indicator for the number of firms included in the EEU register of
                      food business operators and allowed to export to the EEU (RI7b) was exceeded. As noted by the ICR (p. 14),
                      the relevance of the PA (law on food safety) to exports to the EEU was weak. Achievement of RI7a and b are
                      both rated modest. .

                      RI8 measured reductions in the administrative costs of paying taxes by monitoring (i) an increase in firms
                      reporting social contributions (RI8a) and (ii) a reduction in tax compliance costs to firms (RI8b). The target for
                      the former was achieved, but the one for the latter was not. Achievement of RI8a is rated high and
                      achievement of RI8b is rated negligible.

                      RI9 contained two key measures related to the digital economy. The target for bandwidth (RI9a) was
                      exceeded, and that for the operationalization of a dispute mechanism between electronic communications
                      service providers (RI9b) was met. However, the ICR notes that government leadership on digitalization has
                      been inconsistent, and that improvements in bandwidth were achieved primarily due to efforts from the private
                      sector (and not attributable to PA9. Consequently, RI9a is rated modest. RI9b, which plausibly does capture
                      the impact of the PA, is rated high,

                      RI10, measuring the number of visitors to the state portal for e-services, was exceeded; however, because of
                      the lack of specificity of the PA, the pathway between the operation and achievement of this target cannot be
                      established. Achievement is rated modest.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall achievement of the objectives for this operation is rated unsatisfactory based on the ratings of each of
the three PDOs. In all three, ratings were influenced by political economy factors, notably increasing political
instability that influenced decision making. Objective 1, on the macro-fiscal foundations for growth, is rated


                                                                                                                          Page 14 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



unsatisfactory, as PA1 was effectively reversed, PA2 is stalled in Parliament, and PA3 was only modestly relevant
to achievement of the objective. Objective 2, on transparency and anti-corruption in the public sector, is rated
highly unsatisfactory, due to lack of enforcement of the law on conflict of interest (PA4) and reversal of the public
procurement law (PA5 and PA6). Objective 3, boosting private sector competitiveness, is rated moderately
satisfactory, based on limited relevance of PA7 and PA8 to achievement of the objective and unclear specification
of PA10, and reflecting the consideration that both trade promotion and the business environment could have
been more effectively improved by drawing on private interests rather than government (PA10).



Overall Efficacy Rating
Unsatisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of PAs rated moderately satisfactory, but overall efficacy rated unsatisfactory, the overall
outcome of the operation is rated unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Given the absence of attributable results for objectives 1 and 2, a discussion of risks to achieved outcomes is
irrelevant. The complexity and political sensitivity of the reform agenda supported by the operation, as
well the volatile political environment into which it was introduced, create the potential for continued policy
reversals and discontinuities. For the third objective, government ownership in the areas of food safety and
transfer of social insurance payments is present (ICR, p. 19), increasing the possibility for sustaining those
reforms. Though government support is also strong for the digitalization agenda, capacity to enforce laws
and implement reforms is weak.




 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



The operation was aligned with government and Bank priorities as reflected in government planning and
Bank strategy, and it was supported by development partners. It extended reforms supported under earlier
DPL series (P129597; P148099; P126034), building on that experience and also on several years of
related technical assistance and analytical work. The latter included support for implementing a public
sector reform roadmap, financial management capacity building, and public procurement reforms.
Procurement reforms also drew on prior actions that had been dropped from a previous DPO series. The
operation built on joint donor efforts at private sector development, including collaboration with the IMF in
reviewing subsidies, providing technical assistance on developing a rules-based fiscal framework, and
other areas (ICR, p. 5).

The design of the operation reflects this prior work, notably in its focus on a few key policy areas where
change at the time appeared to have strong government support. In other areas, where government
commitment was weaker, the Bank team tread cautiously. For example, reform of the electricity sector,
while undoubtedly a central element of longer-term macro-fiscal stability and an important source of
corruption, was not addressed. The Bank recognized other country risks, reflected in the Program
Document but difficult to address head on, including an uncertain political landscape (still relatively stable
at appraisal) that raised implementation and sustainability risks, numerous stakeholders with conflicting
interests, and limited government capacity to implement reforms. Under such circumstances, the Bank
opted for a stand-alone DPO with relatively narrow focus rather than a programmatic approach that would
have been more challenging under the circumstances. However, design may still have been too ambitious
in an environment that had over time gone through dramatic political and policy shifts and which again
appeared to go through an evolving political environment where stakeholders uncertain about reform and
with institutions less capable of reform.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Existing institutional structures were used to implement and monitor the policy actions that were supported
under the operation. The Ministry of Finance assumed overall responsibility for coordinating implementation,
monitoring, and evaluation of the operation, as well as for reporting progress and coordinating actions among
government agencies. The Bank team monitored the indicators for each policy area and played a coordinating
role among development partners to ensure that there was agreement on the implementation of policy actions.
However, the ICR (p. 18) notes that Bank engagement was "patchy," with no structured dialogue established
formally to address reversals of PAs or failures to follow through on enacted policies, and failure to proactively
identify and effectively respond to risks.



Rating


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)



Moderately Unsatisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Preparation of the operation drew on the Bank’s and other donors’ experience in the country, and the Program
Document noted a series of risks, all of which ranged between “substantial” and “high” and would
normally have called for intense engagement during implementation. However, the Bank did not adequately
assess or mitigate the government's weak commitment and implementation capacity, and it did not follow up
with systematic dialogue or other measures to respond to risks as they materialized.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

No direct, measurable impacts on poverty or social inclusion were identified.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not note any significant effects on the environment.



c. Gender

The ICR did not note any significant gender considerations or impact.



d. Other

None noted.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale
                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)




The ICR is relatively concise, but this comes with certain drawbacks. While the discussion of program context
and development objectives, as well as program design and the discussion around major factors affecting the
efficiency of the operation, are all clear and consistent, that around relevance, outcomes, and impact tends to
be brief, almost cryptic, and could benefit from a clearer results chain. Additional information could have helped
the analysis. The report follows ICR guidelines and methodology.



a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

Political economy constraints should be carefully identified prior to implementation. Potential political
economy constraints require attention to securing political commitment at the highest levels and ensuring
that commitments are followed through and, where appropriate, backed up with actions at the implementation
level, not just as submissions to Parliament.

Deliberate mechanisms are required for ensuring consensus around DPO objectives. Given the
challenging environment in which DPOs can function, careful consideration should be given to engagement of
the Bank team in a context of structured dialogue, where lender and client can communicate in a proactive way
to solve problems.

In some situations, results-based operations may be called for. Complex reforms may be better pursued
with results-based operations that can bring sharper focus to a few critical reforms.




13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Kyrgyz Republic Economic Governance DPO (P163983)




                                                                                 Page 19 of 19
