     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023068

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152860                                    YN Early Childhood Education Innovation

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86710                                 31-Dec-2021                                         49,783,697.66

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Dec-2016                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             49,783,697.66                                               0.00

 Actual                                         49,783,697.66                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6), the project's
   objective was "to improve the access and quality of early childhood education (ECE) provision in the project
   counties in Yunnan Province."

   At a 2020 restructuring, the target for one outcome indicator (percent of beneficiaries who are female) was
   reduced, but the project exceeded both the original and revised targets. The wording of another outcome


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



   indicator (percentage of preschool teachers and staff with professional certification) was changed and its
   target increased. A split rating is not required in either case.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Mar-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was approved with four components:

   1. Increasing access to ECE programs (appraisal: US$42.41 million; actual: US$36.88 million). This
   component was to construct and equip 15 kindergartens across seven project counties with a total of 138
   classrooms, to provide project counties with model kindergartens; construct and equip two university-
   affiliated research kindergartens in Kunming University and Zhaotong University, with a total of 24
   classrooms, to facilitate direct interaction between student teachers and children for practice teaching and
   research; pilot rural community-based ECE and parenting education centers in Weishan, Qiaojia, and
   Zhanyi counties, to increase the scope of project goals and benefits to the hardest-to-reach children in
   remote villages; and construct and equip an early childhood special education center in Kunming University,
   with six full-time special education classes and ongoing diagnosis and rehabilitation centers for zero- to six-
   year-olds with special needs. Project counties were chosen on the basis of poverty status, demand for ECE,
   government investment in ECE, and local government capacity and ownership.

   2. Improving ECE quality (appraisal: US$28.06 million; actual: US$23.93 million). This component was to
   provide structured in-service training for all ECE teachers, managers, and staff, following a prepared set of
   15 training packages; strengthen teacher education programs in the three participating universities
   (Kunming, Zhaotong, and Yunnan Normal Universities), at both the associate degree and bachelor's degree
   levels, through learning by practice, curriculum development, faculty training, study-exchange trips, and
   conferences; establish ECE research/training centers; develop an on-line resource bank and platform for
   ECE teaching and learning; and provide a standard package of teaching and learning materials in existing
   rural one-year pre-primary classes.

   3. Creating an ECE enabling environment (appraisal: US$0.33 million; actual US$0.33 million). This
   component was to create a favorable policy and social environment, conducive to quality provision of ECE
   services, through development and piloting of ECE institutional quality standards; an information and
   advocacy campaign for ECE and scientific childrearing practices; and policy development on ECE.

   4. Project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (appraisal: US$0.61 million; actual
   US$0.61 million). This component was to support the project's management structure; implementation of its

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



   Project Implementation Plan; training of project management personnel on procurement, M&E, financial
   management, and safeguards; and implementation of project M&E.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Total project cost at appraisal was US$74.62 million, with US$50 million financed by a loan from the
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and US$24.62 million in counterpart
   financing from the Yunnan provincial government ((US$0.24 million), the project counties (US$14.14
   million), and project universities (US$10.24 million). During implementation, savings of US$9.7 million was
   generated by lower-than-estimated prices for civil works contracts under the first and second components.
   Actual IBRD financing was US$49.78 million, and total actual project cost was US$61.75 million. According
   to the project team, actual spending by the provincial government, counties, and universities was in line with
   what was planned, taking the realized cost savings into account.

   The project was approved on December 9, 2016 and became effective on June 1, 2017. It underwent a
   mid-term review in April 2019. A March 27, 2020 restructuring introduced minor revisions to its costs and
   results framework. The project closed as scheduled on December 31, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were highly relevant to country context. Yunnan is the third-poorest province in China,
measured by net income per capita. Over 65 percent of its population of 47 million people resides in rural
areas, 22 percent live below the national poverty line, and one-third are ethnic minorities. In 2015, Yunnan's
gross enrollment rate (GER) for three- to six-year-old children was 63.8 percent, over 11 percentage points
below the national average (75 percent). The average student-to-teacher ratio was 21:1, compared with the
national average of 18:1. Within Yunnan, there was significant urban-rural disparity. Rural prefectures had
an ECE GER of 33 percent, while the capital city of Kunming had a GER of 95 percent. Rural schools were
found to have large class sizes, lack of teaching and learning materials, and developmentally inappropriate
teaching practices. Due to historically low public investment, most of Yunnan's kindergartens were private,
functioning without an effective quality assurance system. Only about a third of all kindergarten teachers at
the time of project appraisal had teaching certificates, and those teachers were deployed primarily in urban
areas. While 50 percent of total kindergarten enrollment was rural, only 22 percent of certified teachers
were serving in rural areas.

The objectives were also highly relevant to government policy. Although China does not have a specific
ECE law, it created a ten-year Medium- and Long-Term Education Development Plan Outline in 2010 that
set 2020 targets of kindergarten enrollment for 95 percent of five-year-olds, 80 percent of four-year-olds,
and 70 percent of three-year-olds. Provinces and local governments were called on to increase financing
for ECE and develop a series of three-year Action Plans to achieve these national goals. At the time of
project appraisal, Yunnan was implementing its second Three-Year ECE Action Plan, covering 2015-2017,
which contained ambitious goals and substantial increases in political and financial commitment. The Bank
and government's "China 2030" strategy, adopted in 2010, contained a pillar on "expanding opportunities


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



               for all" that included a focus on early childhood education, especially for underserved rural and migrant
               populations.

               The objectives aligned with elements of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY13-16) at
               appraisal, which included a focus on subnational engagement and enhancement of opportunities in rural
               areas and small towns. However, early childhood education and development were not included in the
               FY13-16 lending program. Strategic alignment was significantly higher with the current Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF, FY20-25), which has an objective on strengthening the quality of early learning and skills
               development programs, a continued focus on interventions at the subnational level, and a CPF indicator on
               number of kindergartens in Yunnan province that comply with new quality standards.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access to early childhood education provision in the project counties

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that construction and renovation of kindergarten classrooms
                             would create more available spaces for three- to six-year-old children, with a special focus on the formation of
                             community-based rural ECE centers that would narrow the rural-urban access gap, contributing to increased
                             access to ECE and an improvement in the GER. Parenting education, along with teacher training and
                             adequate staffing, would further complement and strengthen the intended pathway toward achieving the
                             objective.

                             The theory of change was intertwined with that of Objective 2 on improving ECE quality, as good-quality ECE
                             triggers and reinforces parent demand for ECE in terms of access and utilization.



                             Outputs

                             Fifteen kindergartens containing 210 classrooms were constructed or renovated and equipped under the
                             project, exceeding the target of 170 classrooms.

                             The Yunnan provincial government rolled out a recruitment drive in the second half of 2020 to place about
                             33,000 college graduates in ECE teaching positions on the public payroll, bringing 18,000 more teachers on



                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



board than original planned (ICR, p. 26). Project-supported training activities (see Objective 2) oriented these
teachers in their new roles.

Rural ECE centers were piloted in five schools in Qiaojia and Weishan counties, providing ECE in 30 remote
villages and benefiting 1,983 children. Non-governmental organizations were contracted to help incubate the
centers and provide support for teacher training and coaching, site management, and M&E. At project
closing, both pilot programs were in their final stages, evaluating and documenting results
and finalizing scale-up to 38 schools.

Two university-affiliated research kindergartens were established, as planned. Kunming University opened its
special education center in September 2021, enrolling a first cohort of 145 children, of whom 21 were children
with special needs. Zhaotong University adopted a public-private partnership approach for its research center,
working with an experienced private kindergarten to run daily operations.



Outcomes

The three-year kindergarten GER in project counties increased from 54 percent in 2015 to 88.4 percent in
2021, exceeding the target of 69 percent.

The three-year kindergarten GER in rural areas in project counties increased from 45 percent in 2015 to 84
percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 69 percent.

The three-year kindergarten GER among ethnic minorities in project counties increased from 64 percent in
2015 to 90 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 69 percent.

There were 19,259 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 17,291 beneficiaries. Of those, 50.7
percent were female, exceeding the original target of 50 percent and the revised target of 47 percent (the
target was revised downward to adjust to the percentage of girls in the total population).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of early childhood education (ECE) provision in the project counties

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that creation of university-based research kindergarten and
special education centers would improve the analytic and knowledge base for teacher training; provision of
additional and relevant pre-service and in-service training for more teachers would increase the percentage of
teachers with professional certification; development of an on-line resource bank and platform for ECE
teaching and learning would increase teachers' and administrators' access to quality ECE materials and
guidance; increasing the number of qualified teachers would improve the student-teacher ratio; and

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



establishing a provincial ECE quality assurance and sustainable financing framework would support the
ongoing development and provision of quality services. Taken together, these intermediate outcomes would
support improved quality of ECE provision along a well-conceived results chain: students graduating from
university programs were provided with strong knowledge of ECE; demand for teachers was created by
aiming for a higher GER and student-teacher ratio target; and heightened institutional standards encouraged
ECE to seek a higher-quality workforce to obtain higher ratings.



Outputs

The percentage of rural and private teachers that participated in training under the project reached 99
percent, exceeding the target of 90 percent. According to a monitoring report on training quality, demand
assessments helped make training design relevant; training facilitators included an effective combination of
experts and practitioners; chat groups and social media were well leveraged to foster a learning community
and provide timely feedback; programming was flexible; and coordination and logistics were smooth (ICR, p.
16). A tailored approach was adopted for participants who work with ethnic minority children.

The Yunnan Department of Education approved Comprehensive Kindergarten Quality Standards in August
2017, drawing on standards established by the United Nations Children's Fund, European Union, and
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

The three participating universities increased the number of ECE majors and graduates, recruited faculty
members with advanced degrees, and implemented a variety of ECE research tasks (including development
of a new child development measurement instrument). 43 university faculty with master's or doctoral degrees
were newly recruited, more than doubling the target of 20 faculty. The university graduate employment rate in
the ECE sector increased from 68 percent in 2015 to 90.8 percent in 2021, essentially meeting the target of
91 percent. 91 kindergartens were using the new child development measurement instruments at project
closure, exceeding the target of 88 kindergartens. No baseline was provided.



Outcomes

The percentage of preschool teachers and staff with professional certificates in project counties increased
from zero in 2016 to 74.07 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 62 percent. At the time of project
preparation, Yunnan Province had not adopted a classroom observation tool that could be used to assess the
extent to which teachers were putting their training and certification into practice in the classroom, but the
overall kindergarten quality standard indicator (below) covered performance not only of teachers but a wider
range of ECE staff, including caretakers, health professionals, and principals (ICR, p. 16).

331 kindergartens were in compliance with the new kindergarten quality standards at project closure, more
than doubling the target of 158 kindergartens.

The student-teacher ratio in project counties declined from 20 in 2015 to 12.6 in 2021, exceeding the target of
14. The student-teacher ratio in rural areas in project counties declined from 24 in 2015 to 13.9 in 2021,
exceeding the target of 14.5.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



                            Parental satisfaction with kindergarten quality was 99.46 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 90 percent.
                            No baseline was provided.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project implemented all planned activities and met or exceeded outcome targets for improved access and
                            quality of ECE in Yunnan province.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analysis carried out at appraisal estimated an internal rate of return (IRR) of 6.69 -
   10.14 percent (in low, middle, and high scenarios, with the discount rate ranging from 2 percent to 8 percent,
   and a midline IRR of 8.65 percent), based on direct benefits of higher educational attainment for those who
   attend ECE programs, higher subsequent employment rates and wages, and lower risky behaviors. This was a
   conservative estimate, as it did not take into consideration additional indirect benefits for parents and
   communities.

   At closure, the ICR's economic analysis estimated an IRR of 11.59 percent (sensitivity analysis varying found a
   range from 7.39 - 12.74 percent), with a net present value of US$416.07 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 4.4.
   Key assumptions included three full years of attendance for each ECE enrollee; a ten-year time horizon of
   benefits; a 22 percent annual wage premium for children enrolled in ECE compared with those who are not
   enrolled; three years of additional employment for 13 mothers for every 100 children who attend ECE; and a
   discount rate of four percent. These assumptions were reasonable and drew from relevant experience and
   international literature (ICR, Annex 4, pp. 47-49). The sensitivity analysis varied the ECE attendees' wage
   premium and caregivers' labor force participation rate. The ICR's result is higher than that estimated at appraisal
   due to project cost savings, exceeded outcome targets, and updated assumptions based on recent ECE
   literature. The ICR (p. 19) notes that these returns are likely underestimated, as they consider only
   improvements in ECE access and do not consider the impact of quality improvements.

   Implementation was highly efficient. The project was delivered under budget and on schedule. There were minor
   delays in the first year of implementation with signing of subsidiary agreements for transfer of funds to project
   counties and universities (ICR, p. 25). The Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO) remained lean by
   outsourcing many technical and non-routine tasks, leading to project management costs of less than one

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



percent of total project costs (US$310,000). PPMO staffing was consistent and effective throughout. Civil works,
goods, and consulting services were cost effective, with aggregate purchase values at 81.7 percent, 98.9
percent, and 99.0 percent of their budgeted values, respectively (ICR, p. 19). Key external support groups,
including an expert advisory team and teacher professional development monitoring team, were recruited
through competitive processes and hired through part-time contracts (rather than as more expensive full-time
staff members). Financial management, procurement, safeguards management, and M&E were smooth.
COVID-19 pandemic-related disruptions included a delay of two to three months in some civil works activities
and teacher training workshops, and some of the latter moved on-line, but activities were resumed by May 2020.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 8.65
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              11.59
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was highly relevant, effective, and efficient. As the first Bank-supported ECE project in China, it
would allow Yunnan Province to guide other provinces in replicating its experience.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project's model of introducing innovations through pilots and later scaling up successful programs built
sustainability into its design. It strengthened institutional capacity at the provincial level and among key
university partners, which should support a continued process of replicating project outcomes in the future.
Two province-wide policies -- new institutional quality standards, and Administrative Measures for Preschool
Education (strengthening registration and permit issuance for kindergartens, especially private ones) -- will
facilitate continued adherence to quality benchmarks achieved under the project. As of 2022, the provincial
government has established spending mechanisms (per-student subsidies) that will support kindergarten
attendance for students from poor households. Yunnan Normal University has been established as China's

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



regional ECE knowledge hub for Southeast Asia and South Asia, having successfully organized global
learning conferences with the Bank in 2017 and 2019, indicating that research and programming innovation
will continue.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was the first World Bank project in the ECE sector in China. In 2014, the Bank and the Yunnan
  Department of Education produced the research study "Challenges and Opportunities: Early Childhood
  Education in Yunnan," providing a solid foundation for policy dialogue that led to the project. Project
  preparation and design drew on lessons learned from prior projects in the sector and experience with
  ECE in China and other countries, including that children who participate in quality ECE programs tend to
  have higher overall education attainment; teachers are a key determinant of quality interaction and quality
  education; university-affiliated laboratory preschools are good models that can inform educational
  practice and research; empowerment of parents can preserve and enhance gains made in access to and
  quality or ECE services; and early education and care interventions for children with disabilities is critical
  for them to survive, learn, and thrive; and management and benchmarking of the quality of ECE services
  requires a minimum quality standards framework (PAD, pp. 14-15).

  Risks were well assessed at appraisal. Moderate risks were identified related to project design, given the
  multiple entities involved in implementation and multiple planned interventions. Sustainability risk was
  also rated moderate, given potential challenges in keeping rural ECE centers operating in sparsely
  populated areas. The Bank team was to work closely with implementing units and with provincial and
  county governments to mitigate these risks. Sustainability mechanisms were built into project design,
  including leveraging the demonstration effect of the research kindergartens established at universities,
  supporting policy development and an enabling environment for quality ECE expansion, and using project
  activities to test new interventions for scale-up (through non-governmental organizations in rural areas,
  public-private partnerships, and tailoring of pre-service and in-service training to encourage work with
  ethnic minority children).

  Institutional arrangements were well specified and standardized among project counties and
  kindergartens. M&E design was thorough and of high quality, with a well-specified theory of change,
  indicators, and designation of institutional responsibility for data collection, reporting, and analysis (see
  Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team maintained "open, fluid, and continuous dialogue with the PPMO and project
 implementation units (PIUs) in project counties" (ICR, p. 30), providing required technical assistance to all

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



 project kindergartens, reviewing training plans and curriculum standards, and engaging an array of relevant
 stakeholders. Implementation Status and Results Reports were timely, clear, and results-focused. During
 implementation, the team carried out a set of studies on ECE in Yunnan to support ongoing reform efforts
 (listed in the ICR, p. 31). Project implementation was effective and efficient despite the impacts of the
 COVID-19 pandemic and a 6.4-magnitude earthquake that struck the province in 2021. With project
 support, Yunnan Province played a leadership role in China in supporting parents with home-based
 activities for young children during pandemic-related school closures (ICR, pp. 25-26).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's theory of change was sound and straightforward, with progress toward achievement of the
 development objectives measured through a series of output, intermediate outcome, and outcome
 indicators. The PPMO, part of the Provincial Department of Education, was in charge of overall project
 M&E; it was to recruit an M&E specialist to oversee the task. The indicators were to be tracked on a regular
 basis by PIUs set up within each of the seven project counties and three universities. To the extent
 possible, existing data collection and information systems of the PIUs were to be used. The PPMO was to
 prepare an overall monitoring report every six months, as well as a mid-term review (MTR) in 2019. A
 series of focus group discussions, interviews with teachers and parents, and case studies was to be
 conducted as part of the MTR to summarize experiences accumulated and lessons learned during the first
 half of implementation. To strengthen PPMO and PIU capacity, the Bank team was to provide technical
 assistance on an as-needed basis.



b. M&E Implementation
  Systematic monitoring and reporting of outputs and outcomes were carried out as planned. The
  PPMO prepared a comprehensive report for the mid-term review, which took place as scheduled in 2019.
  A child development tool was developed with project funding, applied annually from 2018 through 2020 to
  children attending project kindergartens; findings were used to generate a substantial report on the
  development of project-supported children in 2020 (summarized in Annex 6 of the ICR). A formal impact
  evaluation was not conducted.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 28), PIU and PPMO reporting and analysis were used to adjust project activities
  and priorities throughout implementation, addressing emerging issues before they developed into

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



  problems. Analysis and results were shared with individual kindergartens, and feedback and
  consultation sessions were organized to enhance service delivery.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
   Assessment; OP/BP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples; and OP/BP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement. An
   Environmental Management Plan was developed, based on environmental assessments of all sub-projects,
   and disclosed on December 2, 2015. An extensive Social Assessment was conducted and used toward
   development of an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (disclosed on February 29, 2016), as about 28
   percent of people in project countries were ethnic minorities. A due diligence review of land acquisition and
   compensation was carried out, confirming that national and Bank regulations had been followed. To cater to
   possible site changes during implementation, a Resettlement Plan Framework was developed and
   disclosed on March 7, 2016.

   The M&E consultant issued a report on social safeguards compliance every six months. According to the
   ICR (p. 29), "there were no major issues with safeguards compliance," and ethnic minority culture and
   values were protected and promoted by the project. Specifically, teachers for the rural ECE centers were
   recruited locally. Those teachers were able to speak local dialects, incorporate traditional cultures in
   teaching activities, and help children from ethnic minority groups transition from home to kindergarten. Staff
   turnover rates were low. A picture book was published in both the Yi and Han languages and used in
   project schools where the Yi language is spoken.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At appraisal, fiduciary risks were rated as moderate: the PPMO and most of the PIUs were new to Bank
   operations and therefore were not familiar with Bank policies and requirements; counterpart funding from
   local governments was uncertain due to low fiscal capacity; disbursement delays could result from
   inefficient working or document flows between the PPMO, PIUs, and finance departments. These risks
   were mitigated through preparation of project financial management and procurement manuals, ongoing
   workshops and hands-on guidance from the Bank team, the inclusion of counterpart funding in government
   annual fiscal budgets, the employment of a qualified and experienced procurement agent at the PPMO,
   and a requirement that each PIU be staffed with a procurement specialist.

   According to the ICR (p. 30), there were no significant issues related to financial management or
   procurement, and both were rated Satisfactory throughout implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory      Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                  This ICR Review rated both
                                                                                  Quality at Entry and Supervision
                                                                                  as Highly Satisfactory because
                                                                                  there were shortcomings in
                                                                                  neither identification,
                                                                                  preparation, or appraisal nor in
Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                  the proactive identification of
                                                                                  opportunities and resolution of
                                                                                  threats. The aggregation of
                                                                                  these sub-ratings is consistent
                                                                                  with a Highly Satisfactory rating
                                                                                  for overall Bank Performance.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 32-33) includes several well developed lessons, including:

      Keeping institutional arrangements simple, in a complex project, can help
       implementation. In this case, even though there were multiple Project Implementation Units
       (seven at the county level, and three at the university level), their standardized structure and
       coordination by an experienced Provincial Project Management Office facilitated smooth
       operations.
      The participation and expertise of relevant universities can build capacity to support
       early childhood education outcomes. In this case, the inclusion of three key universities in
       the ECE field helped maintain and increase the supply of ECE teachers, establish model
       kindergartens that served as exemplars and laboratories for innovation, and
       develop important analytical and diagnostic tools.
      Community engagement is central to development of effective and inclusive ECE in
       rural settings. In this case, staffing of rural ECE centers placed priority on village-based

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       YN Early Childhood Education Innovation (P152860)



         candidates with strong ties to the community, increasing teacher retention and supporting
         engagement with local communities and parents. Non-governmental organizations provided
         systematic professional development programs to ensure adequate staff competencies.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, candid, concise, and results-oriented. It presented high-quality evidence with careful
sourcing of data. It contained useful annexes on the child development measurement tool developed under the
project, and on the project's poverty impact. The analysis effectively interrogated the results chain, with the
project's interventions well explained and logically linked to observed outcomes. Its lessons were grounded in
the project's specific experience and were linked to the findings and ratings presented in the main report. The
ICR was internally consistent and followed established guidelines.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
