     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023073

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P153085                                   DRC-Goma Airport Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of             Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0420,TF-A1623                        31-Dec-2020                                         52,750,042.91

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Mar-2015                               30-Sep-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           52,000,000.00                                    1,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            53,598,337.00                                    1,775,594.06

 Actual                                        52,750,042.91                                    1,775,594.06




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman          Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) was " to improve the safety, security and operations of the
   Goma International Airport ".

   This review is based on the two sub-objectives:



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



   PDO 1. To improve the safety and security of the Goma International Airport;

   PDO 2. To improve operations of the Goma International Airport.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two components (PAD, pages 7 - 8):

   1. Airport Infrastructure Investments. The appraisal estimate was US$40.00 million. The actual cost was
   as estimated. This component financed investments for improving the international safety and security
   standards of the Goma International airport and bringing its operational capacity to the pre-volcano level
   (discussed in section three). Activities included: (a) rehabilitating the runway, apron, electrical systems,
   passenger terminal and the internal service road; (b) providing a mobile control tower; (c) upgrading air
   navigation aids; (d) erecting the airport's security fence; (e) supporting airport rescue and firefighting
   services; (f) laying out a cargo area; and (g) implementing an Environmental and Social Impact
   Assessment.

   The project scope was modified during implementation. The Government had initially planned to finance
   removal of drainage water from the airport to Lake Kivu through a storm water collector line of about 1.7
   kilometer (km) length. However, only 400 meters was built and additional government funds were not
   available for completing this activity. Because water coming from the airport was the cause of flooding and
   human suffering in the neighborhood bordering the airport, the Bank agreed to finance this activity.

   During preparation, the design envisioned constructing a new mobile air traffic control tower for two
   reasons. One, a permanent control tower was deemed to be infeasible in the time period; and two, a
   permanent tower was not considered to be necessary for the urgent need of improving the airport's safety
   and security. However, early during implementation, the Bank with the Government decided that a
   permanent tower would serve the airport's long term need and could be constructed at a similar price under
   the standardized design available at that time. Hence, the design was modified to include construction of a
   permanent air traffic control tower.

   The activities associated with supply and installation of equipment, rehabilitation of the existing passenger
   terminal and laying out a cargo area were dropped to finance the added activities.

   2. Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support. The appraisal estimate was US$6.00 million.
   The actual cost was as estimated. Activities in this component included Technical Assistance (TA) for: (a) a
   priority airport rehabilitation program; (b) monitoring volcano risks; (c) strengthening the economic and
   social fabric of the communities around the airport; and (d) implementation support including through

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



   provision of goods, consultant services, training and financing operating costs to support coordination,
   auditing and monitoring and evaluation.

   The TA activities associated with preparing a priority airport rehabilitation program and strengthening the
   economic and social fabric of the communities around the airport were dropped during implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal including contingencies US$52.00 million. The actual cost
   was US$52.75 million. The difference between the estimated cost at appraisal and actual cost was due to
   exchange rate changes during implementation.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant of US$52.00 million and a Trust Fund (TF) of
   US$1.80 million. With this, financing for the project was US$53.80 million. US$52.75 million was disbursed
   (US$50.97 million of the IDA Grant and US1.77 million of the TF).

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. However, the government
   contributed to financing 400 meters of the storm water collection line.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 13, 2015, became effective on September 30, 2015, and was
   scheduled to close on December 31, 2020. However, the project closed nine months behind schedule on
   September 30, 2021, to allow for work to be completed following the COVID-19 pandemic.

   Other changes. The modifications to the project design (removal of drainage water from the airport to Lake
   Kivu through a storm water collector line and a permanent air traffic control tower) were added without a
   formal project restructuring.

   The following changes were made through a level 2 restructuring on December 17, 2020.

         A key outcome indicator " Regulatory certification of safety and security at Goma International
          Airport" was replaced with an indicator "Conformity of the improved infrastructure at Goma
          International Airport with aeronautical regulations". The original indicator was revised as the project
          did not finance any certification activities. The certification activities were planned as part of another
          Bank-financed project (Multimodal Transport Project) and its results could not be attributed to this
          project.
         The closing date was extended by nine months from December 31, 2020, to September 30, 2021,
          for completing the ongoing activities that were delayed due to the restrictions following the COVID-
          19 pandemic.

   Split rating. This review is not based on a split rating of objectives, given that the PDO remained
   unchanged, project scope did not materially change, and the key PDO indicator was modified to reflect the
   achievements that could be attributed to this project.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)




Rationale
Country context. With a land surface area of 2.3 million square kilometers (km), the Democratic Republic
of Congo (DRC) is one the poorest countries in the world, with 64% of its population living below the
poverty line of US$1.25 per day. Over the past decade, excepting for some parts of the Eastern Provinces
(North Kivu), DRC was at peace. Since 1960, the Eastern Provinces has been afflicted by a mix of factors,
including poor governance, weak capacity and periodic recurrence of armed conflicts. As a result, the World
Bank classifies the DRC's Eastern Provinces as a "fragile" state.

Sector context and Government Strategy. Air transport has not able to fulfill its role in DRC due to the
dilapidated airport infrastructure and extremely weak technical and safety regulations. The Goma
International Airport - Eastern DRC's main international gateway - was especially in dire condition. While
decades of conflict and frequent rebel control of the airport had contributed to its poor operations, the
volcanic eruption in 2002 caused significant damage to its key infrastructure. The lava flow from the volcano
buried 1,150 meters of the runway (one third of the 3,000 meters runway). The remaining section of the
runway rendered the airport operational for only small aircrafts. Humanitarian aid flows, United Nation (UN)
operations and passenger and cargo transport were constrained due to the limited airport capacity and its
poor safety and security standards. Re-establishing the airport's operations to its pre volcanic condition and
improving the airport's safety and security was a top priority for the Government strategy. The PDO was
consistent with the Government's Second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP - 2), which explicitly
highlighted the need for addressing the challenges of stabilization and peace consolidation in DRC's
Eastern Provinces.

Bank strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the second objective of the
Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2013-2016 articulated the need for "boosting the
competitiveness of the country by accelerating private sector-led growth" through among other things,
improving connectivity and access to transport infrastructure. The PDO was aligned with the Bank's 2013
regional strategy for supporting peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region ( Burundi, DRC, Rwanda and
Uganda). The PDO is well-aligned with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2022 - 2025.
The Focus Area one of the CPF underscored the need for strengthening stabilization efforts and reducing
the risk of conflict and violence through: (i) improving interconnectedness between countries and within the
country; and (ii) strengthening regional integration between the Great Lakes countries.

Bank experience. The Bank has supported projects in the Eastern Provinces of DRC. These included: (i)
the Eastern Recovery Project (2014) aimed to improve access socio-economic infrastructure to the
vulnerable communities in Eastern Provinces; (ii) the Great Lakes Emergency Sexual and Gender-based
violence and Women's Health project (2014); (iii) the Prevention and Mitigation of Sexual and Gender-
Based Violence in North and South Kivu Project (2014); and the ongoing Pro-Route Program.

This project aimed at improving the safety and security standards of the Goma International Airport and
improving its operational capacity. The project was designed as an emergency project as it was in an area
of conflict and the poor airport condition following the volcanic eruption. Given that the PDO was relevant to
the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for DRC as well and the Bank strategy for the Great Lakes
region, the relevance of the PDO is high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve the safety and security of the Goma International Airport.

                Rationale
                Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. Airport
                infrastructure investments such as rehabilitating the runaway, apron, the electrical system, constructing the
                security fence, a control tower, a drainage system linking the airport with the city drainage system, a cargo
                area, the airport's rescue and firefighting services and upgrading its navigation aids, were likely to improve the
                airport's safety and security standards. The results framework assumes the following; (i) the volcanic activities
                in the area remains under control; and (ii) the security, the political and the governance situation will be stable
                in North Kivu.

                Outputs (ICR, pages 13 - 15).

                The following activities were completed as targeted.

                        The existing runaway was rehabilitated. The 335 meters needed to restore the runaways total length
                           to the original 3,000 meters were reconstructed. Two Runway End Safety Areas (RESAs) were
                           constructed, one at each end of the runway to reduce the risk of damage to an aircraft, improve
                           aircraft deceleration and facilitate movement of rescue and fire vehicles. Before the project, airport
                           safety operations were endangered due to the lava flows at the end of the runway. The project
                           contributed to a safer runway by removing the lava rock from its norther end.
                          A new control tower (25 meters) was constructed, allowing controllers a better view of the entire
                           airport (before the project, the existing control tower (6 meters) was low and did not allow a full view of
                           the aprons, taxiways and runaways). Although the control tower was not completed at project closure,
                           the tower was operational by November 30, 2021 with government funding (ICR, paragraph 61).
                          A 5,450 meters fence surrounding the airport was constructed for protecting restricted areas and
                           preventing access to unauthorized personnel. After completion of the fence, the number of people
                           crossing the runway dropped from 2,000 people before the project to none, and the number of
                           complaints related to theft of property in the compound reduced from around 40 per month to none.
                          The airport's power plant building was rehabilitated and new electricity supply equipment were
                           provided. With the equipment, the airport has electricity twenty four hours, seven days a week. The
                           new control tower was supplied with electricity from the airport powerplant.
                          The rescue and firefighting services were equipped with tools, parts, and supplies.
                          The activity associated with the stormwater collector was not fully complete when the project closed.
                           The activity nevertheless resumed using local provincial government funding. As part of this sub-
                           component, the project provided additional benefits to the surrounding population through constructing
                           14 standpipes in five neighborhood districts near the airport.

                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)




      The project provided TA to the Goma Volcanic Observatory (OVG) to monitor volcano risks and to
       strengthen the preparedness of the airport and surrounding communities by: (i) developing knowledge
       and tools (geospatial information dataset) for better monitoring of the Nyiragongo volcano; (ii)
       developing and distributing risk management plans (a contingency plan, an evacuation plan, a lava
       flow risk map for Goma city in the event of an eruption of the Nyuragongo volcano; (iii) training OVG
       researchers, technicians and North Kivu Civil Protection Agents; (iv) providing materials and
       equipment for civil protection; (v) undertaking awareness campaigns on volcanic risks; and (vi)
       establishing focal points for volcanic crisis management.
      Sensitization campaigns on Gender-Based Violence (GBV) were held in seven neighborhoods
       bordering the airport. A gender-sensitive Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was also et-up to
       raise awareness of the population. Forty-two members of the community were trained for managing
       the complaints on GBV. 31 women out of 584 employees worked directly on the project.

The following activities were dropped.

      The supply and installation of equipment to upgrade air navigation aids.
      The rehabilitation of the existing passenger terminal (the upgrading of the air navigation aids and
       rehabilitation of the existing passenger terminal would have further reinforced the safety of the airport).
      Laying out of a cargo area.
      Preparing a priority airport rehabilitation program.
      Technical Assistance to strengthen the economic and social fabric of the communities around the
       airport.

Outcomes.

The original outcome indicator to monitor performance of this PDO was ' regulatory certification of safety and
security at Goma International Airport". This indicator was unachievable, as the project did not finance
activities pertaining to the airport's regulatory certification. The indicator was consequently replaced with the
indicator ' conformity of the improved infrastructure at Goma International Airport with aeronautical
regulations". According to the DRC's Civil Aviation Authority (AAC), the airport's infrastructure complied with
aeronautical regulations and that the required technical specifications were added in the works' contracts and
the engineer's terms of reference. The restructuring paper did not however explain the methodology for
monitoring this indicator.

Although there is no concrete evidence, this review concludes that this was due to the lack of an appropriate
indicator. However, given that project interventions were in the context of a fragile environment and that the
outputs would have helped in improving the safety and security of the Goma International airport, this review
concludes that the project significantly contributed to realizing the PDO. . The most significant safety and
security improvements are improving safety at the runway, securing the airport by enclosure, having a more
safe and adequate air traffic control, securing the electricity supply, improving the drainage network inside the
airport, improving the capacity of rescue and firefighting services, and improving the monitoring of volcano
risks.



Rating


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve operations of the Goma International Airport.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities described above were likely to improve the operational capacity
of the Goma International Airport and restore it to the pre-volcano level. The causal links between the project
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 15 -17).

In addition to the outputs described above, the following outputs were relevant to this objective.

      The 335 meters of the runway were reconstructed. This brought the runway's total length to the
       original pre-volcano level of 3,000 meters. This activity along with the rehabilitation of the apron
       increased the capacity to accommodate larger aircrafts. Before the project, Boeing 767 aircraft could
       no longer land at the airport. At project closure, Boeings 767, 777 and 787 could all safely take off and
       land at the airport.
      The number of airlines companies that can perform at least one flight per week increased from 20
       companies before the project to 34 after the project. Aircraft movements by night on an annual basis
       increased to 178 at project closure as compared to none before the project. The capacity of the apron
       to accommodate originally designated type of aircraft (Boeing 767/Airbus) increased from three at the
       baseline to five.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were aimed to improve the operational capacity of the Goma international
airport to its pre-volcano levels. As indicated above, the capacity of the airport to accommodate larger
aircrafts increased significantly due to the project interventions. The other outcomes were;

      The number of passengers through the Goma international airport increased from 140,000 in
       December 31, 2014, to 277,730 by December 31, 2019 (the numbers are based on December 31,
       2019, due to the restrictions following the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021). Air freight grew
       from 14,941 in 2014 tons to an estimated 28,000 tons in 2019, representing an average growth of
       11% during this period. The number of aircraft movements grew from 17,625 in 2014 to 23,047 in
       2019, representing an average growth of 6.93%.
      Annual revenue of the airport increased from US$2.5 million in 2014 to US$4.9 million in December
       31, 2019, exceeding the target of US$4.5 million.

In sum, the efficacy of this PDO is substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given that outcomes were realized for the most part, overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A Benefit-Cost analysis was conducted for infrastructure investments. These activities
   accounted for 77% of the project cost. The benefits were to come from time savings for passengers, reductions
   in aircraft operating costs for cargo carriers, the use of larger aircraft and the lifting of restrictions on aircraft take
   off. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% at closure was US$6.78 million, as compared to the NPV of US$9.8
   million at appraisal using the same discount rate. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
   13.4%, as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 15.1%. The actual EIRR was lower due to a combination of factors
   including differences between the passenger and freight movements when the project closed, as compared to
   the movements at appraisal. Some of this lower return was undoubtedly due to the impact of Covid-19.

   Financial analysis. A financial analysis undertaken at appraisal showed a Financial Internal Rate of Return
   (FIRR) of 11.4%. The Bank deemed this FIRR as acceptable for an investment program in a region marred by
   decades of conflict and instability (PAD, paragraph 35). An analysis was not conducted at closure because
   actual historical data on aeronautical and non-aeronautical revenues and annual maintenance, operating and
   administrative expenses were not available likely due to the Covid-19.

   Administrative shortcomings. The actual cost of activities (such as, the rehabilitation of the runway, apron,
   airport's electrical system, supply and installation of the new control tower, construction of the airport's security
   fence and rehabilitation of the internal service road), were higher than estimated at appraisal. The termination
   dispute with the company in charge of runway and storm water collection work resulted in a significant
   unplanned payment from the project's funds of US$3.2 million for dispute settlement. The decision to use direct
   contracting for runway rehabilitation due to the poor performance of the contractor, led to a dispute settlement
   because the contractor claimed that not all of the realized works had been paid. Actual administrative costs were
   about US$1.30 million higher than expected. Although at the project level the project was implemented within
   the budget, this was due to a combination of factors including, contingency funding in project financing, and cost
   savings from a number of activities that were dropped that would have reinforced the safety and security
   standards of the airport (discussed in the previous section). The delays in completing the works (construction of
   the power plant and control tower) were exacerbated by factors over which the project had no control such as
   the physical restrictions in the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic and eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano on May



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



23, 2021. The team clarified that the power plant and control tower have been completed since then. The
reduced scope of project activities was completed with a nine-month extension of the project closing date.

In sum, efficiency is rated as modest in view of the many administrative shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     77.00
 Appraisal                                                 15.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     77.00
 ICR Estimate                                              13.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy, Bank's strategy for DRC and the Bank's regional strategy is
High. Overall efficacy is substantial. Efficiency is modest. Overall outcome is moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a a moderate risk that the development outcome could be undermined
due to inadequate support from the local provincial government. To reduce the flooding in the communities
surrounding the airport, the project financed the evacuation of drainage water from the airport to Lake Kivu
through a stormwater collection line. When the project closed, this activity was not complete, but had
resumed using funds from the local provincial government. There is the risk that this activity may not be
completed due to inadequate funding from the local provincial government.

Natural disaster risk. The last eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano on May 23, 2021 did not impact the
Goma International airport. There is a moderate risk that a new eruption could damage the airport
infrastructure and jeopardize the operations of the airport. To mitigate this risk, the project provided a



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



technical assistance to OVG to better monitor the volcano risks and strengthened the preparedness of the
airport and surroundings communities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Given the urgent need in a fragile environment, the Bank expedited the preparation of this project: it was
  prepared in just five months and approved on March 13, 2015. The ICR (paragraph 87) noted that the
  project was prepared by an experienced team who had worked on projects in similar challenging
  contexts, and had managed the Bank-financed Multimodal Transport Project.

  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed projects in DRC
  and other fragile countries. The lessons incorporated included: (a) recognizing that design needs to be
  simple in fragile environments, the design had one large component that was limited to the airport, and
  a small component supporting implementation; (b) recognizing that even with a simple design, investment
  projects can be used to leverage interventions that can benefit peacebuilding, the design provided
  support for strengthening the management of the volcanic risk in the Goma area: and (iii) given that
  previous projects providing investments in fragile settings have had mixed results when they attempted to
  address the broader issues of institutional and financial sustainability, the project design did not have any
  activity aimed to address such issues.

  The implementation arrangements made at appraisal were appropriate. This included: (i) the Ministry of
  Transport (MOT) in charge of coordination: (ii) the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in Kinshasa created
  for the ongoing Multimodal Project was to be in charge of day-to-day implementation; and (iii) the
  National Airways Management Agency (RVA) to be responsible for technical oversight. During
  implementation, the PIU was relocated from Kinshasa to Goma to provide better oversight and
  monitoring.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including political and governance risks, macroeconomic
  risk, weak implementation capacity risk, fiduciary risks and the risk that the achievements could be
  undermined by adverse external risks. Mitigation measures included, having a small number of
  implementing entities which had demonstrated capacity with the previous project, a mitigation plan for
  fiduciary risks and the strengthening of volcano monitoring and the preparation of contingency plans for
  the airport. Even with these measures, the overall risk was assessed as high at appraisal (PAD,
  paragraph 35). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (as discussed in section 10).

  There were several shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry: (i) although the overall project cost was within the
  budget, costs of some activities were underestimated at appraisal; (ii) the design options for the control
  tower were not fully explored and the preparation team did not check that the funding was in place from
  the Government for the drainage system; (iii) using the direct contracting system proved to be
  inappropriate because the chosen contractor was overloaded; and (iv) there were shortcomings in M&E
  design (discussed in section 9).



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paragraph 90) notes that the Bank carried out an average of one formal supervision mission a
 year during the project lifetime. The team clarified that in addition to the formal supervision missions, the
 team conducted one informal supervision mission every two months from April 2018 until the beginning of
 the travel restriction in April 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The missions were complemented by
 fiduciary and safeguards specific missions and frequent site visits. The support provided by the team aided
 in fiduciary and safeguards compliance (discussed in section 10). The Bank supported the decision to
 relocate the PIU from Kinshasa to Goma which led to better results on the ground. The supervision team
 had to make a judgement call on dropping certain activities to ensure the drainage problem was sorted out.
 The team clarified that there were four task team leaders (TTLs) and one co-TTL during the project lifetime
 and the last TTL was based in DRC from April 2018. The quality of supervision was satisfactory.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory, in view of the shortcomings at
 Quality-at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Implementation Unit in coordination with the DRC National Airport Management Agency (RVA)
 was responsible for collecting the data required for monitoring performance.

 Of the two key outcome indicators, the indicator for PDO 2 " capacity of the runaway infrastructure at the
 Goma International airport to accommodate the original design aircraft" was more or less appropriate,
 given the project context (to restore the operational capacity of the airport to pre-volcano level). PDO 1
 "regulatory certification of the safety and security at the Goma International airport" was unachievable, as
 the project did not have any activities for supporting the certification process. This indicator was replaced
 with the indicator "conformity of the improved infrastructure at the airport". While the revised indicator did
 reflect the project activities, it lacked clarity either about the entity which should confirm the safety and
 security standards of the airport or the methodology for confirming safety and security standards. It would
 have been more appropriate to have an independent third-party assessment of the safety and security
 standards of the airport.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



 The targets for some intermediate indicators were inappropriate. For example, the indicator related to the
 "number of Goma International airport passengers" was achieved even before implementation of project
 activities. This was due to two factors: (i) the wrong baseline at project preparation; and (ii) inaccurate
 projections of traffic growth.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 77) noted that the PIU coordinated with the RVA for collecting the data required
  for monitoring performance. The ICR notes that data collection was not straightforward, with RVA taking
  a lot of time for collecting the required data.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project's results framework was used for monitoring progress. The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that
  the intermediate indicator on runaway progress, helped the PIU and the Bank to take the decision to
  relocate the PIU to Goma. This helped in improving supervision and implementation of the civil works.

  In sum. overall M&E is rated as modest, in view of the significant shortcomings in M&E design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguards
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, pages 16
   and 17).

   The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that a draft environmental and social screening report was prepared and
   publicly-disclosed in January 2016. Subsequently seven Environment and Social Management Plans
   (ESMPs) were developed to address environmental and physical cultural resources issues.

   The project's performance on safeguards was rated as moderately satisfactory in the ISRs (ICR, paragraph
   82). The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that there were six Occupational Health and Safety incidents during
   implementation. Of these, one was classified as severe. None were classified as serious and five were
   classified as indicative. All incidents had been resolved by project closure. The project had an operational
   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) in each district with project works. 815 complaints were received by
   the GRM. 813 complaints were resolved when the project closed. The team clarified that the remaining two
   cases had been resolved to date. The project also supported measures to better manage environmental




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



   and social risks. The ICR (paragraph 84) notes that the project successfully developed standard operating
   procedures for managing unexploded landmines in DRC.

   Regarding involuntary resettlement, the ICR (paragraph 82) notes that 260 Project Affected Persons (PAPs)
   were compensated for the construction activities of the fence wall and the stormwater collector.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment of the PIU at
   appraisal. The PIU had executed the previous Bank-financed project and its arrangements were deemed
   to be satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 41). The financial risk was rated as substantial at appraisal. The
   financial management during implementation was rated as moderately satisfactory during implementation
   (ICR, paragraph 85). There was one case of over-use of project funds leading to lack of funds for some
   activities and one case of ineligible expenses. The team clarified that audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the PIU at appraisal. The procurement
   risk was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 36). The ICR (paragraph 86) notes that procurement
   management was rated as moderately satisfactory during implementation. The first company recruited by
   direct agreement for the runway failed. The second company was hired following a competitive process,
   completed the work on time to the satisfaction of the client and the Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (paragraph 57) observes that there were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Efficiency is rated as modest in
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   view of the administrative
                                                                              shortcomings.
                                                                              There were shortcomings in
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              Quality-at-Entry.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial



                                                                                                Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)



12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, which
are reported with some adaptation of language.

1. A flexible design and contingency funds for unplanned activities can be useful for projects
in fragile and conflict affected environment. In this project, some activities (such as changing
from a mobile control tower to a permanent tower and drainage works from the airport to Lake Kivu)
were modified at government request. The flexible design and contingency funds for unplanned
activities enabled the project to adapt to the changing situation on the ground.

2. The project activities need to be aligned with the project development objective for proper
attribution of results. In this project, the key indicator - regulatory certification of the safety and
security standards of the airport - was unrealistic as none of the project activities supported the
certification process.

3. A decentralized approach to project management can help in implementation on the
ground. In this project, relocating the Project Implementation Unit from Kinshasa to Goma
allowed: (i) to substantially improve the implementation of the project; (ii) improve the dialogue
between the local and the central government that helped to incorporate inputs from the
stakeholders; and (iii) secure acceptance of the project by the local communities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and candidly discusses the challenges in a fragile setting. The theory of change
provided in the ICR presents a clear elucidation of the links between project activities, outputs and outcomes.
The ICR candidly acknowledges the shortcoming with a key outcome indicator. The evidence provided in the
ICR is adequate to assess project performance. The ICR draws good lessons from the experiences in
implementing this project. The photographs provided in the ICR enables the reader to visualize the extent of
changes before and after the project. The Annex 3 “Project Cost By Component” reports US$6.0 million
contingencies under the actual at project closing. This contingency should have been included under
component A.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DRC-Goma Airport Project (P153085)




                                                                  Page 15 of 15
