     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023024

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P154036                                     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56860                                   01-Dec-2019                                        115,652,073.03

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Jun-2015                                 30-Nov-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           125,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            116,976,239.33                                               0.00

 Actual                                        115,652,073.03                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 20),
   the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to support the restoration of flood protection infrastructure
   and strengthen the recipient's capacity to manage disasters and climate variability.

   The eight districts of Neelum, Hattian, Bagh, Poonch, Haveli, Kotli, Bhimber, and Muzaffarabad were referred
   to as the State (PAD, paragraph 7).


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



   This review will parse the PDO into two objectives against which project performance will be assessed:

        1. To support the restoration of flood protection infrastructure
        2. To strengthen the recipient's capacity to manage disasters and climate variability



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Restoring Flood Protection Infrastructure and Upgrading Flood Management
   Systems: (US$100 million at appraisal, US$89.3 million actual). Three sub-components were to be
   financed under this component: (i) the restoration of flood protection infrastructure that was damaged by the
   2014 floods. The activities to be financed included the restoration of flood embankments to resilient
   standards, rehabilitation of other infrastructure such as spurs and river channelization works; (ii) feasibility
   studies and diagnostics for medium- to long-term investments in flood protection works; and (iii) non-
   structural measures such as establishing a Decision Support System (DSS), a safety evaluation of the flood
   protection infrastructures; support for the Irrigation Research Institute to conduct relevant studies and
   training; and conduct river morphology studies and floodplain mapping of selected eastern rivers. The
   activities that would lead to a DSS, river morphology studies, and flood plain mapping outputs were dropped
   at restructuring (see Dates below).

   2: Managing Disasters and Climate Variability: (US$17 million at appraisal, increased to US$21 million at
   restructuring, US$20.1 million actual). This component was to finance US$14.0 million worth of technical
   assistance directed at the Punjab province and another US$3.0 million to the eight districts of Neelum,
   Hattian, Bagh, Poonch, Haveli, Kotli, Bhimber, and Muzaffarabad, collectively referred to as the state in this
   project. The technical assistance (TA) was to finance: (i) studies on urban and flash flooding in Punjab
   province and slope stabilization in the state; (ii) policy reviews to strengthen district level disaster risk
   management institutions, improve their early warning systems; and mainstream disaster risk management
   and climate variability aspects in planning processes of the Punjab Planning and Development Department;
   and (iii) a Disaster Risk Financing Strategy, an appropriate governance structure, standard operating
   procedures, fiduciary safeguards and controls, a standard emergency cash transfer system, and a
   transparent allocation criteria for the Punjab Provincial Disaster Management Fund.

   3: Project Management: (US$8 million at appraisal, US$5.1 million actual). This component was to finance
   project management undertaken by the implementation units in the Punjab Irrigation Department (PID), the
   Punjab Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) and the State Planning and Development (P&D)
   department.

   4: Contingent Emergency Response: (US$0 million at appraisal, US$0 million actual). This component
   was to finance emergency response and recovery following a disaster by reallocating uncommitted funds or
   receive additional financing.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$125.0 million. The actual total project cost was
   US$117.0 million.

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this credit. The original credit was
   US$125.0 million. A total of US$8.0 million was cancelled due to currency fluctuations and cancellation of
   some project activities (see Dates below). The credit disbursed US$US$114.6 million (according to ICR,
   Annex 3 but the ICR Data Sheet noted US$115.6 million). The balance of US$1.4 million was cancelled.

   Borrower Contribution: None

   Dates: The project was approved on June 2, 2015 and made effective on September 14, 2015. The Mid
   Term Review (MTR) was conducted on September 28, 2018. The original closing date was December 1,
   2019. The project was extended twice for a total of 24 months to close on November 30, 2021. There were
   3 level 2 restructurings:

         On September 23, 2019 to extend the closing date for the first time by 13 months from December 1,
          2019 to December 31, 2020; cancel the financing of the DSS, river morphology studies, and flood
          plain mapping; and reallocate US$4.0 million from the PID to the State P&D department.
         On December 9, 2020 to extend the closing date a second time, for 11 more months, from
          December 1, 2020 to November 30, 2021 because of the impact of the COVID19 pandemic.
         On November 30, 2021 to cancel US$8.0 million. The project used savings from exchange rate
          gains (PKR to US$), difference between estimated and actual costs, and the cancellation of some
          activities to finance additional subprojects.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome is undertaken. The PDOs and outcome indicators were
   unchanged throughout project implementation. Certain activities were dropped that did not significantly
   affect the achievement or the original level of ambition of the objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The country is vulnerable to flooding. In 2014, floods hit Punjab and the eight districts of Neelum, Hattian,
Bagh, Poonch, Haveli, Kotli, Bhimber, and Muzaffarabad (collectively referred to as the “State,” PAD,
paragraph 7). The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) estimated that the floods affected over
2.5 million people in both urban and rural areas and caused 367 deaths, damaged homes, agriculture,
transport, irrigation, and communications infrastructure.

Country Context: The 2010 National Disaster Management Act laid out the country’s disaster
management strategy involving the central and subnational entities. At the central level, the NDMA, the
Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority, Emergency Relief Cell, and the Federal Flood
Commission, had overlapping mandates. At the provincial level, there were the Provincial Disaster
Management Authorities, the Provincial Irrigation Departments, and the Civil Defense and Rescue Services.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



Some provincial entities had authority over administrative regions. At the district level, a number of districts
had Disaster Management Authorities. An 18th amendment to the 2010 Act devolved some powers to the
provinces, with greater responsibility for preparing and responding to disasters (PAD, paragraph
11). However, the 2010 Act has not been fully implemented and lacks operational details (PAD, paragraph
13). According to the PAD, subnational levels need to be armed with medium- and long-term planning for
recovery and reconstruction, and to foster resilience.

Country Plans: The PDOs were relevant to the country’s Vision 2025. This country plan aimed for
sustained and inclusive economic growth by focusing on resilience to fiscal shocks and disasters. The plan
also prioritized institutional reform. The project directly contributed to the Punjab province’s focus on
agricultural productivity by reducing losses due to flooding events through flood protection infrastructure
restored to resilient standards (ICR, paragraph 26).

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy: The PDOs were relevant to the World Bank’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2015-20. The CPS was extended by another year to align with the
country's electoral and the IDA18 cycles. The Bank's Country Partnership Framework for 2022-2026 is
currently under consultation.

The project was consistent with the inclusionary focus of the CPS. Improving the country's disaster risk
management capacity was an outcome indicator for Outcome 3.3: "Increased resilience to disasters in
target regions," by increasing the number of provinces with disaster risk management plans,
improved disaster risk management, and having early warning systems in place. The project supported the
third cross cutting theme in the CPS of reducing vulnerability to climate change and improving
disaster preparedness. The second theme focused on deepening provincial level engagement and
clarifying the roles between the state and local governments, as this project addressed. The Systematic
Country Diagnostic Report also pointed out that the country is vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly
floods, cyclones, and droughts. This vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change hampers the
achievement of macroeconomic stability, social cohesion, and environment sustainability. An unplanned
process of urbanization and the poor quality of buildings and infrastructures amplify the vulnerability of
people to natural disasters.

World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: According to the PAD, the Bank had extensive
disaster risk management experience in the region and in Pakistan. Several capacity development and
institutional development projects were also noted such as the Bank support to anticipatory risk
management. The Bank had provided technical assistance to the government to highlight physical and
fiscal risks from hazards, including risk assessments of federal and provincial capitals. The Jhelum and
Tawi Flood Recovery Project (P154990) was under preparation at the same time as this project. The Bank
was to deliver a US$188 million IDA-funded Pakistan Hydromet and Climate Services Project which aims to
strengthen Pakistan’s public-sector delivery of reliable and timely hydro-meteorological services and
enhance community resilience to shocks. The project is expected to improve weather forecasting in
Pakistan and facilitate sustainable management of around 80,000 hectares of forest area. The Bank was
also engaged with federal and provincial governments to improve understanding of climate risks and green
transition of the economy.

Overall, the relevance of the project's objective is rated Substantial. The project objectives addressed the
development problem caused by the floods. The Bank experience, expertise, and strategy for the country fit




                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



               the problem being addressed. The objectives were substantially relevant to the country plans to strengthen
               the preparedness capacity at the subnational level to respond to disasters and climate change impacts.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the restoration of flood protection infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: A Theory of Change (TOC) was not required at appraisal (ICR, paragraph 7) but the
                             results framework provided a causal link between three outputs and four outcomes to restore flood protection
                             (PAD, Annex 1). A TOC was prepared at closing (ICR, Figure 1). The TOC provided a logical link between the
                             infrastructure inputs and outputs to achieve the disaster resilient flood protection.

                             Inputs were to include the construction of flood protection works such as the rehabilitation of embankments,
                             procurement of instruments, and carrying out analytical flood control works. These inputs were logically linked
                             to lead to the outputs.

                             Outputs were to include the rehabilitated embankments, number of flood protection works, and early warning
                             systems in place. The Punjab Irrigation Department. requested to cancel other outputs - establishing a
                             Decision Support System (DSS) for the provincial irrigation departments, studies on river morphology, and
                             floodplain maps - at the first restructuring after prolonged delays and new priorities of its Flood Risk
                             Assessment Unit. The outputs identified in the TOC were reasonably linked to the inputs from the
                             interventions.

                             Outcomes were the reduced loss of lives, property, and livelihoods in the target area based on the restored
                             flood preventive measures. The inputs and outputs were reasonably linked to this outcome that a certain level
                             of protection was achieved for the target population. However, the outcome indicator, number of
                             beneficiaries, was more of an intermediate rather than an outcome indicator. This was not sufficient to
                             express the development impact on the lives saved and loss of livelihoods of the beneficiaries. However, this
                             indicator is accepted as a reasonable impact from preventive measures in place (see Section 9 M&E Design
                             below). Other outcomes were to be reported based on the analysis of project benefits (see Section 5
                             Efficiency below).

                             The TOC noted the following three critical assumptions to make the achievement of the objective more
                             likely: (i) the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) had dedicated staff and sufficient capacity to execute the
                             project; (ii) adequate Operations and Maintenance (O&M) budget was allocated and capacity to maintain the
                             investments; and (iii) the Punjab Irrigation Department would use the analytical work to design and execute

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



additional works. These assumptions were borne out at implementation and contributed to the achievement of
the project outcomes. Another assumption was the retention of staff who have been trained in O&M of the
built infrastructure, in addition to O&M budgets.

Outputs:

According to the results framework, the following outputs were achieved:

      5 (target 4, target exceeded) preparatory analytical works for flood protection investments were
       completed to support medium- to long-term investments in Punjab and the State. Project savings led
       to one additional study to be completed.
      73 civil works (target 51, target exceeded) flood protection works were completed with 22 civil works
       in Punjab (380.5 km) and 51 in the State (19.89 km). Some civil works could not be undertaken
       following technical, social, and environmental assessments.
      400.4 km (target 500 km, target almost achieved) of embankment were constructed or rehabilitated.
       The target was set at Mid Term as allowed under the framework approach of an emergency project,

The ICR also reported that the following outputs were achieved. These additional outputs were not included in
the results framework and did not include targets:

      The Punjab Irrigation Department’s new Water Resources Division was provided with the following:
            o Information Communication Technology (ICT) and technical equipment.
            o 152 flood fighting vehicles for its field units.
            o Hydrographic survey boat.
            o Computers, and hardware for its Hydraulic Structure Safety Evaluation Unit.
            o Deep well inspection cameras and water monitoring units for the Irrigation Research Institute.
      104 male and four female executive, superintendent, and chief irrigation engineers were trained.
      In the State, 184 individuals were trained on disaster risk reduction policies, geographic information
       system (GIS) analysis, information technology (IT) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
      In Punjab, supervision consultants and the PIU conducted 22 training workshops on environmental
       and social safeguards for 853 participants including contactor staff, labor, community activists as well
       as officials of relevant government departments (ICR, paragraph 79).
      Exchange rate gains and project savings led to an additional 28 km of flood protection; and eight
       structures valued at PKR0.56 million (ICR, paragraph 34).

The following outputs were not achieved because these were dropped at restructuring: the establishment of
a DSS for the provincial irrigation departments, studies on river morphology, and floodplain maps.

Outcomes:

According to the results framework, the following outcomes were achieved:

      9,391,391 people were counted as direct beneficiaries (target 2,000,000 target exceeded) of these,
       1,490,000 were from the State and another 7,900,000 were from Punjab province. The target was
       exceeded because of the added flood protection works; a higher rate of individuals receiving early
       warning notifications; procurement of additional goods and services due to project savings; and
       additional beneficiaries receiving support as part of the COVID19 response.

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)




      4,646,436 female beneficiaries with 3,872,420 from Punjab and another 774,016 from the State
       (1,000,000, target exceeded). The target was exceeded because:
            o Most project interventions were designed to equally benefit male and female beneficiaries.
            o Gender dimensions were considered in all proposed studies, civil works, and disaster
              management plans.
            o Community based interventions consulted women.
            o Female participation was ensured in capacity development programs.

The ICR also reported that the following outcomes were achieved. These additional outcomes were not
included in the results framework and did not include targets.

      Nonstructural measures enhanced the flood management capabilities of the Punjab Irrigation
       Department.
           o The operationalization of the new Water Resources Division enhanced the PID’s capacity to
             undertake integrated water resources management.
           o Strengthened the capacity of the Hydraulic Structure Safety Evaluation Unit to assess
             structural safety of flood protection works by conducting hydrographic studies and
             analyzing data.
           o improved the O&M capacity of the Irrigation Research Institute by giving them the tools to
             manage future climate impacts.
           o Strengthen on-ground flood mitigation response capacity during flood emergencies by having
             field teams in place.
      The additional flood protection works benefited 206 settlements.

The following outcomes were also not included in the results framework, had no targets, and were reported
under the outcome assessments conducted at closing:

    o The restoration works, (fencing water channels, repair of powerhouse approach roads and channel
      beds, lining at power channels) reduced the vulnerability of powerhouses to floods and improved the
      resilience of electricity supply in the state.
            o Load shedding was reduced from 8 to 3 hours a day.
            o Power voltage increased from 160 to 220 volts.
            o Daily generation losses decreased (no data).
            o State revenues increased by up to 25 percent (PKR150 million, no baseline provided).
            o Power channel rehabilitation at Qadirabad and Rehras hydel (hydro-electric) power stations
              increased generation capacity from 0.293 MW to 1.371 MW plus an additional PKR9.8 million
              in revenues (ICR, paragraph 31).
    o The rehabilitation of flood works reduced losses and damages due to floods. The 2019 floods in
      Punjab and the State damaged 239 houses and led to 69 deaths compared to the 2014 floods that
      damaged 129,880 houses and led to 367 deaths. However, the monsoon rainfall in 2014 was the
      second highest for the State and fourth highest in Punjab since 1961 (ICR, footnote 15).
    o According to focus group discussions with target communities in the State at closing, land prices
      around project sites increased twelve-fold (no data).
    o Exchange rate gains and project savings that led to saving over 127,900 acres of land (no data on
      method), benefited 670,452 persons (ICR, paragraph 34).




                                                                                               Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. The intermediate outcomes
reported, from the original TOC and additional outcomes from the assessments conducted at closing,
reasonably point to the restoration of the flood protection infrastructure. The other outcomes reported outside
of the TOC pointed to the reduced impact from the 2019 floods as a result of the restored preventive flood
infrastructure measures.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen capacity to manage disasters and climate variability.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The TOC at closing provided a causal link among the inputs, outputs, and outcomes to
achieve this objective. The capacity building inputs directed at the State and Punjab institutions reasonably
led to the outputs. The outputs, when adopted and implemented, would enhance local capacity to manage
floods and other disaster events caused by climate variability.

Inputs were to include technical assistance, studies, and capacity building activities directed at the Punjab
Province and the State. The State referred to the 8 districts of Neelum, Hattian, Bagh, Poonch, Haveli, Kotli,
Bhimber, and Muzaffarabad (PAD, paragraph 7). These inputs were logically sequenced to lead to the
outputs to enhance local disaster management capacity.

Outputs were to include the completed studies, and the standard operating procedures for the Punjab
Disaster Management Fund. These outputs were reasonably attributed to the inputs. Studies on urban flash
flooding in Punjab and slope stabilization in the State were not undertaken as client priorities evolved at
implementation and these studies were dropped.

Outcomes were to be the strengthened capacity at the local level to manage disasters and climate variability.
The TOC expressed this outcome as the number of direct beneficiaries as part of core indicators, including
the share of female beneficiaries, and the number of at-risk people receiving early warning notifications
and plans that subnational departments have adopted. These outcome indicators from the results framework
were more at an intermediate rather than outcome level and were insufficient to express strengthened
capacity. The use of these outputs to save lives and protect from the impact of disasters from climate
variability could show strengthened capacity. There were no indicators to reflect the impact of the
strengthened capacity or that adopted plans would be sustained after the project closed, e.g., that budgetary
support for systems and equipment were in place or how strengthened capacity were performed in managing
subsequent disasters.

The TOC noted the following 3 critical assumptions to enhance the likelihood that the outcomes of this
objective would be achieved: (i) the Disaster Management Authorities (DMAs) will incorporate studies in
future projects; (ii) agencies will utilize institutional mechanisms after the project; (iii) skilled personnel and



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



equipment will be available to agencies after the project. Note that these assumptions were more applicable
to sustaining the outcome rather than influencing the achievement of the outcomes.

Outputs:

According to the results framework, the following outputs were achieved:

      12 studies that identified risks were completed (target 4, target exceeded). These studies included
       climate change study in Punjab, mapping of major nullah’s and tributaries to identify proposed gauging
       stations for flood warning and mitigation in the State. Punjab PDMA also developed district level multi-
       hazard vulnerability and risk assessments. A Multi-hazard Vulnerability and Risk Assessment for 15
       districts in Punjab were completed, printed, and disseminated to raise awareness on the frequency,
       magnitude, and spatial extent of hazards.
      Operational procedures for responding to disasters were in place, achieving target.
             o In Punjab, a community-based disaster risk management program at the provincial level was
                developed.
             o In the State, disaster management plans were developed for all districts.
      Standard operating procedures for the Punjab Disaster Management Fund were established,
       achieving target. However, one of the focus areas to better manage the contingent liability and meet
       financial needs for post disaster emergency response and reconstruction in Punjab was not met.
       Standard operating procedures for combating COVID19 were prepared and disseminated.

The ICR also reported that the following outputs were achieved. These additional outputs were not included in
the results framework and did not include targets.

      Capacity assessment plans were prepared for the State Disaster Management Authority, the Land
       Use Plan at the State Planning and Development Department, and for the Punjab Provincial Disaster
       Management Authority and its district level Disaster Management Authorities. The plans identified
       various equipment needs.
            o The Punjab PDMA procured mobile communication office to monitor relief and rescue
              operations in remote areas, undertake public service announcements, and disseminate key
              awareness messages. Other equipment procured included 72 breathing apparatus, 36
              hydraulic concrete chainsaw, 36 hydraulic combi tools, 8 water bowsers, 6 fiber optic cameras,
              a geographic information system (GIS) mapping services, a search and rescue drone, 2 fire
              fighting vehicles, 6 earthquake and disaster search and rescue vans, 9 water rescue units, and
              4 digital satellite news gathering vans.
            o The State DMA and 10 district DMAs received 17 fire tenders, 12 water bowsers, 11
              ambulances, 3 cranes, 12 small fire tenders.
            o Soil testing equipment, high resolution satellite imagery, and information technology (IT)
              equipment were used by the Land Use Plan of the State Planning and Development
              Department to prepare digital maps, assess land use patterns, and classify land use, uploaded
              on the Department’s website.
      Trained Punjab PDMA team on the use of the inundation model to simulate flood extents, highlight
       areas to be inundated, and identify villages in hazard zones. 225 government officials were trained to
       manage grassroots organizations. At the State level, a visit to Sri Lanka on procurement was
       conducted; job orientation for 54 newly recruited district DMA staff; and disaster risk reduction
       planning for 28 government officials were conducted. At the State level, 184 individuals were trained

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



       on disaster risk reduction policies, GIS analysis, Information Technology, and M&E. In Punjab,
       supervision consultants and PIU conducted 22 training workshops on environmental and social
       safeguards for 853 participants including contactor staff, labor, community activists as well as officials
       of relevant government departments.
      The Punjab PDMA developed a contact database of 2.98 million at-risk individuals who could be
       notified of disaster risk through text messages. The Punjab PDMA dispatched 6.15 million early
       warning messages throughout the life of the project.
      The Punjab PDMA headquarters established a state-of-the-art Emergency Operation Center (EOC) to
       serve as a hub for data collection, processing, and dissemination in real time and facilitate informed
       decision making.

Outcomes:

According to the results framework, the following outcomes were achieved:

      4,355,781 direct beneficiaries were reported (target 2,000,000 target exceeded)
      2,177,150 female beneficiaries were reported (target 1,000,000 target exceeded)
      2,980,000 at-risk people received early warning notifications through mobile short messaging services
       (baseline 50,000, target 500,000 target exceeded). The Punjab PDMA dealt with numerous shocks
       such as urban and flash flooding, smog, monsoon, heatwaves, locust infestation, and COVID19
       pandemic. These emergencies expanded the use of the existing early warning notification system.
       The early warning messages sent directly to mobile phones in affected areas for them to take
       precautionary measures (storing essential commodities, evacuation, or relocation) to help avoid
       human and material losses. Future financing of services from telecom companies for text message
       dissemination will be undertaken by the government of Punjab’s annual allocation of PKR1.0 billion for
       disaster response.
      Integrated disaster management plans were developed and adopted by departments at subnational
       levels, to reflect improved institutional capacity for flood risk management as targeted.
            o The State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) developed disaster risk management plans
                for both the State and the 10 districts. The plans were approved by the Disaster Management
                Commission. The district plans were approved by the respective District Disaster Management
                Authorities in the State.
            o In Punjab, the provincial and district plans were developed and approved by Punjab PDMA.
                These plans increased the ability of the government to absorb, accommodate, and recover
                from disasters and climate variabilities. Prevention, preparedness, response, rehabilitation, and
                recovery allowed the mainstreaming of disaster management at the subnational levels.

The ICR also reported that the following outcomes were achieved. These additional outcomes were not
included in the results framework and did not include targets.

      The disseminated district assessments identified vulnerable areas and increased the knowledge base
       on disaster and climate variability by helping districts develop disaster risk management plans
       including strategic and cost effective evacuations for at-risk communities.
      In post training survey, 89 percent of participants expressed satisfaction with the training content and
       increased their confidence and motivation. During the 2019 floods, with reduced response time,
       trained teams quickly notified at-risk communities of the coming floods.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)




                                   The PDMA IT team used GIS-based applications to manage the surveillance and monitoring
                                      dashboard for locust infestation of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
                                     PDMA also maintained apps to monitor philanthropic donations, locust monitoring, and smog
                                      reporting.
                                     The Punjab PDMA Emergency Operation Center (EOC) served as a hub for data collection,
                                      processing, and dissemination in real time and facilitate informed decision making. The EOC
                                      served as a research center to analyze, control, and manage different phases of disaster response.
                                      Future outreach by the EOC was to be undertaken by the district level EOCs across all 36 districts.
                                      The District EOCs were to provide critical grassroots level disaster risk management and 24/7
                                      reporting and rapid response. District level DMAs will consolidate their disaster management services.
                                      Similar EOCs were also established at the center and in 10 districts of the State (ICR, paragraph 46).
                                     The EOC demonstrated its capacity during the COVID19 outbreak by generating GIS-based “heat
                                      maps” situational trend analysis, trend reports, multiple alerts, for public outreach. These facilitated
                                      real time monitoring of the COVID19 outbreak across all 36 districts of Punjab. Data collected from the
                                      districts supported other initiatives such as emergency disbursements of cash assistance programs
                                      and relief activities.
                                     Punjab PDMA established 700 Village Emergency Loss of Livelihoods Reporting and Facilitation
                                      Centers (VERFCs) as flagship initiative at the sub-district and village levels to support decentralized
                                      decision making, disaster response, and information dissemination following calamities. These centers
                                      will collect First Information Reports during disasters at the community level, digitize the data to
                                      provide real time information to control rooms, district law enforcement agencies, and other disaster
                                      response agencies. During COVID19, the VERFCs collected data disseminate information to health
                                      centers, and allocated resources to local communities. This increased efficiency of government,
                                      reduced operational burdens for urban centers, improved response times, and enhanced coordination
                                      across government departments

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. There is some evidence that
                            capacity was built to address future disasters at the subnational level. Punjab was acknowledged to lead the
                            transition to a data and technology driven disaster risk reduction architecture and serve as a model for the
                            Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, promoting inter- and intra-provincial coordination for disaster risk reduction
                            and climate change.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the first objective is rated Substantial. All the indicators were
                            exceeded. There is a reasonable expectation that the residents benefited from the restored flood protection
                            infrastructure. However, as noted above, the indicators in the results framework did not sufficiently reflect the
                            outcome of the restored preventive infrastructure. Evidence from the 2019 floods were reported to reduce the


                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



  negative impact on the lives (reduced loss of lives) and livelihoods (reduced value of property damaged)
  although these were not part of the TOC or its results framework.

  The efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective is rated Substantial evident in the institutional
  response to the natural disasters such as the 2019 floods, the locust infestation, the smog alerts, and
  COVID19. The efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is not rated High because of a lack of indicators
  to show the development impact of improved capacity on the lives and livelihoods of the target community
  (see for example the benefits cited in Section 5 Efficiency below)



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, a benefit cost analysis was conducted. Three types of benefits were
identified: (i) lives saved and reduced casualties as measured by the value of statistical life and of statistical
injury; (ii) worth of reduced damage to private and public physical infrastructure using assumptions of the
Q theory of investment and externalities of public goods; and (iii) externalities such as reduced land erosion,
fewer losses of crops and livestock, resilient physical infrastructure, easy mobility, trained personnel equipped
with state-of-the-art instruments to better perform their jobs, appreciation of land value for the vulnerable
segment, rehabilitation of water schemes and other infrastructure, and expanded economic activity due to the
multiplier effect of project spending (PAD, paragraphs 57-63). The Q-theory of investment states that all
fluctuations in investment are related to marginal Q, i.e., the ratio of the shadow value to the market price of a
unit of capital. While some of the benefits can easily be quantified, others, such as systemic improvements,
research, and information dissemination, are more difficult to measure. The net present value of the benefits
was estimated to average US$835.5 million. Cost was estimated at US$125 million. The average benefit-cost
ratio of the project was estimated at 5.6.

At closing, efficiency analysis included available additional data from the expanded project scope. Economic
benefits were estimated over 10 years after the project closed. A 5 percent discount rate was used. The
discount rate for human related benefits was adjusted for population growth. The analysis used PKR175/USD
exchange rate (ICR, footnote 21). The average present value of the estimated economic benefits was US$2.5
billion. Costs were estimated at US$114.6 million since US$8 million was cancelled. The same 14 benefits that
were quantified at appraisal were also used to arrive at the estimated benefits at closing. The average benefit-
cost ratio at closing was estimated at 22.2.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project faced implementation delays, but the extended period
led to achieving or exceeding certain outcome targets. The project was prepared in a limited time frame because
it was an emergency response. The framework approach allowed the government to respond to evolving
priorities. The State (eight districts of Neelum, Hattian, Bagh, Poonch, Haveli, Kotli, Bhimber, and Muzaffarabad)
had limited experience in Bank-financed operations that led to extended discussions regarding skillsets,
competencies, and resources to set up the PIU. Some procedures proved lengthy. The government created an
umbrella coordination (PC-1) and required PC-1s for each PIU. The PIUs experienced lengthy approval
processes in hiring the Third-Party Monitoring & Validation (TPV) firm in Punjab and in procuring vehicles and

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



instruments. The 2018 general elections led to delays in obtaining approvals. The Punjab Irrigation Department's
Flood Risk Assessment Unit changed its priorities and the government requested to cancel setting up a Decision
Support System (DSS) and related river morphology studies. The project period was extended twice, with a total
of 24-month extension. First, to complete the contracted civil works and other activities after delays (see Section
8 Assessment of Bank Performance at Supervision below); and second, to address the impact of COVID19. The
delay led to losing approximately US$122 million in opportunity cost of benefits because people in target areas
remained vulnerable for an additional period (ICR, paragraph 55). The project cancelled US$8 million at closing
because of cost savings. The project used the savings to finance additional activities and resulted in exceeding
targets.

Overall, the project efficiency is rated Substantial. The high benefit-cost ratio led to good value for money. The
implementation delays and cancelled activities did not reduce the level of ambition of the operation. This was
countered by the use of cost savings to favor the achievement of the PDOs.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial. The PDOs established a strong alignment with the
government's development plan and the Bank's partnership strategy. The country's vulnerability to natural
hazards and climate change were to be addressed by strengthening local preparedness capacity. The efficacy
of the project to achieve the first objective is rated Substantial because of achieving the restored flood protection
infrastructure, albeit with minor shortcomings in the choice of outcome indicators. The efficacy of the project to
achieve the second objective is rated Substantial because of the evidence of the strengthened future capacity to
manage disasters and climate variability at the subnational levels. The overall efficacy of the project to achieve
its objectives is rated Substantial. The project strengthened DMAs future disaster resilience evident in the use of
systems and processes originally focused on flood protection to respond to COVID19. Efficiency is rated
Substantial despite initial delays, two-year extension, and dropping of some initially planned investments as cost
savings made up for the delayed benefits. The framework approach allowed for responding to evolving
government priorities. The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose substantially high risks to the development outcomes:

      Risk from retaining capacity built: In this project, political will supported the capacity built in Punjab
       and the State. However, the skilled technical personnel trained in the DRM sector need to be retained
       in the medium- and long-term. To mitigate this risk in Punjab, the provincial government indicated
       its commitment to continue with the staff and processes initiated under the project (ICR, Annex 5).
       The ICR had no information what the State has committed to in the medium term after the project
       closed. Future interventions will build on the outcome of this project for greater disaster risk
       management impact in the province.
      Risks to sustaining processes introduced by the project. In this project, changes to policies,
       operational procedures, and management plans remain to be implemented and enforced, Sub
       national governments’ financial resources are constrained and pose a risk that there are insufficient
       O&M budgets for the rehabilitated infrastructure after project close. No information was provided
       regarding the future needs of technology related outputs that need periodic updating. To mitigate this
       risk, all subprojects completed under this project were allocated O&M costs under the recurrent
       budget but unclear on the scope and period covered.
      Risk from natural hazards and climate change: In this project, effects of climate change can
       significantly alter future flooding patterns and exposure to other disasters. Considering rapid
       urbanization, inappropriate land-use planning, environmental degradation as well as an ongoing
       pandemic, the vulnerability of affected communities is likely to increase. Such risks can be further
       examined and included for mitigation in future engagement with the Government.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team designed this project as a strategic response to the 2014 floods emergency and the
  country's disaster risk management agenda, for provincial governments to move beyond relief and more
  toward medium- and long-term planning for resilience. The Bank team adopted a framework approach
  where the government had a prospective list of investments. These sub-projects and work sites were to
  be finalized using agreed upon criteria during implementation. Activities could change as government
  priorities evolved. The Bank team focused on ex-post restoration of damaged infrastructure to resilient
  standards, and ex-ante enhancement of a government capacity covering a wide geographic area but
  originally focused only on flood-related disasters. The Bank team closely coordinated with the parallel
  Jhelum and Tawi Flood Recovery Project (P154990). Both projects were jointly presented for Board
  approval. The Bank team designed the project informed by lessons from other Bank-financed recovery

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



  projects (e.g., the Balochistan Disaster Management Project). The Bank team adequately assessed
  the technical, institutional, financial, and human capacities of the subnational government level including
  departments for civil works allocating operations and maintenance (O&M) budgets for infrastructure.
  Implementation arrangements were adequate. Two Project Implementation Units (PIU) - one at the
  Punjab Irrigation Department (PID) of the Punjab Disaster Management Authority (PDMA), and the other
  at the State Planning and Development (P&D) Department with dedicated staff were to oversee project
  implementation. M&E functions were to be carried out by the PIUs. However, the emergency nature of
  the project and its narrow preparation period caused initial delays in setting up the PIUs (see Supervision
  below). The State had limited experience in Bank-financed operations. Required skillsets, competencies,
  and adequate resources were discussed at length in setting up the State PIU. Environmental and social
  safeguards were adequately assessed (see Section 10 Other Issues below).

  Overall, the performance of the Bank team at entry is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings in
  assessing the readiness of the State PIU to implement the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 13 supervision missions over the 6 year period, including virtual missions during
 the COVID19 pandemic. Training in compliance with environmental and social safeguards were carried out
 in the initial set up of the PIUs. Implementation delays were adequately addressed with training an
 repurposing of resources to respond to the COVID19 pandemic using the disaster management teams of
 the project.

 The Bank team responded to the delays by adding technical and sectoral experts to join the regular
 supervision missions and provided sectoral experts. The Bank team supported the PIUs by conducting
 training in procurement and contract management including capacity building training of contractors. These
 trainings were useful because PDMA Punjab faced issues with staff retention. Clearing safeguards in
 awarding the State civil works improved with increased capacity of the safeguards team. Implementation
 improved with timely completion of the actions agreed during Implementation Support Missions (ISMs). In
 Punjab, no disbursements in FY2018-2019 were due to postponed approvals in anticipation of the July
 2018 national elections. A new government set-up and bureaucracy changes further delayed decision
 making. This slowdown was a key reason for the first project extension.

 Government regulations on financing caused some operational delays. Procurement of flood fighting
 vehicles for the PID faced delays due to lack of timely approvals as the Punjab government pursued
 austerity. The Pakistani Rupee (PKR) depreciated against the US Dollar (USD), resulting in differences in
 projected and actual costs. The exchange rate gains, cancelled activities due to changes in government
 priorities, and the differences in estimated and actual costs led to significant project savings. The Bank
 team worked with the government to use the savings for additional investments resulting in exceeding
 target indicators even as US$8 million in uncommitted funds was cancelled.

 The COVID19 pandemic lockdowns and health risks for staff interrupted implementation. The Bank team
 supported Punjab and the State in pandemic emergency response, by financing and procuring medical and

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



 protective equipment. While the pandemic and subsequent lockdowns caused slippage in project timelines,
 the Bank was able to effectively utilize this project as a vehicle for critical and timely support to subnational
 governments, in direct alignment with the PDO. Consequently, the Government requested an 11-month
 extension of the closing date to overcome implementation delays.

 Overall, the Bank performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory. The task team and Government of
 Punjab have an ongoing dialogue for the next generation of investments on climate resilience through the
 Punjab Climate Resilience Project. The Punjab Irrigation Department will prepare a PC-II and PDMA
 Punjab will prepare a concept note by November 30, 2021.

 Overall, with both the Bank performance at entry and supervision rated Satisfactory, the overall Bank
 performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated, although one was narrowly defined to focus only on flood
 prevention; the other, broad in coverage but originally only focused on flood management capacity. The
 theory of change documented how the key activities (inputs) and outputs would lead to expected
 intermediate outcomes (outputs). The number of beneficiaries is more of an intermediate outcome but
 generally accepted as indicative of emergency interventions. In the case of the second objective, not
 all possible outcomes of the interventions were reflected in the outcome indicators of the results framework.
 Those outcomes were noted under the heading "Other Outcomes" rather than as part of the results
 framework. Due to a lack of data, targets were set as percentages at appraisal, and were revised to exact
 figures at the Mid Term Review (MTR). The indicators consisting of both quantitative and qualitative targets
 were measurable, achievable, realistic, relevant, and time bound. However, they were only focused on
 reporting on beneficiaries and not on development outcome of the interventions. For example, the three
 outcome indicators were supported by a total of five outputs. But two of the three outcome indicators were
 beneficiary related and the third outcome indicator was only a Yes/No value.

 The indicators were selected to monitor progress of component activities. The M&E staff was to collect and
 report at regular intervals with data sources, frequency, methods, and responsibility for collection. Progress
 on all indicators was to be submitted on an annual basis. The M&E design was project specific. There was
 no information in the ICR that the system would continue after the project closed.




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was implemented by the three PIUs - the Punjab Provincial Disaster Management
  Authority (PDMA), the Punjab Irrigation Department (PID), and the State P&D Department. Each PIU had
  an M&E Specialist to coordinate and consolidate reporting. PIUs regularly monitored all physical outputs.
  Site visits were conducted when Third-Party Monitoring & Validation (TPV) firms were unavailable.
  Submission of progress reports was not always timely. There were delays in PID hiring a TPV firm,
  because the Cabinet Committee had to approve the contract. This practice was not previously
  required and caused delays. Other options for contracting the services for TPV were suggested. The PID
  PIU directly contracted a TPV firm in July 2021 for 10.5 months. Over time, the timeliness and quality of
  data improved. M&E was supplemented by post training surveys. Baselines were provided by post
  disaster needs assessments (ICR, footnotes 6 and 7).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used to prepare project progress reports for use by management to monitor
  progress. Respective line departments used M&E data to address performance. The findings from the
  project’s M&E were used to inform corrective measures, informed decision making, and resource
  allocation. The quality of the evidence provided to support the achievement of the PDOs were sufficient
  to support the rating of efficacy although the indicators were not part of the results framework or the
  Theory of Change.

  The overall M&E Quality is Substantial. There were moderate shortcomings in M&E design. Lack of
  baselines (mentioned in Section 12 Lessons below) led to approximate initial targets expressed as
  percentages. The framework approach in design allowed to set more exact targets at Mid Term. The
  M&E system was generally sufficient to assess the achievement of the inputs. Survey at closing
  provided some evaluation of outcomes although most would have to be assessed after sufficient time
  has shown the adoption of the processes and capacity built. The M&E data was utilized to effectively
  track progress, monitor project activities, and record results against the PDO.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as a category “B”, and triggered OP 4.01
   Environmental Assessment and OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways. Environmental impacts
   were related to civil works associated with restoration and rehabilitation of flood embankments and
   damaged flood protection walls, raising and strengthening of riverbanks and spurs. The project prepared an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The safeguard instruments were disclosed on
   April 29, 2015. Site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared as
   needed, as civil works sites were finalized. The Punjab and State PIUs were both staffed with dedicated
   Environmental Specialists throughout the project. Bank staff trained the PIUs in preparing and implementing
   safeguards instruments. The project was acknowledged to have many good examples of safeguards

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



  compliance. These were (i) inclusion of safeguards instruments in all bidding documents, (ii) enforcement of
  penalties for contractors for safeguards non-compliances, (iii) design modifications to avoid tree cutting; (iv)
  excessive compensatory tree plantation activities and (v) soil bio-engineering techniques in areas of the
  State prone to landslides and for land restoration. The environmental and social audit by third party also
  validated safeguards compliance in the field. The project complied with all applicable safeguards policies
  (ICR, paragraph 76).

  Social Safeguards: The planned activities involved rehabilitation and repair of existing structure with low to
  moderate social impact potential. The project triggered OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Social impacts
  were anticipated, such as the possible loss of land or infrastructure, or access to land resources. The
  project team developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and site-specific Resettlement Action
  Plans (RAPs) as needed. The PID and State PIUs remained adequately staffed with a dedicated Social
  Specialist throughout the project, initially requiring support by the Bank team. No civil works in the State
  involved any displacement or resettlement. In Punjab, initial engineering designs for rehabilitation of flood
  protection bunds would have resulted in removing existing residential/communal structures and affect
  certain roads in at least 16 sub-schemes. Design was modified (adjustment in width, freeboard, wetting
  channel prism, etc.) in 15 cases to protect these structures, resulting in zero removals or displacement of
  people. Only one case (Haveli Main Line & Allied Hydraulics) required an Abbreviated Resettlement Action
  Plan (ARAP). Design adjustments could not protect all the structures and a few structures had to be
  removed. Four persons affected were paid approximately PKR 1 million in total. The project complied with
  all applicable safeguards policies (ICR, paragraph 78).

  The project website displayed the details of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and provided at the
  civil works sites in English and Urdu. Implementing agencies held a dedicated GRM session at community
  and stakeholder consultations at project sites. The GRM received and processed complaints at the sub-
  project level (office of resident engineer) and the PIU level. The project had no land acquisition
  or resettlement. No grievances on safeguards were registered. Procurement related complaints were
  received and resolved by the GRM, with copy to the Bank.

  Active stakeholder consultation was a good example of social compliance by the project. Most project
  schemes were carried out in areas where women's mobility and social activity is higher than in other parts
  of the country. In a few cases (for instance Remodeling of Marginal Bund at Panjnad, and Restoration of
  JHead Spurs near Kalowal), the stakeholder consultation agenda also included nominating community
  members to be representatives in local Grievance Redressal Committees (GRCs). Women in GRCs
  was not a priory, however.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The Financial Management system complied with Bank policies. Initial payment
  delays from the Finance department to the PIUs were experienced but this improved over time.
  Throughout implementation the PIUs were adequately staffed. Interim Financial Reports were submitted on
  time, accepted, and recorded into the system. Audit reports were also received in a timely manner and
  were acceptable to the Bank. Audit reports were issued with unqualified opinion (ICR, paragraph 81).

  Procurement: All procurement complied with the Bank’s guidelines. These were monitored/tracked using
  the Bank’s online Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system. The State PIU

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



   procurement performance was satisfactory. The PDMA and PID PIUs experienced procurement delays.
   Each PIU reallocated over 20 percent of cancelled procurement - 24 percent for PID, 20 percent for PDMA
   and 23 percent for the State. These cancelled activities were considered redundant, not pursued further,
   but also reflected a lack of activity planning. There was also a large variation in contract award time, from 2
   to 745 days from bid evaluation to contract award mostly due to delayed management approvals to
   initiate or conclude procurement activities (ICR, footnote 28). For example, procurement delays led to the
   cancellation of some activities under the Hydraulic Structure Safety Evaluation. The Health Department
   provided technical support to help the PDMA PIU to resolve the 5 complaints related to the COVID-19
   emergency procurements.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided five lessons from the operations (ICR, paragraphs 92-96). These are presented
below with slight modifications:

      A broadly formulated objective facilitates a flexible response to evolving needs. In this
       project, the objective covered disasters in a broad sense, which managed to include the
       COVID19 pandemic. The project reallocated resources for the PIUs to support the
       subnational governments, the disaster management authorities, and other departments in
       Punjab and the State to address the growing health crisis. The reallocated funds financed
       activities that contributed to enhancing local disaster management capacity.
      Specifying sites for possible subprojects prior to project start may enhance readiness
       of a project using a framework approach. In this project, appraisal was completed in five
       months because this was prepared as an emergency response. Adopting a framework
       approach meant that the government had a list of priority investments. However,
       infrastructure work sites were approved only as implementation was underway. Delays were
       experienced because some complex infrastructure works required extended preparation. The

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)



       2018 national elections and postponed procurement and contracting decisions also
       contributed to delays. identifying work sites for proposed civil works may help spur
       implementation readiness and avoid delays.
      Sectors with enhanced capacities may have room to absorb the implementation needs
       of additional investments financed by cost savings. In this project, substantial cost
       savings were generated by the exchange rate gains when the PKR continued to decline
       against the USD during the life of the project. This led to substantial differences in estimated
       and actual costs of subprojects. A change in priorities led the government to cancel some
       activities without changing the level of ambition of the project objectives. These resources
       were then used to finance additional critical subprojects to achieve disaster resilience, and in
       some cases, exceed target outcome indicators. Building the capacity of the PIUs in financial
       management and planning prepared them to absorb and implement the added investments.
      Strengthened district-level entities may become effective frontline responders to
       emergencies. In this project, design focused on enhancing the capacities of disaster
       management authorities at the grassroots level. In Punjab, this focus translated to adopting
       district level and community-based disaster management planning; establishing district level
       emergency operations centers; and village emergency reporting and facilitation centers. In
       the State, the Disaster Management Agency developed district level disaster
       risk management plans and participated in procurement. These efforts led to fostering
       outreach, coordination, and response capacities of local disaster management entities in
       Punjab and the State. Enhanced capacities were demonstrated in their response to the 2019
       floods, generating smog alerts, mapping locust infestation, predicting geographical areas to
       be affected by heatwaves, and reducing the spread of COVID19.
      Standardizing Post Disaster Needs Assessments (PDNAs) may help establish
       baselines for monitoring and evaluating emergency projects. In this project, lack of
       baselines for the project interventions led to setting initial targets in percentages. This proved
       difficult to monitor. Exact targets were established at the mid-term. The framework approach
       in project design allowed the adjustment of targets during implementation as government
       priorities evolved. Standardizing baselines, in both methods and minimum targets, may be
       further refined with ICT tools such as remote sensing, community-based monitoring, or
       application-based surveys for improved data collection, supervision, and transparency.
       These tools may help when access to physical sites is limited.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Given the recent flood disaster in Pakistan, it would be useful to look at how well the measures undertaken
  during this project contributed to mitigation efforts.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Disaster Resilience Improvement Project (P154036)




The ICR provided a clear picture of the project operation. The report was internally consistent and linked the
evidence to the findings. The report emphasized the impact of the project interventions, particularly with regard
to the capacity built at the local level for both Punjab and the State. The section describing other impacts was
helpful to support the efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives. The annexes completed the storyline
around efficiency (Annex 4), the commitment of the implementing entities after the project closed (Annex 5) and
the detailed impact of the project outputs to the beneficiaries (Annex 6). Lessons were informed by the
operation. Annex 4 provided a good overview of the factors that influenced project outcomes. These
explanations amplified the project outcomes even as there were no equivalent indicators in the results
framework. The report followed OPCS guidelines except for exceeding the suggested number of pages
(26 instead of 15).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
