        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023113

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145861                                     Skills Development and Youth Employment

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                        Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55130,IDA-H9710                         30-Jun-2020                                          56,637,141.58

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Jun-2014                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             63,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              63,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          56,637,141.58                                               0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Salim J. Habayeb              Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                            Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to support education and training for employability and private-sector led job
   opportunities for youth in the Republic of Mali (Financing Agreement dated July 25, 2014, p. 6).

   One associated outcome target related to the entrepreneurship program was moderately reduced during
   implementation to allow the consideration of “team applications” for business plan competition instead of only
   “individual applications." This procedural improvement was unrelated to project scope or ambition. The


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



   original target was substantially met, and the revised target was met. Therefore, the application of a split
   evaluation would serve no purpose in this case.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Education and Training for Employability (Appraisal: US$29.2; Actual: US$32.5 million). The
   component would support formal education and training for in-school youth and non-formal training for out-
   of-school youth to improve their skills for employability by strengthening technical and vocational education
   and non-formal short-term skills development programs.

   1.1 Strengthening Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET). The sub-component
   would strengthen specific public institutions and competitively selected private institutions in key priority
   sectors, with the development of partnerships, training of trainers, curricula, and training programs targeting
   youth 15 to 24 years old who were enrolled in formal public and private technical and vocational institutions
   at the secondary and tertiary levels. Main activities would include:

         Support to public sector TVET institutions: This would include public sector education and training
          institutions and a non-formal vocational institution related to each of the priority areas of agro-
          industry, construction, and mining sectors, with a focus on a reform package that prioritizes
          curricula, management, human resources, and physical rehabilitation. Activities would include the
          elaboration and application of competency-based approach curricula, standards, partnership
          framework with the productive sector, and performance framework with public and private providers
          related to measurable outcomes, design of entrepreneurship modules, training of trainers, and
          selected rehabilitation work and upgrading of classrooms and equipment.

         Support to private sector TVET institutions through the provision of competitively selected grants to
          expand and improve technical and vocational programs.

         Support to Ecole Normale de l’Enseignement Technique et Professionnel (ENETP), as ENETP had
          a key responsibility in quality assurance of curricula and teacher training modules. Support would
          aim at building ENETP capacity with the acquisition of teaching equipment, training of trainers, and
          the establishment of partnerships with similar regional or global institutions.

   1.2 Strengthening Skills Development for Out-of-School Youth through dual apprenticeship and short-
   term decentralized skills training programs tailored to the needs of two distinct categories of urban and rural
   out-of-school youth. The sub-component would target young people 15 to 24 years old with primary to lower
   secondary education who were living in urban areas, as well as youth ages 15 to 29 with less than lower
   secondary education or no prior education living in peri-urban and rural areas, while also ensuring broad

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



participation of females. Youth exiting from these programs would also have the opportunity to receive
additional entrepreneurship training, start-up funds, and easier access to credit as outlined in Component 2.

The dual apprenticeship programs in urban localities would be combined with formal training to confer
cognitive and technical skills. Apprenticeships would include 80 percent of time in the workplace and 20
percent of time in training at an accredited private training center.

The decentralized skills training program would use a modular training program of the Ministry of National
Entrepreneurship, Employment and Vocational Training (MEFP) to train out-of-school youth with flexible
modalities both on and off the workplace and to prepare them for integration in the local labor market in
agriculture, livestock, construction, and other key sectors, with a focus on youth who had very limited or no
education in peri-urban and rural areas, including post-conflict areas where the program had the potential to
help in reintegrating youth at risk. The most motivated youth would then be able to participate in the
entrepreneurship program supported by Component 2.



2. Private Sector-Led Job Creation for Youth (Appraisal: US$25.1 million; Actual: US$20.4 million).
The component would support private sector led job creation to improve job opportunities for youth through
two key strategies: (i) entrepreneurship for youth; and (ii) development and strengthening of established
micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs).

2.1 Supporting Entrepreneurship for Youth. This sub-component would support entrepreneurship
development through two programs adapted for youth, ages 21-35 years, with different education and
training levels:

      The entrepreneurship program for youth with limited education would support youth with lower levels
       of formal technical education or non-formal education and training to start their own micro-
       enterprises through a combination of seed funding and training.

      The entrepreneurship program for youth with at least upper secondary education would support
       youth with at least upper secondary education who had the potential for creating somewhat larger
       enterprises in the informal and formal sector. The program would combine training, coaching, and
       technical and financial support.

2.2 Supporting Established Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) for Job Creation. The sub-
component would support selected SMEs (in existence for more than five years) with plans to scale up by
facilitating access to markets and credit, and to ad-hoc specialized managerial, business, and technical
expertise. The sub-component would provide matching grants to support high-potential local SMEs to
improve their productivity, production processes, processing, and/or marketing, by facilitating their access to
finance, value chain development, specific skills, sound business plans, and partnerships with good practice
investors. To address credit constraints, an Auto Revolving Fund for Employment (FARE) would also
guarantee loans to help alleviate credit constraints for new and established MSMEs.



3. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (Appraisal: US$8.7 million; Actual US$11.2
million). The component would support the provision of works, goods, consultant and non-consultant


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



   services, training, and operating costs for: (a) developing an employment information system, including
   capacity building for a labor market observatory; (b) developing a skills certification and employment
   promotion framework, including updating of relevant legal frameworks and policy documents, and promoting
   multi-sector consultation frameworks; (c) institutional strengthening of relevant technical departments of
   employment and vocational training, secondary education, industry and investments, and executing
   agencies; and (d) activities of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) for project coordination, monitoring,
   evaluation, and fiduciary compliance.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost and financing: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$63 million, consisting of an
   International Development Association (IDA) Credit of US$36.1 million equivalent and an IDA Grant of
   US$26.9 million. In addition, the Borrower intended to contribute an amount equivalent to about US$1.9
   million, under which World Bank procurement guidelines would not be applied, to finance the salary of the
   Project Coordinator and supplemental operating costs related to project piloting (PAD, p. 18). The actual
   cost was US$56.6 million. US$/SDR exchange rate fluctuations contributed to the difference between
   original and actual costs.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 27, 2014 and became effective on November 24, 2014. The
   original closing date was planned for June 30, 2020. A Mid-Term Review was carried out in March 2018. A
   level-2 restructuring on September 13, 2019 extended the project closing date by 12 months from June 30,
   2020 to June 30, 2021, reallocated funds between disbursement categories, and revised the results
   framework. On June 18, 2021, a second level-2 restructuring further extended the closing June by six
   months to December 31, 2021, at which date the project closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Development objectives were responsive to deeply rooted employability challenges facing Malian youth,
further aggravated by the 2012 socio-political crisis in the country. More than 70 percent of youth between
ages 15 and 24 had very limited qualifications and skills for employability. The majority of these youth were
employed in generally low productivity/quality jobs in the informal agriculture and service sectors, and 20
percent were unemployed or inactive (PAD, p. 2). Education outcomes were poor, pointing to a skills
mismatch with current and future labor market needs (ICR, p. 6). The completion rate of primary education
was only 48 percent, and only one-third of school-age students were enrolled in upper secondary
education.

At appraisal, objectives were aligned with the World Bank’s Interim Strategy Note for the period FY 2014-
2015, in particular with its two pillars on: (i) protecting human capital and building resilience; and (ii)
preparing the conditions for economic recovery for Mali that focused on long-term economic growth,
building human capital and resilience to shocks, and boosting economic competitiveness by addressing skill
gaps (ICR, p. 17). Objectives were also aligned with the country’s policy framework for skills and
employment, including the 2011 national youth employment policy, the 2011 legal framework for the


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



               promotion of the private sector, and the 2009 national policy on technical and vocational education and
               training.

               During implementation, objectives continued to be relevant to government plans. The 2015 National
               Employment Policy, which defined the strategic context that underpinned all national and multilateral
               initiatives for creating jobs, aimed at addressing three main challenges: (i) structural inadequacy of decent
               job opportunities; (ii) poor level of human capital and reduced employability; and (iii) lack of adequate
               information on the labor market. In 2019, Mali adopted the Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery
               and Sustainable Development (2019-2023), which aims at promoting inclusive growth and the development
               of human capital by encouraging the creation of value and jobs while giving priority to diversifying the
               economy and developing agricultural value chains through increased industrial processing of local products.

               Prior to project closing in 2021, objectives remained fully relevant to the Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for the period FY2016-2019, specifically to CPF Objective 3.1: Develop Human Capital under Focus
               Area 3 on Building Resilience, where the CPF highlighted the fact that skill programs would contribute to
               creating more employment opportunities for youth. Related CPF indicators and supplementary progress
               milestones were intertwined with those of the project, including for out-of-school youth enrollment in dual
               apprenticeship programs, and for out-of-school youth employment or self-employment within one year of
               training completion.

               The above referenced CPF for the period 2016-2019 was the most recent partnership framework available
               at project closing on December 31, 2021. The preparation of a Country Engagement Note was initiated but
               was postponed in view of the volatile country situation. According to Task Team clarifications of September
               19, 2022, an Engagement Note for FY2023-2024 is currently under preparation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support education and training for employability for youth

                             Rationale
                             Note on the objective statement: Since the term “support” raised some ambiguity in terms of intended
                             outcomes, these were inferred from the project description in the Financing Agreement (pp. 6-7) where the
                             term "strengthening” was used, from the PAD’s description, and from the ICR’s theory of change (p. 9) where
                             all outcomes related to education and training for employability and private-sector led job opportunities for
                             youth were to be measured by “increases” in key associated outcome indicators. Hence the project intended



                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



to achieve a quantitative increase, augmentation, or scale up in the stated PDO elements. This was also
confirmed by the Task Team on September 19, 2022.

The overall project strategy encompassed a two-pronged approach to develop skills for Malian youth and to
promote job creation. First, skills development would focus on both the formal and non-formal education and
training sectors, with emphasis on supporting more relevant and efficient technical tracks, revamping the
apprenticeship program, and creating new and more relevant opportunities for short-term skills development
for out of school youth. Second, job creation would target the private sector by supporting would-be
entrepreneurs and emerging or established SMEs with potential for job creation.

The theory of change for Objective 1 held that support to: (i) public sector institutions in value chain priority
areas for competency-based curriculum development, management and human resources capacity
development, and facilities rehabilitation; (ii) private institutions with provision of grants for upgrading
curricula, training of staff, and equipment; (iii) ENETP for quality assurance in curricula and teacher training
modules; (iv) dual apprenticeships programs with training for youth and master apprentices; and (v)
decentralized and flexible short-term training for out-of-school youth, would result in an increased number of
youths enrolled in TVET institutions; increased number of private TVET institutions strengthened; increased
number of out-of-school youth enrolled in dual apprenticeship programs; and increased number of out-of-
school youth enrolled in skills training programs.

The above results would plausibly contribute to augment education and training that promote employability,
measured by graduation, completion, and employment rates.



Outputs and intermediate results

The project provided support to five selected public institutions in the rehabilitation of facilities; provision of
educational equipment, materials, and tools; human resources development; and competency-based
curricula.

The project developed 21 new technical and professional competency-based training programs and eight
vocational training programs. According to the ICR (p. 47), these training programs are currently being offered
in all public TVET institutions beyond the five target institutions. The new programs contributed to the
diversification of training pathways and to strengthening the link between training and the labor market. They
included (i) agri-food processing such as milk processing, cereal processing, and oilseed product processing;
(ii) construction aspects such as site management, elevator installation and repairs, painting, and electricity;
and (iii) leather programs such as tannery, leather goods, and manufacturing.

The project provided support to nine private institutions that were competitively selected through the provision
of grants for upgrading curricula, training of staff, and provision of equipment. According to the ICR, these
nine institutions are now ranked among the best private TVET institutions in the country, resulting in their
enhanced status and contributing to regional partnerships with Benin, Morocco, and Tunisia in the fields of
agricultural training, livestock and agricultural processing, and solar energy (ICR, p. 20).

Youth enrolled in the public TVET institutions supported by the project in the three priority sectors increased
from a baseline of 2,100 in 2014 to 3,680 youths in 2021, exceeding the target of 3,300 youths.


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



Out-of-school youth enrolled in dual apprenticeship programs under the project reached 4,858 youth,
exceeding the target of 4,500 youths, out of whom 32.7 percent were females, exceeding the target of 30
percent.

Out-of-school youth enrolled in the skills training program under the project reached 23,718 youths,
exceeding the target of 20,000 youths, out of whom 30 percent were females, short of the target of 40 percent
female youths. According to the ICR, female participation remained challenging mostly due to cultural norms
and the fact that women are less inclined to enroll in training in the areas of construction, fish farming, or
industry, as they remain concentrated in a few sub-sectors such as hair dressing, agriculture processing, and
soap making, among others.

A total of 1,540 trainers were trained on improving sessions, preparation, leading sessions, and evaluating
learning. 136 trainers benefited from advanced training programs, and eight trainers obtained qualifying
diplomas of "Brevet de Technicien Supérieur."

The project improved ENETP capacity to support TVET, including through (i) equipping three workshops and
laboratories to support education and training in mechanics, hydraulics, and electronics; and (ii) pedagogical
training of 36 teachers in competency-based training. ENETP established links with the Ecole Normale
Supérieur d’Enseignement Technique de Rabat in Morocco to continue improving its capacities.

The number of student beneficiaries was 46,735 students, exceeding the target of 37,000 students, out of
whom 14,532 students were females, exceeding the target of 13,320 female students.

As noted under Component I (section 2d), decentralized and flexible training arrangements facilitated training
progress and its reach. Decentralized short-term training helped in being closer to where families lived, thus
also contributing to the alleviation of some barriers to women’s participation (ICR, p. 26).



Outcomes

Youth graduating with a Certificate of Professional Aptitude (CAP level: 2-year program) in public TVET
institutions supported by the project reached 76.3 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent. However, no
results could be measured for youth graduating with the Technical Degree or Brevet de Technicien (BT level:
4-year program) because the first enrollments took place only in 2019. Delayed enrollment in the BT program
was related to the construction of facilities and equipment installation. Nevertheless, at the time of the ICR,
1,142 youths were enrolled in BT programs. Graduation results were not available prior to the submission of
the ICR.

The proportion of out-of-school youth who completed the skills training program was 100 percent, exceeding
the target of 90 percent, out of whom 31 percent were females, exceeding the target of 30 percent.

The proportion of out-of-school youth who completed the short-term skills training program employed or self-
employed within one year of completion reached 83.7 percent, exceeding the target of 70 percent.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



The proportion of out-of-school youth who completed dual apprenticeship programs reached 84.6 percent,
exceeding the target of 80 percent, out of whom 35.4 percent were females, exceeding the target of 30
percent.

The proportion of out-of-school youth who completed dual apprenticeship programs and who were employed
or self-employed within one year of completion reached 75.1 percent, attaining the target of 75 percent.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support private sector led job opportunities for youth

Rationale
The theory of change held that (i) promoting youth entrepreneurship and the creation of micro-enterprises by
providing seed grants, loan guarantees, business plans, and mentoring; and (ii) supporting established SMEs
for job creation by providing matching grants and loan guarantees, would result in increased numbers of non-
graduate youth with simplified project plans, and graduate youth with business plans. These outputs would
plausibly contribute to increasing private sector-led job opportunities, measured by increased numbers of
enterprises created or scaled up for job creation.



Outputs and intermediate results

The number of youths with completed simplified project plans under the entrepreneurship program for non-
graduates reached 6,500 youths, attaining the target.

The number of youths with completed business plans under the entrepreneurship program for graduates
reached 1,020 youths, exceeding the target of 1,000 youths.

The project supported the development and functioning of a labor market observatory: “National Observatory
of Employment and Training" (ONEF). In December 2013, during project preparation, the government issued
an ordinance to establish the observatory. The project equipped the observatory, including with computers,
software, and communication technologies, financed staff training, and supported its activities and surveys.
Beginning in 2017, ONEF started conducting surveys, such as beneficiary surveys of the short-term skills
training, dual apprenticeship program, and entrepreneurship program for youth with limited education. In
2018, it conducted a “value chain” survey to identify job-creating sectors and their value chains. In 2019, it
conducted a beneficiary survey of the youth that received support to develop income-generating
activities/businesses with a focus on: (i) characteristics of microenterprises; (ii) progress of economic activity
of enterprises; (iii) survival of enterprises; and (iv) level of satisfaction of beneficiaries. It also conducted a
study on the dual apprenticeship program to assess the satisfaction of youth with the training received. In

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



                            2020, ONEF carried out a survey of the dual apprenticeship program to measure the levels and conditions of
                            insertion. Importantly, the studies provided an opportunity to link between the economy and employment,
                            specifically to understand: (i) training and employment needs; and (ii) how best to adapt training to those
                            needs. According to the ICR (p. 23), the surveys helped in creating a feedback loop to continuously improve
                            training and relevance of TVET.



                            Outcomes

                            Outcomes were reflected by the augmentation of entrepreneur youths who created or consolidated
                            enterprises and by additional jobs that were further created in cascade by these enterprises.

                            Enterprises created or consolidated by the project’s entrepreneurship program aggregated at 4,931
                            enterprises in 2021, exceeding the target of 3,500 enterprises. The proportion of females involved in creating
                            or consolidating these enterprises was 50 percent, meeting the target. The total of 4,931 enterprises included
                            the following (ICR, p. 22, and Task Team clarifications):

                                  Enterprises that were created or consolidated by non-graduate youth reached 4,415 enterprises,
                                   exceeding the target of 3,000 enterprises. In addition, these enterprises also created 7,945 jobs. The
                                   enterprise survival rate after two years was 82.8 percent (ICR, p. 22).
                                  Enterprises created or consolidated by graduate youth reached 401 enterprises, short of the original
                                   target of 500, but attaining the revised target of 400 enterprises, under which graduate beneficiaries
                                   also created 565 additional jobs. The selection process evolved over time: initially, it was led by public
                                   sector officials, and subsequently by members of the private sector, indicative of a growing public-
                                   private partnership.
                                  95 well-established enterprises benefitted from matching grants to scale-up their activities, and 20
                                   other enterprises were strengthened through partnerships.

                            The number of established and high-potential enterprises in existence for more than five years that were
                            scaled up reached 144 enterprises in December 2021, exceeding the target of 130 enterprises. These scaled-
                            up enterprises created 540 new jobs.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The two objectives to support education and training for employability and private sector-led job opportunities
                            for youth were almost fully achieved. The project made substantial advances in enhancing training,
                            apprenticeships, and entrepreneurship that promoted employment and self-employment. The project also


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



  built the capacities of the labor market observatory to conduct the necessary studies and surveys that allowed
  further understanding of labor market needs and relevance of training. Overall efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the economic analysis considered main benefits in terms of increased employability and earning
capacity of trained youth. It made reasonable assumptions, including on rates of graduation, drop-outs, and
employability. Using a discount rate of 4 percent, the project’s net present value (NPV) was estimated at
US$706.9 million, with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 31 percent over 25 years, indicating that benefits would
substantially exceed investment costs.

The ex-post analysis confirmed the likelihood of substantial returns. Using assumptions similar to those made at
appraisal, the economic analysis used the lower bound of the present discounted value of benefits for the overall
project. The corresponding NPV was estimated to be US$81.5 million with an associated IRR of 15.2 percent.

Implementation aspects were adequate overall, and there were no shortcomings in fiduciary compliance (see
section 10). Implementation progress was rated moderately satisfactory throughout most of the implementation
period (ICR, p. 30). The project faced initial delays in the procurement of civil works and TVET equipment and
some coordination challenges among various agencies, which were subsequently overcome and facilitated by
the adherence of the PCU and Ministry of National Entrepreneurship, Employment and Vocational Training
(MEFP) to monthly follow-up meetings with various actors and by the provision of additional technical
assistance.

In 2020, there were interruptions and travel restrictions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. A coup d’état on
August 18, 2020 triggered the World Bank’s OP 7.30 with temporary cessation of project financing beyond
minimal levels. When the OP 7.30 evaluation process was completed three months later, disbursements
resumed in November 9, 2020. According to the ICR (p. 26), the subsequent pace of implementation was swift,
and by project closing in December 2021, the vast majority of project envisaged outputs were achieved.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



                                                                                      100.00
Appraisal                                                   31.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                                15.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high in view of full consistency with government programs and the Country
Partnership Framework. Efficacy is rated substantial, as objectives were almost fully met. Efficiency is rated
substantial in view of high expected returns, but with some shortcomings in implementation aspects that
moderately reduced efficiency. The overall outcome is rated satisfactory, indicative of essentially minor
shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of its objectives, in its efficiency, and in its relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The overarching risk to sustaining development outcomes is related to continued political tension and conflict
within the country. At the same time, project activities have been institutionalized, and the original capacity
risks were mitigated by institutional strengthening at various levels. Training programs developed under the
project are currently being offered in all public TVET institutions (ICR, p. 19). Also, the National Observatory
of Employment and Training has developed strong capacity to conduct labor market and employer surveys to
better monitor employment issues and to produce data that are being used to develop employment
strategies, improve training, and further understand links with the job market. It is likely that overall improved
capacities will contribute to sustaining project-related approaches and development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Overview: Overall, implementation arrangements were well prepared, including for institutional aspects,
  fiduciary compliance, safeguards, and M&E aspects (ICR, p. 31).

  Project design had multi-sectoral characteristics associated with TVET. MEFP had primary responsibility
  for leading and coordinating the project. It was supported by a PCU and a multi-sectoral Project
  Implementation Steering Committee (PAD, p. 21). Implementation arrangements and fiduciary
  responsibilities were adequately defined among agencies. The Ministry of Trade and Industry would have

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



  a co-leadership role in the entrepreneurship program, and the Directorate for Technical and Professional
  Education would co-lead in TVET. The National Directorate for Higher Education would be involved in
  teacher training aspects. The Fund for the Support of Vocational Training and Apprenticeship would
  assist in implementing the dual apprenticeship program in coordination with the Federation of Craftsmen
  and other industrial associations in the country. The entrepreneurship program for non-graduates would
  be implemented by the Agency for the Promotion of Youth Employment in coordination with FARE. The
  entrepreneurship program for graduates would be implemented by a private institution to be competitively
  selected in coordination with FARE.

  Lessons learned from national and international experience reflected in the design included adopting an
  inclusive and participatory approach, using realistic indicators, involving employers, fostering
  entrepreneurship, and balancing short-term and long-term needs for institutional strengthening (PAD, pp.
  19-20).

  Overall implementation arrangements were well prepared, including for institutional, fiduciary, and M&E
  arrangements. Key risks and appropriate mitigation measures were identified during preparation,
  including risks of tensions among stakeholders in a multi-sectoral operation. The project was to be
  implemented in a volatile political and social environment and with limitations in overall institutional
  capacities. Mitigation measures included (ICR, p. 30): (i) elaboration of clearly defined roles and
  responsibilities for all implementing entities in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM); (i) signing of
  Memoranda of Understanding with executing agencies with clear delineation of roles and responsibilities;
  (iii) assigning a focal point to be appointed by each ministry to facilitate coordination between ministries
  and the PCU; (iv) clarifying financial management procedures in the PIM, customization of accounting
  software for the project, and recruitment of external consultants to carry out quarterly internal control
  reviews and physical verifications; and (iv) recruitment of procurement specialists, inclusion of detailed
  procurement guidelines in the PIM, and arranging for extensive training of staff involved in procurement.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision and implementation support missions were undertaken regularly on a semi-annual basis.
 Missions included specialists in education, fiduciary aspects, and safeguards. The Task Team was
 reportedly pro-active in providing support to the government and in addressing arising challenges.
 According to the ICR (p. 30), the team’s performance was further reinforced by effective engagement of the
 PCU, MEFP, and implementing units, complemented by technical assistance. The team’s monitoring and
 reporting on financial management, procurement, and safeguards compliance were regular, and the team
 assisted country counterparts to further build capacity in these areas. The team adequately reported on
 project progress and arising issues in aides-memoire, back-to-office reports, and Implementation Status
 and Results Reports (ISRs). To facilitate coordination among different stakeholders, the team initiated the
 organization of monthly follow-up meetings between the PCU, MEFP, and representatives of implementing

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



 bodies. The team facilitated project restructuring and extension of the closing date to allow completion of
 planned activities and to allow the institutionalization of main project interventions.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As noted in section 4, the main thrust of the objective statement on education and training for employability
 and private sector-led job opportunities for youth was clear, but the use of the term “support” raised some
 ambiguity in terms of intended outcomes. These were inferred from the Financing Agreement, the PAD,
 and the theory of change as a quantitative increase in the stated PDO elements, as also confirmed by the
 Task Team interview.

 In this context, the design had a clear and logical results chain linking activities, outputs, intermediate
 results, and outcomes. The results framework was robust. Data would be collected from routine reporting
 and surveys, supplemented by a labor market observatory that would be made operational under the
 project to provide additional information on labor market trends, insertion results, and feedback from
 employers (PAD, p. 22). The project design also aimed at improving the education management
 information (EMIS) system within MEFP to assist in managing the TVET sub-sector.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation proceeded as planned throughout the implementation period. Indicators were adequately
  tracked, and the results framework was regularly updated in a timely manner.

  The National Observatory of Employment and Training conducted all envisioned studies. An inventory of
  SMEs was completed. EMIS systems were developed, and staff were trained in their utilization, including
  staff of the National Directorate for Vocational Training, Department of Finance, Human Resources
  Department, and the National Directorate of Secondary Education (ICR, p. 31).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular project monitoring and were shared with stakeholders. EMIS is
  being used to monitor enrollment in TVET institutions and vocational training centers (ICR, p. 32).



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



  Importantly, ONEF, Mali’s labor market observatory, was fully institutionalized and continues to carry out
  monitoring and evaluation of TVET (ICR, p. 31).

  The observatory strengthened the links between training and employment needs of the market. The high
  quality of work of the observatory was well regarded within the region and, according to the ICR (p. 23),
  ONEF is now chairing the African Network of Observatories for Employment and Vocational Training.

  M&E provided robust and reliable evidence on outcome achievements. Apart from minor shortcomings,
  the M&E system’s design, implementation, and utilization were more than sufficient to assess the
  achievement of objectives and to test the links in the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Overview: The Overall Safeguard Rating was moderately satisfactory throughout implementation.

   The project was classified under Environmental Category B, as it triggered safeguard policy BP 4.10 in view
   of potential risks related to classroom construction. An Environmental and Social Management Framework
   was prepared and disclosed. Local actors were effectively engaged in the implementation of environmental
   and social safeguards measures. Safeguards were consistently monitored during project implementation,
   and findings were reported in the ISRs. Compliance performance was consistently rated as moderately
   satisfactory.

   Although there were no direct investments in known heritage areas, the safeguard policy on Physical
   Cultural Resources OP/ BP 4.11 was triggered, as covered cultural resources may potentially be dug up
   during civil works. Also, a chance find procedure was inserted as a clause in enterprise contracts (ISDS,
   May 12, 2014, p. 6). No information was provided by the ICR on potential findings during the
   implementation period.

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 was also triggered. Although no type of land take or loss of economic
   assets was expected, some SMEs may require land space, and a Resettlement Policy Framework was
   prepared to ensure that preventive measures were in place in case any resettlement occurs (ISDS May 12,
   2014, pp. 5-6). The ICR (p. 32) noted that compensation for economic loss was made for a few persons
   affected by construction activities. Vulnerable groups were also identified and received support from the
   project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



   Both financial management and procurement performance ratings alternated between moderately
   satisfactory and satisfactory during the implementation period, including under regular procurement
   performance rating assessment missions (PRAMS) conducted by the World Bank’s procurement team.
   Throughout implementation, the PCU was adequately organized, and its procurement personnel had the
   necessary skills with clearly defined responsibilities (ICR, p. 33). Further capacity development workshops
   for both financial management and procurement were conducted by the World Bank’s financial
   management specialists for PCU staff. The PCU also conducted regular meetings with the Project Steering
   Committee. Interim financial reports were submitted in a timely manner and were of acceptable quality.
   Audits were unqualified (ICR, p. 33).

   The PCU migrated to the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) in 2018.
   Procurement plans were updated and submitted regularly. The final PRAMS assessment of September
   2021 showed that: (i) the PCU was knowledgeable of the procurement rules and was organized to adhere
   to the fundamental principles of procurement, value for money, and accountability; (ii) procurement plans
   were realistic and aligned with the officially approved budget; (iii) the target market was generally stable
   and did not suffer from supply chain risks; and (iv) the risks of fraud and corruption were low, and there
   were no restrictions on opening up competition in the market.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                 M&E provided robust evidence
                                                                                 on the achievement of
                                                                                 outcomes. Apart from minor
                                                                                 shortcomings, the M&E system’s
                                                                                 design, implementation, and
Quality of M&E                    Substantial          High
                                                                                 utilization were more than
                                                                                 sufficient to assess the
                                                                                 achievement of objectives and to
                                                                                 test the links in the results chain.
                                                                                 M&E contributed to increased

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



                                                                                   understanding of training
                                                                                   relevance to market needs for
                                                                                   employment. The capacities of
                                                                                   the labor market observatory
                                                                                   that were developed under the
                                                                                   project and the high quality of its
                                                                                   M&E work were harnessed at
                                                                                   the regional level, as the
                                                                                   observatory is now chairing the
                                                                                   African Network of
                                                                                   Observatories for Employment
                                                                                   and Vocational Training.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 34-350 identified several important lessons, including the following lessons partially re-
stated by IEG:

Skills development interventions can be remarkably successful in fragile settings when the
design includes decentralized and flexible short-term training that can reach the maximum
number of young people in rural areas. The project accommodated the country’s immediate
needs of providing employment for unemployed and underemployed youth in rural areas by
providing skills training in a decentralized manner with certification upon completion and with
opportunities for apprenticeships. Flexible skills training arrangements helped in accommodating the
life situations of young rural beneficiaries. Decentralized short-term training provided training closer
to where families live and has likely contributed to alleviating some of the barriers to the participation
of young women.

In value chain domains, effective selection of beneficiaries, entrepreneurship training, and
the provision of seed funds are critical for new entrepreneurs to begin and sustain their
businesses. The project provided entrepreneurship training that included the preparation of
business plans as well as seed funds for beneficiaries selected to start Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises. This lesson also generated a recommendation to organize continuing education and
training with mentoring and technical support to enhance continued viability of new Small and
Medium Enterprises.

The creation of an effective labor market observatory facilitates the monitoring of labor
market supply and demand. The project supported the establishment of a labor market
observatory that provided valuable information to government, training institutions, and businesses
for improving TVET operations.

Dual apprenticeship programs can be an effective approach to fostering job market
integration and/or self-employment. Under the project, dual apprenticeship programs in urban
localities (combining formal training to confer cognitive and technical skills for one-third of the time
and apprenticeship for two-thirds of the time) were found to be effective. Associated apprenticeship


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Skills Development and Youth Employment (P145861)



reforms also resulted in system improvements, including flexibility and duration, equitable access,
and strengthening partnerships with the participation of professional organizations.

Strong private sector engagement is essential for promoting the relevance of skills training
programs. The project placed considerable emphasis on engaging the private sector through
private sector-led job creation strategies to improve employment opportunities for youth. In doing so,
the project supported entrepreneurship programs for youth, scaled up established enterprises, and
strengthened private TVET institutions to expand and improve their technical and vocational
programs. The project included business leaders within the TVET governance structures. This
engagement helped to instill private sector confidence in the training programs.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a thorough and complete overview of the project experience. It was results-oriented. Its
narrative was accurate and aligned to development objectives. The narrative supported the ICR ratings. The
ICR had a well-established theory of change with clear and logical links between activities, outputs,
intermediate results, and outcomes. The evidence provided was robust. The ICR’s analysis was well focused
and candid. The ICR was especially strong in analyzing efficacy and contextual aspects. It offered multiple
specific lessons that were directly derived from project experience. These should be useful for similar future
TVET operations in fragile settings. The ICR was internally consistent and followed guidelines. Apart from being
lengthy, the overall quality of the ICR was high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
