     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023071

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P150374                                     Somali Urban Investment Planning

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A8878                                    31-Dec-2021                                            3,209,188.13

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Feb-2016                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              1,060,000.00                                     3,210,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               1,060,000.00                                     3,209,188.13

 Actual                                           1,060,000.00                                     3,209,188.13




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Vibecke Dixon                 Kavita Mathur                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. viii) and the Financing Agreement of February 21,
   2016 (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to provide (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary
   plans for, selected urban investment and institutional strengthening activities in southern Somalia, Puntland
   and Somaliland, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.”

   When the project received Additional Financing (AF) in 2018, the scope of the project was expanded to the
   cities of Kismayo and Baidoa and the objective of the project was revised to “provide (i) an assessment of

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



   the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and institutional strengthening activities
   in targeted areas, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating
   agencies”.

   For the purpose of this ICRR, the latest of the two PDOs will be assessed, and it will be parsed in two as
   follows:

        1. To provide an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment
           and institutional strengthening activities in targeted areas; and
        2. To provide enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.

   This project was part of the Somalia Urban Resilience Program which included in total three interrelated
   projects (the Somalia Urban Investment Planning Project, the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase 1, and
   the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Jan-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Mogadishu (appraisal estimate US$1.73 million, actual US$1.73 million): This
   component was to conduct feasibility- and preliminary design studies for the primary roads to assess
   whether the selection of the three roads by the Benadir Regional Administration (BRA) was the most
   efficient use of roads funds in relation to the roads already being upgraded with Turkish assistance.

   Component 2: Garowe (appraisal estimate US$0.98 million, actual US$0.98 million): This component
   was to conduct feasibility- and preliminary design studies to assess whether the identified roads and
   potential bridges were to be the most efficient use of the roads funds.

   Component 3: Hargeisa (appraisal estimate US$1.03 million, actual US$1.03 million): This component
   was to conduct feasibility- and preliminary design studies for solid and liquid waste investments to
   determine the costs and siting of bulk solid and liquid waste disposal/treatment sites and improvements in
   transfer points/stations.

   All three components were to conduct a baseline survey of Environmental & Social (E&S) information, data,
   and issues to inform SURP design and develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



  (ESMF) for managing E&S risks related to urban investments, regardless of funding source, to be used
  by local authorities. On the institutional level, all three components were to conduct an institutional
  assessment to inform the preparation of institutional strengthening activities (component 1 at the Benadir
  Regional Administration (BRA) and the Federal Ministry of Public Works; component 2 at the Garowe
  Municipality; and component 3 at the Hargeisa Municipality (HM) and the Hargeisa Water Agency (HWA)).
  Finally, each component was to finance the establishment of a PIU to prepare for and lead the
  implementation of the Somalia Urban Resilience Project (SURP).

  Component 4: Cross-cutting activities (appraisal estimate US$1.83 million, actual US$1.83 million):
  This component was to finance several activities: (i) an assessment of the Local Development Fund (LDF);
  (ii) cross-cutting studies on conflict and socio-economic impact of selected infrastructure components;
  (iii) an external financial audit of the project across all four implementing agencies; and (iv) implementation
  enhancements to mitigate security risks associated with working in the fragile environment.

  In June 2018 when the project received AF the geographic scope of the project was expanded to include
  two new municipalities, Kismayo and Baidoa. All original activities under each component as stated above
  were implemented for the two new municipalities. The objectives and related indicators remained the
  same, so no split rating is necessary.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$6.0 million. In 2018 the project received AF in the
  amount of US$3.0 million. Actual cost was US$9.0 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by three Trust Funds (TF): (i) TF-A8878 in the amount of US$1.06
  million which was completely disbursed); (ii) TF-0A1710 of US$0.7 million; (iii) TF-0A1754 in the amount of
  US$1.45 million; (iv) TF0A8879 in the amount of US$1.94 million (which was fully disbursed); (v) TF0A1755
  in the amount of US$3.25 million; and (vi) TF0A1724 in the amount of US$.25 million. All TFs were fully
  disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any contributions.

  Dates: The project was restructured four times:

        On June 6, 2017, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the loan closing date from June 30,
         2017, to December 31, 2017, to allow for the implementation of project activities under the Recipient
         Executed (RE) grants that had been delayed in order to ensure sufficient time for the follow-on
         project to be prepared.
        On December 8, 2017, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the closing date from closing
         date from December 31, 2017, to June 30, 2018, to provide sufficient time for the processing of the
         AF and follow-on project.
        On June 4, 2018, the project was restructured (level 2) to: (i) extend the closing date from June 30,
         2018, to December 31, 2018, to allow for processing of the SUIPP Additional Financing for Kismayo
         and Baidoa.
        On January 16, 2019, the project received AF in the amount of US$3.0 million to scale up activities
         to the cities of Kismayo and Baidoa. Also, the PDO was revised to “to provide (i) an assessment of
         the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and institutional

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



                            strengthening activities in targeted areas, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation
                            capacity of participating agencies.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
After two decades of civil war, Somalia was on a path to political stabilization. Somalia has been affected by
fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) for decades. As a result, the country experienced and continues to
experience high levels of poverty.

Somalia has the world’s lowest rate of access to water and sanitation. At the time of appraisal, urban
services and infrastructure were in poor condition throughout the territory including roads and transport,
drainage, water supply, sanitation, and solid waste removal. Investment in urban infrastructure and service
delivery to improve the economic productivity of Somali cities and living conditions for urban dwellers was
identified as an urgent priority.

The institutional environment pertaining to urban development and management consisted of two key
levels. At the local/sectoral level, city governments had the most functional powers and responsibilities in
respect of urban infrastructure and services provision and management together with public utilities. In rural
areas, local infrastructure and services were delivered by District Councils. In general, at both levels,
institutions were weak, had limited financial resources and required strengthening.

A systematic analysis of the economic and demographic structure of the Somali urban system had not been
conducted yet. This project was the World Bank’s first urban infrastructure project in Somalia financed
through the Multi-Partner Fund (MPF) for Somalia.

The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (FY19-22),
which aims to build the capacity of Somali municipalities for urban resilience. Also, the objective of the
project was in line with the Interim Strategy Note for the Federal Republic of Somalia (FY14-16), the
Somalia National Development Plan (2017-2019) and the Somalia Compact (2013-2016), which aimed to:
(i) expand service delivery; (ii) build resilience to climate shocks; and (iii) boost economic opportunities in
Somalia.

This project was prepared under OP/BP 10.0 and triggered paragraph 12 which provides additional
flexibility for countries with capacity constraints because of fragility. Also, this project comprised a “project to
prepare a project”. The main project, called the Somali Urban Development Project (SUDP), had an
estimated budget envelope of US$86.11 million (excluding currently unspecified contingency amounts),
intended for support by the Multi Partner Fund (MPF). As a result, the PDO was set at an output low level
and did not have any outcomes, which is adequate given that this was both a) a project to prepare a
project; and b) operating in a very difficult environment with Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To provide an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and
                institutional strengthening activities in targeted areas.

                Rationale
                The original objective focused on southern Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland. When the project received
                Additional Financing (AF) in 2018, the scope of the project was expanded to the cities of Kismayo and Baidoa
                (Southern Somalia) that were highly vulnerable resulting from inflows of large numbers of returnees and
                internally displaced persons (IDPs). Since the scope of the project was expanded, no split rating for this
                assessment is necessary.

                Theory of Change: The project’s theory envisioned that a project activity such as contracting entities to
                complete technical studies was to result in the objective stated above, i.e. to provide feasibility assessments
                and preliminary plans for the upcoming project.

                Activities:

                        Four consulting firms (Crown Agents, IPE Global, Apex Consulting, Altai Consulting) and the the
                         United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) were contracted to complete technical studies for
                         the project, achieving the target of contracting five entities.

                Outputs:

                        Seven sets of feasibility, preliminary design, and detailed design studies for specific urban
                         investments were conducted, surpassing the target of five sets. In Hargeisa, feasibility studies and
                         preliminary engineering designs were completed for a sanitary landfill, solid waste management
                         facility and anaerobic pond liquid waste management system. In Garowe, an engineering feasibility
                         report and preliminary engineering cost estimates were completed for 19 kilometers of secondary
                         roads and bridges. In Mogadishu, feasibility studies and preliminary engineering designs and cost
                         estimates were completed for four primary roads (17 kilometers) and 31 secondary roads across 17
                         districts. Under the AF, the indicator was modified to include detailed design studies, applying lessons
                         learned from the first phase. This was applied to the works performed in Kismayo where feasibility
                         studies, detailed engineering designs and bidding documents were completed for 18 priority roads
                         (total of 31.2 kilometers) and one priority trunk drainage investment. Also, designs and bidding
                         documents for a laboratory block in Baidoa and designs and bidding documents for an office block
                         and material testing lab in Kismayo were delivered.

                Given the nature of this project, i.e. that it is only to prepare for project implementation, no outcomes were
                aimed for or achieved. This would normally warrant a Modest rating, as all projects are expected to aim for

                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



                            and achieve results at outcome level. However, it is clear that the objective of this project is only to prepare
                            for the two subsequent projects. IEG perceives this as both a necessary and appropriate approach given the
                            FCV context and will therefore rate the achievements Substantial due to the high achievement of all output
                            targets and despite the lack of any outcome level results.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            To provide enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.

                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as conducting
                            assessments in municipalities and establishing PIUs were to result in the above stated objective, i.e. to
                            provide enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.

                            Outputs:

                                  Seven assessments in the five municipalities were conducted, surpassing the target of five
                                   assessments. The studies identified gaps in technical staffing and skillsets among civil servants in
                                   areas including financial management, engineering, M&E and safeguards. Also, an inter-agency
                                   review and coordinated strengthening plan was conducted in 2017. The following institutions were
                                   assessed: (i) Banadir Regional Administration/Mogadishu Municipality; (ii) Federal Ministry of Public
                                   Works; (iii) Garowe Municipality; (iv) Hargeisa Municipality; (v) Hargeisa Water Agency; (vi) Inter-
                                   Agency Review and Coordinated Strengthening Plan; (vii) Local Development Fund and Special
                                   Financing Facility; (viii) Kismayo Municipality; (ix) Baidoa Municipality.
                                  Five PIUs were established in each participating municipality, achieving the target of five PIUs.

                            Given the nature of this project, i.e. that it is only to prepare for project implementation, no outcomes were
                            aimed for or achieved. This would normally warrant a Modest rating, as all projects are expected to aim for
                            and achieve results at outcome level. However, it is clear that the objective of this project is only to prepare
                            for the two subsequent projects. IEG perceives this as both a necessary and an appropriate approach given
                            the FCV context and will therefore rate the achievements Substantial due to the high achievement of all
                            output targets and despite the lack of any outcome level results.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Achievement of both objectives was Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency:

Neither the PAD nor the ICR conducted a traditional economic analysis. The PAD (p. 12) stated that the
economic benefit of the project was to be derived from the enhanced urban infrastructure and strengthened
urban management institutions supported by the investment activities which were to follow from the preliminary
design and TA work undertaken under the project. Overall rates of return to these investments (e.g. roads,
water) were expected to be high but could not be calculated at the time of appraisal according to the PAD (p.
13).

The ICR (p. 36) stated that since the project was a “project to prepare a project,” the economic benefit of the
work undertaken through the project were only to be realized through subsequent investment activities. As
such, while the overall rates of return of subsequent investments were expected to be high, they could not be
estimated for the project as an independent project.

Operational Efficiency:

The project experienced efficiency challenges related to lack of financing for investments in Hargeisa for
subsequent projects resulting in follow-on investment projects being unable to come to fruition in Hargeisa, and
the PIU being disbanded. Investments in Hargeisa lacked donor interest to channel funds for Hargeisa through
the Multi-Partner Fund (MPF). Also, political challenges prevented the flow of World Bank resources for
Hargeisa. The project also experienced delays in mobilizing financing for follow-on investments in Mogadishu
and Garowe due to limited donor interest in infrastructure investments. However, ultimately significant
investments were secured. According to the ICR (p. 18) the project benefited from UNOPS providing technical
support to the capacity of PIUs. However, the turnover of UNOPS staff between project phases without a formal
handover between UNOPS teams had the potential to result in inefficiencies.

While there were evident shortcomings, the project’s very limited scope and given the unique fragility model it
sought to institute, the overall efficiency rating is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework
(FY19-22), which aims to build the capacity of Somali municipalities for urban resilience, and despite its
relatively low level of the PDO, as IEG accepts that this is appropriate for a “project to prepare a project” in this
context. Efficacy was Substantial given the project’s achievement of all targets at the output level. Efficiency
was rated Substantial even with the very limited information available to assess the value for money.
Therefore, the project’s overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the development outcome can be classified into the following broad categories:

FCV environment: Somalia remains in a FCV situation with high political instability, which can negatively
impact the project outputs as well as the implementation of any new Bank project.

Government commitment: The government continues to remain committed to building resilience as
reflected in the country’s National Development Plan, the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework and
the follow-on project, the SURP. However, political instability and Somalia’s high exposure to repeated
climate change-related shocks put the project’s outcomes at risk.

Technical capacity: While the project was able to build capacity, capacity built at the PIUs and
municipalities is vulnerable to lack of funding since updating of the institutional capacity assessments and
development and operationalization of capacity-building plans and budgets will be required. According to
the ICR (p. 24) it will be critical for future projects to not mainly rely on consultants for project implementation
but engage municipal civil servants proactively to build capacity within the broader municipality.

Financial: According to the ICR (p. 24) some of the urban investments for which preparatory work was
completed, especially in Hargeisa, may never be realized due to budgetary constraints. The ICR (p. 16)
stated that due to the lack of follow-on investment projects in Hargeisa, the PIU was disbanded after project

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



activities were concluded. However, the PIU under the SURP-II ensures that if the SURP II obtains AF, that
this preparatory work will be revisited to avoid duplication.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was simple and adapted to the fragile context in Somalia. Also, due to concerns
  regarding capacity constraints in the government as well as lack of familiarity with World Bank projects,
  the World Bank team adopted a hybrid approach with most of the components designed to be
  implemented by the World Bank on behalf of the government, and only limited implementation by the
  government.

  According to the PAD (p. 12) the World Bank team identified several high risks including: (i) insecurity
  which had the potential to prevent or delay work and make monitoring challenging. The project tried to
  mitigate this risk by using consulting firms, NGOs, UNOPs and other UN Agencies for much of the
  technical work; (ii) institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability. The project tried to mitigate
  this risk by investing in sustained client dialogue; (iii) lack of clarity on the division of labor amongst
  various government ministries, agencies and departments and as a result, poor coordination. The project
  tried to mitigate this risk by preparing subsidiary agreements between various levels of government
  involved in the implementation which clearly outlined the respective roles and responsibilities of each
  entity.

  Not all mitigation measures were sufficient, resulting in, for example, procurement challenges. Also,
  according to the ICR (p. 19) some of the World Bank and recipient executed activities were combined
  and implemented before the PIUs in the municipalities were established or completely staffed not
  allowing for ownership and strengthening local capacity.

  Also, the World Bank team did not identify the risk of lack of financing resulting in drastically scaling back
  investments to only Mogadishu and Garowe (instead of also including Hargeisa) with the availability of
  US$9.0 million in financing instead of the originally planned US$86 million.

  The project’s Results Framework did not have any major shortcomings (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 23) the World Bank team conducted seven supervision missions and was able to
 identify and resolve implementation challenges swiftly. The World Bank team engaged with the
 counterparts through extensive dialogue to ensure their involvement despite the World Bank being
 supervisor and implementor. The World Bank collaborated with UNOPS to improve project management

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



 capacity in the field, which positively impacted implementation give the local security challenges and the
 limited access the task team had to counterparts and project sites. According to the ICR (p. 24) the World
 Bank team conducted short intensive supervision missions with each municipality to agree on short-term
 action plans with specific goals and deadlines to ensure continuous momentum. After the initial missed
 opportunity of creating ownership and building capacity in the PIUs (as stated in the section above), the
 World Bank team engaged with the PIUs in the BEBR components, which gradually increased the PIUs’
 capacity. The project faced several procurement related challenges (see section 10b) which the World
 Bank team addressed by providing training and continuous support.

 The ICR (p. 23) stated that the project could have benefitted from engaging more with community
 stakeholders and mainstreaming gender. Also, the project design could have included a phased approach
 to manage capacity gaps and fiduciary risks before investments are being made.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original and revised objectives were clearly specified, and the selected indicators encompassed all
 outputs of the PDO statement, were sufficiently specific, measurable and relevant. No outcome indicators
 were identified, as the PDO itself was only at output level.

 According to the PAD (p. 11) the World Bank team was responsible for monitoring the progress of the
 activities it executed while client agencies were responsible for monitoring the progress of the activities,
 they implemented.

 The project’s Results Framework could have benefited from including indicators measuring the quality of
 various outputs such as studies, assessments and designs. Also, the project lacked a theory of change that
 showed how key activities were to lead to intended outputs for this first preparatory project.



b. M&E Implementation
  Since the outputs of the project were mainly developing documents and the establishments of PIUs, the
  need for data was minimal, making monitoring straight forward.

  According to the ICR (p. 20) it would have been beneficial if the World Bank team would have reported on
  how outputs were used to inform subsequent activities and if the quality of these outputs was adequate




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



  as it later showed that outputs were lacking quality when they were used in the implementation of the
  follow-on project, the Somalia Urban Resilience Project (SURP).



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 20) the Results Framework was used to track implementation progress. The
  project reported regularly through Implementation Status and Results reports (ISRs) and bi-annual
  projects briefs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). According to the ICR (p. 21) the project prepared an ESMF and Resettlement Policy
   Framework with sub-project specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs). The E&S performance of the project was downgraded during the last two
   Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) (July 2020 and July 2021) due to unavoidable delays associated with
   the transition from the Bank’s former safeguard policies to the new Environmental and Social Framework
   (ESF).

   The ICR did not state whether the project complied with each of these safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The ICR (p. 21) stated that throughout implementation the audited annual
   financial statements were timely submitted to the World Bank, except during the last two years when they
   were delayed due to delays in hiring the technical assistance firm to support the Auditor General.

   According to the ICR (p. 21) the external audit report for the financial year ending in December 2020 found
   the following issues: (i) failure to hold frequent Federal Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee (FIMSC)
   meetings (instead of four meetings only two meetings took place); (ii) instances of weak payment
   verification process on works completion certificates; and (iii) lack of single sourcing justification to provide
   internet services for the period under review in Puntland. However, despite these issues the project
   obtained an unqualified opinion by the external auditor.

   Procurement: According to the ICR (p. 22) the project’s procurement was conducted in accordance with
   the World Bank’s procurement regulations for IPF borrowers since the national procurement law was not
   fully operational. The project’s procurement experienced several challenges including contract extensions

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



   being often completed late, and scope changes not being documented or budgeted properly resulting in
   disputes between the PIU and the contractors. Also, the PIUs lacked familiarity with World Bank
   procurement regulations and had only few established relationships with contractors. The project’s
   procurement also experienced delays at the end of the project due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The World
   Bank addressed these issues by providing training and continuous support including all transactions being
   conducted as prior review. Also, COVID-19 related delays were addressed through
   bidders/suppliers/consultants being able to submit their bids/proposals electronically.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 25-26) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      While working with municipal governments can result in strong levels of ownership
         within the municipalities it can also lead to coordination challenges. In this project,
         working through municipal governments reduced political interference and empowered the
         municipalities. However, without a clear apex institution linking the municipalities, the project
         faced implementation challenges, which were addressed by hiring a program coordinator and
         establishing a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) under the SURP.

      Engaging international third-party expertise in the implementation of a project in a
         country with limited capacity while at the same time building capacity within the
         government can positively impact project implementation. In this project, project
         management capacity was enhanced by engaging UNOPS, which used in-house capacity



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)



         rather than managing external consultants or firms, to deliver better quality assurance in a
         low capacity-environment while being engaged locally.

        Ensuring a participatory approach by engaging with local communities during project
         preparation can positively impact implementation. During the preparation of this project
         local communities were involved little, presenting a lost opportunity. However, throughout
         implementation the needs of vulnerable groups including women and internally displaced
         persons (IDPs) became a priority resulting in participatory planning processes.

        World Bank executed components can be useful in a FCV context with limited
         government capacity and challenging monitoring. In this project, the World Bank
         executed several project activities such as the institutional and socio-economic assessment
         on behalf of the government due to limited capacity. This allowed for a better understanding
         of institutional capacity and existing dynamics that needed to be considered for calibrating
         the project’s implementation approach.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and was concise and
appropriately focused on the relevant results. Also, it included useful lessons learned that can be applied to
similar projects in this area. However, the ICR lacked a theory of change specific to this project. Also, the ICR
did not provide any information on how the World Bank mitigated safeguard policies and provided limited
information on several topics including M&E and TF disbursement. Taking everything together, the quality of
the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)




                                                                          Page 14 of 14
