      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0023038

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P171819                                      GZ: Development Policy Grant 10

 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
  TF-B2435,TF-B3118                           31-Oct-2021                                             38,332,308.00

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  08-May-2020                                 31-Oct-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                             38,332,308.00                                      38,332,308.00

  Revised Commitment                              38,332,308.00                                      38,332,308.00

  Actual                                          38,332,308.00                                      38,332,308.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia           Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller                IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program document (PD, par. 34) states that “The PDOs of the proposed operation are to: (i) strengthen
commitment control in line ministries and improve overall public procurement practice, (ii) improve sector
governance in water and health service provision, and (iii) strengthen the stability and integrity of the financial
sector.” The grant agreement does not define objectives for the operation.


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Development Policy Grant (DPG) had three policy areas: (a) commitment control in line ministries and
public procurement practice; (b) governance in water and health service provision; and (c) stability and
integrity of the financial sector.

Commitment control in line ministries and public procurement practice. This pillar covered setting a
control system for commitments and aspects of procurement practice and management.

Governance in water and health service provision. This pillar covered aspects of human resource
planning and policy, monitoring service providers and debt of service providers.

Stability and integrity of the financial sector. This pillar covered aspects of antimony laundering and
combatting financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), bank capital requirements, and financial sector supervision.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The operation consisted of a development policy grant for US$38.3 million, of which US$30 million corresponded
to a trust-fund grant (TF-B2435) for US$30 million and another (TF-B3118) for US$8.3 million. Therefore, the
actual amount disbursed was US$38.3 million. The grant was approved on May 8, 2020, and closed on October
31, 2021, as planned.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The program selected relevant objectives which addressed problems that hindered the development of the
 territories and supported government reform and sustainable development, two of the three pillars of the
 government's National Policy Agenda (December 2016). Reform focused on pursuing citizen-centered and
 effective government. To achieve this, the central and local governments would need to be more responsive
 to citizens' needs and improve services, accountability and transparency would need to be strengthened, and
 public financial management would need to be more effective and efficient. The operation also sought to build
 on previous achievements supported by the Bank in PFM, procurement, fiscal resilience, financial sector
 stability, and providing water and health service. The objectives were realistic and achievable over the life of
 the DPG.

 The operation builds on earlier DPG operations and several World Bank-financed projects that support a long-
 term development agenda in the Palestinian Territories. DPGs have consistently focused over the years on
 strengthening PFM and accountability of the Palestinian Authority, improving the quality and transparency of
 its fiscal reporting and reforming public procurement. Past DPGs also sought to improve the quality and
 sustainability of service delivery in the energy, health, and water sectors, on which this operation builds to
 enhance sector governance and improve water and health service delivery. As for investment project
 financing, the DPG complements the Public Financial Management Improvement (PFMI) project and the
 Health System Resiliency Strengthening project. The PFMI project seeks to enhance expenditure controls,

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



financial accountability, and procurement management, while the Health Project seeks to reduce its reliance
on outside medical referrals by investing in equipment and closing gaps in areas where there is a shortage of
local specialists. Pillar 3 of the DPG, which seeks to strengthen the integrity and stability of the financial sector,
complements other interventions that seek to improve access to finance such as the Finance for Jobs project
and the Innovative Private Sector Development project.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

1. Number and List of Prior Actions

Objective 1: Strengthen commitment control in line ministries and improve overall public procurement
practice

      PA#1 – Commitment control system. The Ministry of Finance has taken the necessary actions to
       implement a commitment control system in all line ministries to secure budget allocations prior to the
       signing of a contract with service providers, excluding outside medical referrals, as evidenced by: (i)
       issuance of official instruction No. 2019/1602 of September 8, 2019; (ii) issuance of instructions of
       January 20, 2020 by MoF's accountant general to the heads of financial and administrative units at line
       ministries informing said ministries that MoF has been developing the IFMIS to introduce a commitment
       control system and ensure that financial operations are recorded according to GFS.
      PA#2 – Procurement: plans, opportunities, and contract awards. The Cabinet has instructed public
       entities to publish their procurement plans, procurement opportunities and contract award notices on the
       single portal procurement website which can be accessed on www.shiraa.gov.ps, as evidenced by the
       issuance of the Cabinet Secretariat's instruction 1553/2019 of June 20, 2019.
      PA#3 – Procurement: Bidding documents. The Cabinet has instructed all public entities at the central
       and local levels to use Standard Bidding Documents for the procurement of works, goods, and
       consultants' services, as evidenced by the issuance of the Cabinet decision No. 35/07 of December 16,
       2019.

Objective 2: Improve sector governance in water and health service provision

      PA#4 – Human resource planning and policy. The MoH [Ministry of Health] has instructed the General
       Director of its Education in Health department to ensure that all human resource planning and policies
       related to postgraduate medical training in the sector, including the establishment of medical
       residencies, are based solely on periodic data generated by the human resources observatory, as
       evidenced by Directive No. 32/110/201/February 20 4, 2020.
      PA#5 – Service providers: monitoring. The Recipient's President has taken the necessary steps to
       strengthen the role of the WSRC [Water Sector Regulatory Council] in performance monitoring of
       service providers, as evidenced by the issuance of Presidential Decree No. 2135 of September 10,
       2019.
      PA#6 – Service providers: debt. The Cabinet has instructed PWA [Palestinian Water Authority] to
       reduce the stock of debt owed by service providers that have installed prepaid meters for households
       under their constituency in the same amount paid to install the prepaid meters, as evidenced by: (i)


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



       Cabinet Decree No. 17/215/August 17 7, 2018; and (ii) fifteen (15) Memoranda of Understanding signed
       between PWA and 15 service providers.

Objective 3: Strengthen the stability and integrity of the financial sector

      PA#7 – AML/CFT. The PMA [Palestine Monetary Authority] has instructed banks operating in West
       Bank and Gaza to adopt strengthened AML/CFT internal controls, in accordance with the AML/CFT
       strategy adopted by the Palestinian Cabinet on November 2018, as evidenced by (i) Cabinet decision
       No. 16/229/17 dated November 22, 2018 adopting the national strategy for AML/CFT; (ii) PMA Circular
       No. 74/2019 to all banks operating in the Recipient's territories dated March 26, 2019; and (iii) Cabinet
       decision dated November 22, 2018 establishing a national committee to supervise the implementation of
       the national AML/CFT strategy.
      PA#8 – Capital requirements for banks. The PMA has taken the necessary steps to raise the minimum
       regulatory capital requirements for all banks licensed by the PMA to carry on banking business in West
       Bank and Gaza under the strengthened definition of capital, as evidenced by PMA's instructions No. 8
       and 9 of December 11, 2018, concerning the application of capital adequacy requirements for banks
       licensed by the PMA.
      PA#9. – Financial sector supervision. The PMA and the PCMA [Palestine Capital Markets Authority]
       have jointly reestablished the central sharia supervisory board to cover a wide segment of the financial
       sector, including both bank and non-bank Islamic financial institutions, as evidenced by: (i) PMA's Board
       Decision No. 67/21, of June 30, 2019 approving the establishment of the central sharia supervisory
       authority; (ii) PCMA's Board decision No. 29/2019 of May 12, 2019 approving the establishment of the
       central sharia supervisory board; and (iii) an Memorandum of Understanding signed between PMA and
       PCMA dated August 27, 2018, regulating the relationship between the two institutions.

2. Assessing Relevance of Prior Actions

Objective 1: Strengthen commitment control in line ministries and improve overall public procurement
practice

      PA#1 – Commitment control system. The relevance of PA#1 is Satisfactory.

The government did not have a proper budgetary process because it did not control commitments, as line
ministries contracted expenses before getting their budget. Before the DPG, a budget reservation (in most
ministries) only occurred when an expense was being paid. That lack of control prevented restraining
expenditure and contributed to the growth of arrears. The DPG sought to help change that situation by
mandating line ministries to ask for and get a budget allocation before contracting an expense. Under the DPG,
the government agreed to implement a commitment control system to help plan expenditures better and
improve the transparency of public finances. The new commitment control system would enable: (i) reserving
budget allocations for specific purposes; (ii) making those allocations unavailable for any other purpose; and (iii)
planning for future disbursements. The system would be applied first to wages and transfers, which accounted
for about 70 percent of total spending. Other spending categories (e.g., outside medical referrals) required
additional sector reforms before entering the commitment system. The Ministry of Finance agreed to have the
remaining 30 percent under the commitment system by 2021. The reform would be implemented through the
Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) and the associated financial procedures.




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



      PA#2 – Procurement: plans, opportunities, and contract awards notices. The relevance of PA#2 is
       Moderately Satisfactory.

The operation supported operationalizing aspects of the 2014 procurement law. Specifically, the Cabinet
mandated that public entities would have to publish their procurement plans, procurement opportunities, and
contract award notices on the website of the single portal for procurement. The mandate created a wider net of
providers of goods and services from the private sector, including female-led businesses. However, uploading
this information to the website did not ensure that procurement management would be better.

      PA#3 – Procurement: Bidding documents. The relevance of PA#3 is Highly Satisfactory.

The operation also supported the government's mandate that all procuring entities at the central and local levels
have to use standard bidding documents, including standard contracts for works, goods, and consultant
services. This was a significant step in creating the conditions to improve procurement management.

Objective 2: Improve sector governance in water and health service provision.

      PA#4 – Human resource planning and policy. The relevance of PA#4 is Satisfactory.

The Palestinian health system suffers from a mismatch between the growing demand for medical care and the
supply of health personnel that can serve its changing needs. The rapid growth of demand for care and the
lack of specialized personnel in certain areas have increased health expenditures and strained the fiscal
position of the sector. Because the Palestinian territories have a shortage of specialized health care workers in
certain areas –especially in non-communicable diseases– patients have to be referred to specialists outside the
health system, which are more expensive, thereby increasing health care costs. The government did not
address that mismatch in the past, but it sought to do so under DPG 10. With the development of an
observatory of human resources within the Ministry of Health and the Palestinian National Institute of Public
Health, new the government can identify the skill gaps of specialized personnel (e.g., oncology) in the private
and public sectors and begin to address it. data helps to compare the current availability of medical staff with its
needs, and thus identify skill gaps in the private and public sectors. The Ministry of Health plans to train local
specialists to cover the human resource gap in these four areas in association with various stakeholders to offer
residency programs in the areas where there is more need for specialized personnel, such as oncology,
hematology, pathology and neurosurgery.

The prior action supports the government's decision to ensure that human resource planning and policies
related to postgraduate medical training are based solely on the data generated by the observatory.

      PA#5 – Water service providers: monitoring. The relevance of PA#5 is Satisfactory.

A lack of commercial focus undermines the sector's viability at multiple levels (World Bank, Securing Water for
Development in West Bank and Gaza, Sector Note, 2018). Collection rates are meager, with only 68 percent of
customers paying their bills on average. Tariffs barely cover the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs and
make no provision for depreciation; service providers (local government units, municipalities) use part of these
collections for other municipal expenditures. In the West Bank, service providers compensate for the deficit by
not paying the West Bank Water Department for purchasing bulk water; in Gaza, service providers cover the
deficit with donor money and non-payment of bills, primarily energy. These problems arise partly from the
difficulty of implementing the 2014 Water Law, designed to clarify accountabilities and establish autonomous
utilities. Its implementation has been slow because of an incomplete legal structure, lack of financing, and lack

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



of clear rules and responsibilities at the local level. For example, where the Palestinian Water Authority sees
water services as a free-standing activity in partnership with the private sector, the Ministry of Local
Government sees water services as part of the local government's allocated responsibilities.

The Law established the Water Sector Regulatory Council (WSRC) as an independent legal entity responsible
for overall monitoring and regulation of all matters related to the operation of water and sanitation service
providers. Its responsibilities include approving tariffs, licensing and regulating service providers, and
protecting consumers, but the legal transfer of most statutory functions hasn't yet occurred. WSRC's main
activity is data gathering, which has created a time series on the performance of service providers (World Bank,
Towards Water Security for Palestinians, 2018, p. 6). With that information, the WSRC publishes a summary in
an annual report. In addition, WSRC has initiated a benchmarking process and leads the monitoring of service
providers in cooperation with the Palestinian Water Authority. However, the WSRC lacked the resources to
expand its monitoring activity and carry out its regulatory role. Therefore, the DPG supported strengthening the
financial position of the WSRC to enhance its capacity to monitor the performance of water service providers.

      PA#6 – Water service providers: debt. The relevance of PA#6 is Satisfactory.

As noted above, service providers built up debt because the revenues collected from the water service fell short
of the expenses incurred. One reason behind the low collection rates was the lack of metering devices to
measure and control household water consumption. To induce service providers to install prepaid meters for
households, the DPG supported the government's decision to instruct the Palestinian Water Authority to reduce
the stock of debt of those service providers by an amount equal to that spent on installing prepaid meters for
households in their constituencies.

Objective 3: Strengthen the stability and integrity of the financial sector.

      PA#7 – AML/CFT. The relevance of PA#7 is Satisfactory.

Although the Palestine State established a Financial Follow-Up Unit under the Anti-Money Laundering Law of
2007, its AML/CTF system lagged in terms of international practices addressing these activities,
notwithstanding having joined the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENA-FATF) in
April 2015. As volatility increased in cross-border correspondent banking relationships, the authorities
considered it necessary to upgrade the integrity standards across the financial sector. Therefore, in 2018 the
authorities conducted their first self-assessment to enhance relevant stakeholders' ability to identify, assess,
understand and mitigate the risks associated with money laundering and terrorism financing. As a result, the
Palestinian Monetary Authority issued instructions to maintain adequate policies and procedures to prevent the
abuse of financial services. The DPG supported this action, which constitutes a step for implementing the
national AML/CFT strategy, one of whose targets was to inspect the banks in the territories systematically. The
action also constitutes a step in implementing the standard conditions for the West Bank and Gaza to become a
member of MENA-FATF.

      PA#8 – Capital requirements for banks. The relevance of PA#8 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The banking system provided direct credit of about US$9 billion, of which US$3 billion represents loans to the
Palestinian Authority and civil servants. Its non-performing loans had increased from 2.5 to 3.5 percent, mainly
because the civil servants could not repay their loans since the Palestinian Authority had not paid them their
salaries in 2019. This resulted from a standoff between the Authority and the Government of Israel over the
transfer of clearance revenues. Moreover, 12 of the 14 banks in the territory complied with the newly

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



 established (higher) capital requirements, and the two remaining banks had plans to meet these requirements.
 The prior action supported the Monetary Authority's decision of December 2018 to raise the minimum capital
 adequacy requirement from 12 to 13 percent for banks licensed by the Authority, providing a much-needed
 buffer for the banking system to withstand shocks. It also allowed regulators (central bank) to intervene and
 take corrective action at an earlier stage should a shock take place that threatened to reduce capital adequacy
 below the new minimum. It is unclear if the prior action had any significant impact on raising the capital
 requirement for banks and on the stability of the financial system if most of them already met the requirement.

       PA#9. – Financial sector supervision. The relevance of PA#9 is Satisfactory.

 The Palestinian financial sector comprises banking institutions that the Palestine Monetary Authority supervises
 and non-banking institutions that the Palestine Capital Markets Authority (PCMA) supervises. The non-banking
 institutions offer a wide range of Islamic financial instruments and serve a segment of the population that does
 not engage in conventional banking because of their religious beliefs. As a result, the two sets of institutions
 offer financial products and services for distinct groups of people under different conditions, making uneven the
 financial playing field. The two authorities agreed to reestablish the Central Sharia Supervisory Authority
 (CSSA) to ensure consistent treatment across new and existing products and financial institutions. This would
 include the institutions providing Islamic financial products and assessing the compliance with Islamic financial
 standards of new markets and entrants.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1. Strengthen commitment control in line ministries and improve overall public
procurement practice.

       RI #1 from prior action #1. The relevance of RI #1 is Satisfactory.

The share of expenditures processed under the new commitment control system is a good measure of the
impact of the PA on progress towards the objective. The indicator measures well the amount of
commitment expenditures under control. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be
obtained.

       RI #2 from prior action #2. The relevance of RI #2 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Share of public entities that publish their procurement plans, procurement opportunities, and contract
award notices on the single portal procurement website is a good measure of the impact of the PA on
progress towards the objective. The indicator measures well the participation of entities in the new
system. Given the desire of the PA to improve the degree to which public procurement must be
transparently advertised and reported upon, a better indicator would have measured the share of

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



government expenditure (in local currency) procured under the single portal procurement
website. Therefore, it is not possible to conclude that overall procurement practice improved. However,
the indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI #3 from prior action #2. The relevance of RI #3 is Unsatisfactory.

The indicator measures the participation of women-owned businesses in procurement contracts but
cannot measure if procurement practice improved. The indicator can be measured, and the information
can be obtained.

      RI#4 from prior action #3. The relevance of RI#4 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The indicator is the share of public entities at the central and local levels of government using the
Standard Bidding Documents in their procurement. The indicator measures the extent to which central
government and municipal entities use standard bidding documents but does not inform if the documents
apply to a large or a small share of expenditure that goes through the procurement process. Therefore, it
is not possible to conclude that overall procurement practice improved. The indicator can be measured,
and the information can be obtained.

Objective 2: Improve sector governance in water and health service provision.

      RI #5 from prior action #4. The relevance of RI #5 is Satisfactory.

The indicator measures well if medical doctors enroll in the certified local medical residencies in oncology,
hematology, pathology, and neurology established by the Palestine Medical Council. The indicator
measures well if local hospitals recruit medical personnel with skills in the four fields. The indicator can be
measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI #6 from prior action #5. The relevance of RI #6 is Satisfactory.

Publishing a performance report for water service providers provides information about the performance
of water service providers. Having that information is a necessary step in measuring the quality of service
and improving governance in the water sector. The indicator can be measured, and the information can
be obtained.

      RI #7 from prior action #6. The relevance of RI #7 is Satisfactory.

Having consumers pay their water bills is a sign of good governance, and the average collection rate
measures well improvements in the governance of the water sector. The indicator could have been more
precise on whether it refers to the percent of consumers who paid their bills or the percent of the total
value of the billed water. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

Objective 3: Strengthen the stability and integrity of the financial sector.

      RI #8 from prior action #7. The relevance of RI #8 is Moderately Satisfactory.

Conducting on-site inspections of banks' AML/CFT internal controls is an integral part of commercial bank
supervision and is necessary to assess banks' risks and their potential impact on the financial

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



system. However, supervision alone and the number of banks inspected do not make for a stronger
financial sector if the authorities do not address and solve the problems found during inspections. The
indicator partially measures the achievement of the objective. The indicator can be measured, and the
information can be obtained.

      RI #9 from prior action #8. The relevance of RI #8 is Satisfactory.

Increasing the minimum capital adequacy requirement for each commercial bank, including capital
conservation buffer (on solo and consolidated levels), allows banks to withstand risks better. The
indicator measures well the achievement of the objective. The indicator can be measured, and the
information can be obtained.

      RI #10 from prior action #9. The relevance of RI #10 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Having the financial regulator review and amend Islamic financial instruments based on CSSA decisions
contributes to eliminating any discrepancy in the treatment of Islamic banking operations between
commercial banks and Islamic banks, which is akin to eliminating distortions in the financial system; the
fewer the distortions, the more likely the financial system is robust, stable, and efficient. The indicator
measures if the regulator follows CSSA decisions when regulating Islamic financial instruments, but doing
so does not measure if there is more stability and integrity in the financial system. The indicator can be
measured, and the information can be obtained.

Summary Table on Results Indicators
                                                                         Actual
                                                                         change Most recent
                                      Baseline   Target        Actual                              RI
RI description        Associa RI                                         in RI     value
                                      (including (including value as                               achieve
(assigning a          ted     relevan                                    relative available (if
                                      units and units and of target                                ment
number to each RI) PA(s) ce                                              to        not target
                                      date)      date)         date                                rating
                                                                         targeted date)
                                                                         change
Objective 1: Strengthen commitment control in line ministries and public procurement practice
RI1 Share of
expenditures                                                   66% by
                                      0% in      70% in
processed under the PA1       S                                March     101% 71% (12/2021)High
                                      12/2018    12/2020
new commitment                                                 2021
control system:
                                                               56 out of
RI2 Share of public                                            90 at
entities that publish                                          central
                                                                         200%
their procurement                                50% at the level and              90/90 at
                                                                         central
plans, procurement                               central level;33 out of           central level
                                                                         level and                 Substanti
opportunities and PA2         MU      0%         30% of        118                 and 58/118 at
                                                                         160%                      al
contract award                                   municipalitie (28%)               municipal level
                                                                         municipa
notices on the single                            s (12/2020) municipal             (12/2021)
                                                                         lities
portal procurement                                             ities
website                                                        (12/31/20
                                                               20)


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



RI3 Annual number
of female owned                                                                18 by
businesses        PA2        U        3 in 2018   6 in 2020   n.a.     5 times December        Modest
participating in                                                               2021
public bids
                                                                                  There were:
RI4 Share of public                                                     51% at (a) 23 central
                                                              8% at the
entities at the                                                         central level agencies
                                                50% at the central
central and local                                                       level and out of the 45
                                                central level;level; 7%
levels of                                                               40% at expected; and
                     PA3   MS      0%           30% of        at                                 Modest
government using                                                        municipa (b) 14
                                                municipalitie municipal
the Standard                                                            l level municipalities
                                                s (12/2020) level
Bidding Documents                                                       (12/2021 out of the 35
                                                              (12/2020)
in their procurement                                                    )         expected
                                                                                  (12/31/2021).
Objective 2: Improve sector governance in water and health service provision
RI5 Certified local
medical residencies
are established by                              at least one
                                   zero local
the Palestine                                   local
                                   residencies
Medical Council in                              enrollment                        oncology: 3,
                                   in each of                           375% for
the fields identified                           in each of 25                     hematology: 2,
                                   the four                             the
by the observatory PA4     S                    the four      (12/31/20           pathology: 4, High
                                   fields in                            combine
of human resources                              fields in     20)                 neurosurgery:
                                   local                                d total
as critical gaps                                local                             10 (12/2021)
                                   hospitals
including oncology,                             hospitals
                                   (12/2018)
hematology,                                     (12/2020)
pathology and
neurology:
                                   2018
                                                Performanc
                                   performance
                                                e report for            12%
                                   report                     98
                                                2019                    service Reports of 92
                                   published in               providers
                                                covering                provider service
RI6 Publication of a               2019                       serving
                                                115 service             s; 38% providers
performance report                 covered 89                 85% of
                      PA5  S                    providers               populati serving 85% Modest
for water service                  service                    populatio
                                                serving 90%             on        of the
providers                          providers                  n
                                                of the                  served population
                                   serving 82%                (12/31/20
                                                population              (12/2021 (12/2021)
                                   of the                     20)
                                                published               )
                                   population
                                                (12/2020)
                                   (12/2018)
RI7 Average           PA6  S       52%          85%           79%       94%       83% (12/2021)Substanti
collection rate                    (12/2018) (December (12/31/20                                 al
amongst consumers                               2020)         20)
served by the 15
service providers
that have signed
MoUs [Memoranda

                                                                                             Page 10 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



of Understanding]
with the PWA to
install prepaid
meters




Objective 3: Strengthen the stability and integrity of the financial sector
                                                   on-site
                                      PMA
                                                   inspections on-site
                                      AML/CFT
RI8 PMA conducting                                 of 50%t of inspectio
                                      supervision
on-site inspections                                banks         ns
                                      manual
of banks' AML/CFT                                  covering      conducte
                                      does not                                    All banks
internal controls,                                 banks'        d on                             Substanti
                      PA7   MS        systematical                         2      inspected
that systematically                                compliance more                                al
                                      ly                                          (12/2021)
incorporate an                                     with risk-    than 70%
                                      incorporate
AML/CFT risk-                                      based         of banks
                                      a risk-based
based approach                                     AML/CFT (31/12/20
                                      approach
                                                   requirement 20)
                                      (12/2018)
                                                   s (12/2020)
                                                   minimum
                                      minimum      capital
RI9 Increased                         capital      adequacy
minimum capital                       adequacy requirement
                                                                 all 14
adequacy                              requirement of 13% on a
                                                                 banks in
requirement for                       of 12% for solo and
                                                                 complian                         Substanti
each bank, including PA8    S         each bank consolidated               100%   13% (12/2021)
                                                                 ce                               al
capital conservation                  on a solo    levels -or is
                                                                 (12/31/20
buffer (on a solo                     and          implementin
                                                                 20)
and consolidated                      consolidatedg timebound
levels)                               levels       corrective
                                      (12/2018) actions-
                                                   (12/2020)
                                                   at least two
                                                   financial     one
                                                   instruments issued on
RI10 Islamic                          no
                                                   amended credit
financial instruments                 regulations
                                                   through       cards
reviewed and                          issued
                                                   regulator     and other
amended by            PA9   MU        based on                             100%   2               Modest
                                                   actions       on
regulator actions                     decisions by
                                                   based on      "Tawaroq
based on CSSA                         the CSSA,
                                                   the           " product
decisions                             12/2018
                                                   decisions of (12/31/20
                                                   the CSSA 20)
                                                   (12/2020)




                                                                                               Page 11 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen commitment control in line ministries and improve overall public procurement practice

               Rationale
               Under this objective, the program supported interventions in two areas: systems to control commitment of
               expenditures and procurement practices.

               Commitment control systems. The expected result was to have 70 percent of expenditures processed
               under the new control system by December 2020. The actual result was that line ministries processed 71
               percent of expenditures under the new commitment control system by December 2021: The achievement was
               high. This sub-objective was covered by PA#1 and RI#1.

               Procurement practice. The expected results covered plans, opportunities, and contract awards; bidding
               documents.

               Plans, opportunities, and contract awards notices. Two results were expected. First, 50 percent of entities at
               the central level and 30 percent of municipalities would publish their plans, opportunities, and contract award
               notices by December 2020. Actual result as of December 2021: all entities at the central level (100%) and 58
               out of 118 at the municipal level (49%) published their plans, opportunities, and award notices on the single
               portal procurement website. The results exceeded the target values; because the relevance of the indicator
               is moderately unsatisfactory, the results achieved are rated substantial. Second, six female-owned
               businesses participate in public bids in 2020. Actual result: 18 female-owned businesses participated in
               public bids by December 2021, exceeding the target; although the numerical result exceeded the target, it
               cannot be concluded from it that procurement practice strengthened. The result achieved is modest. This was
               covered by PA#2 and RI#2 and RI#3.

               Bidding documents. The expected result was that 50 percent of entities at the central level and 30 percent of
               municipalities would use standard bidding documents. The actual results were that the number of entities
               using standard bidding documents increased by 51 percent at the central level and by 40 percent at the
               municipal level. The results achieved were modest. This was covered by PA#3 and RI#2 and RI#4.

               While more entities used the single portal procurement website, suggesting some improvement in
               procurement practices, there was little progress in using standard bidding documents, a fundamental step in
               improving procurement practice.

               The overall result for procurement is modest.


                                                                                                               Page 12 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



Under this objective, achievement was high for share of expenditures under the new commitment control
system (RI#1), substantial for the share of public entities that publish their procurement plans (RI#2), and
modest for number of female-owned businesses participating in public bids (RI#3) and for share of entities at
the central and local level using the standard bidding documents (RI#4).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve sector governance in water and health service provision

Rationale
Under this objective, the program supported interventions to improve governance in two sectors: health
service and water.

Health service. The expected result was at least one enrollment in local hospitals in each of the four
residencies in oncology, hematology, pathology, and neurology by December 2020. Actual result: as of
December 2021, there were three residents in oncology, two residents in hematology, four residents in
pathology, and ten residents in neurosurgery. The achievement of the result was high. This was covered by
PA#4 and RI#5.

Water. Two results were expected. First, the WSRC would publish a 2020 performance report of the
activities of 115 service providers that served 90 percent of the population in 2019. Actual result: As of
December 2021, WSRC had published performance reports of 92 service providers serving 85 percent of the
population. The achievement of the result was modest. This was covered by PA#5 and RI#6.

Second, 15 service providers who were to install prepaid meters would increase their bill collection rates from
52 to 85 percent by December 2020. Actual result: as of December 2021, the collection rate was 83
percent. The achievement of the result was substantial. This was covered by PA#6 and RI#7.

Under this objective, achievement was high for the number of certified medical residences in four fields with
critical gaps (RI#5), modest for publishing a performance report for water service providers (RI#6), and
substantial for the collection rate amongst consumers serviced by 15 service providers of water that signed a
MoU with the Palestine Water Authority to install prepaid meters (RI#7).



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen the stability and integrity of the financial sector

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)




                      Rationale
                      Under this objective, the program supported interventions in three areas: anti-money laundering and control
                      of terrorism financing, capital requirements of commercial banks, and regulation and supervision of Islamic
                      banking.

                      Anti-money laundering and control of terrorism financing. The expected result was to have the PMA
                      conduct on-site inspections of 50 percent of banks' compliance with risk-based AML/CFT
                      requirements. Actual result: by December 2021, the PMA had conducted inspections on all banks, covering
                      banks' compliance with AML/CTF requirements. The number of inspections exceeded the target, and the
                      achievement was high. However, while the number of inspections augurs well for the supervision of banks on
                      matters of AML/CTF, without knowledge of what the inspections found, it is impossible to say if the financial
                      sector is more robust and stable. The achievement of the result is rated substantial. This was covered by
                      PA#7 and RI#8.

                      Commercial banks' capital requirements. The expected result was to have all banks with a minimum
                      capital adequacy ratio of 13 percent by December 2020. Actual result: by December 2021, all banks had met
                      the new requirement. The achievement of the result is rated substantial because the relevance of the prior
                      action is considered moderately satisfactory. This was covered by PA#8 and RI#9.

                      Regulation and supervision of Islamic banking. The expected result was to have at least two financial
                      instruments amended through regulator actions based on CSSA decisions. Actual result: by December 21,
                      CSSA had published two circulars to amend financial instruments. Judging by the numbers alone, the
                      achievement of the result was high. However, without knowing the content of the circulars and the problems
                      they sought to address, it is impossible to say that the financial sector is more stable and stronger than
                      before. The achievement of the result is rated modest, as the relevance of the results indicator is rated
                      moderately unsatisfactory. This was covered by PA#9 and RI#10.

                      Under this objective, achievement was substantial for conducting on-site inspections of banks’ AML/CFT
                      internal controls (RI#8) and for reaching a minimum capital requirement (RI#9), and modest for reviewing and
                      amending Islamic financial instruments based on CSSA decisions (RI#10).



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The program had prior actions of satisfactory relevance and results indicators of moderately satisfactory
relevance. Its overall level of achievement was moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



Since efficacy for one objective is satisfactory and for two objectives moderately satisfactory, overall efficacy is
moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With relevance of prior actions rated as substantial and efficacy rated moderately satisfactory, the overall
outcome rating is moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Most outcomes are likely to be sustained, but some may be harder to sustain. Macroeconomic risks, likely
present in the medium term, are unlikely to derail the progress in controlling commitment expenditures and
the advances in procurement. The ability to sustain gains in procurement is at risk if there is not improved
capacity in the civil service. The outcomes achieved in health service provision face more risks than others
because other things beyond the authorities' control affect the demand and supply of medical personnel
beyond the identification of gaps and the availability of specialists. The outcomes in the water sector are at
risk if considerations other than quality of service and financial sustainability of service providers influence
the decisions of local government units. As for objective 3, the actions taken and the results achieved augur
well for the sustainability of the results.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


The design benefited from lessons from previous development policy grants. First, selecting a standalone
operation reflects the need to be flexible in a volatile context; that flexibility facilitates choosing prior actions
for each operation and tailoring them to the political and security situation when implementing the
program. Also, as the program document notes, flexibility does not mean neglecting specific reforms
requiring more than one DPG since the next DPG can support the next stage of these reforms. The

                                                                                                           Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



reforms responded to the Palestine Authority's priorities and considered the implementation capacity and
the social and security risks they may trigger. The design also benefitted from (a) ASA work on public
financial management and procurement reform that informed the prior actions under Pillar 1; (b) a 2016
public expenditure review, a joint study of the WHO, the Ministry of Health, and the Palestine Institute for
Public Health on the Palestinian Health Workforce, and ASA work on Water Security for Palestinians that
informed the prior actions for Pillar 2; and (c) World Bank TA on AML/CTF, a Financial Sector Review
ASA, and economic literature on Basel III regulations, experience with sharia boards in Turkey, and
evaluation of regulatory reforms on SME financing. Last, the program document identified the risks well
and selected adequate mitigating measures.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The WBG followed program implementation closely. As a result, two implementation status reports (11/9/2020
and 3/17/2021) informed well about the fulfillment of prior actions and the results achieved. The second one
reports the results by December 31, 2020, which the summary table above includes.




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank performance was satisfactory both in the operation's design and implementation phases.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)




The ICR does not report actual impacts.



b. Environmental

The ICR does not report actual impacts.



c. Gender

The ICR does not report actual impacts.



d. Other

None reported




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presents a coherent and logical narrative of the program. The adequate analysis links to evidence and
interventions through a coherent results chain. The evidence supports the achievements it reports; the ICR
documents its sources well, and its discussion of outcomes is clear and convincing. The ICR follows the
methodology for ICR of development policy operations. Its lessons section consists of facts and findings.

The main text, 33 pages, exceeds the 20 pages recommended by the Guidance for ICR for development policy
financing operations. Some of the text could have been shorter.

Paragraph 63 starts with "The DPG program document included an honest (emphasis added) discussion about
the risks … ".This is odd, as the report should always be honest, making the adjective unnecessary.

---



a. Rating

Substantial



                                                                                               Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ: Development Policy Grant 10 (P171819)



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                  ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The most pertinent lessons from the ICR are:

      Continued efforts on the fiscal front are critical, but institutional constraints must be acknowledged and
       addressed at the same time.
      The results framework needs to be outcome-focused, measuring the magnitude of the development
       gains and attributing them to a standalone development policy operation.
      In the Palestine territories, a fragile and conflict affected situation, a reform program is likely to have a
       more consistent and durable impact if technical assistance and capacity building accompany the design
       and execution of the program's prior actions.

IEG offers the following lesson derived from the points raised in the ICR:

The experience of the DPG program in Palestine suggests that single but continuous development policy
operations are likelier to be more effective in achieving their objectives and results than a programmatic series
in countries with volatile and changing economic and political circumstances that make it difficult to find a set of
implementable prior actions in a consistent manner over the medium-term. This type of arrangements makes it
possible to agree on prior actions that support feasible economic reform but which are tailored to the changes in
circumstances.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                        Page 18 of 18
