     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023009

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P163969                                    Huwe

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                    Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A7938                                   30-Jun-2021                                            6,235,405.56

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Aug-2018                                30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                     20,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             20,000,000.00                                     20,000,000.00

 Actual                                         11,500,000.00                                      6,235,405.56




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joy Antoinette De Beyer     Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Grant Agreement (GA), p. 5, and Project Appraisal Document (PAD), p. 1, stated the project objective: “to
   establish the accreditation, verification and payment mechanisms for the operationalization of the Basic
   Health Care Provision Fund (BHCPF) in the Participating States.” The wording was identical in the GA and
   PAD.

   There were no changes to the objective or to any of the indicators or targets during the project.


                                                                                                       Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained two components:

   Component 1: Strengthening Primary Health Care (PHC) services through the Basic Health Care
   Provision Fund (Appraisal: US$17 million; Actual: $5.29 million)

   Nigeria’s National Health Act (NHA), passed in 2014, had established the legal framework for a Basic
   Minimum Package of Health Services for all Nigerians, to be financed through the BHCPF, which would
   channel federal funding to accredited public and private providers. The HUWE project would provide
   support to set up accreditation, verification and payment systems (Component 2) and would enable the
   Fund to be operationalized in three states (Abia, Niger and Osun) as a proof-of-concept, piloting the flow of
   funds from the BHCPF to service providers through the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) and the
   National Primary Health Care Development Agency (NPHCDA) (Component 1). The participating states
   were to be selected through a competitive process developed by the Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) that
   included: (a) a formal application to pilot BHCPF in the state, (b) demonstration of vested financial
   investments through the upfront payment of NGN 100 million as “counterpart funding” to be used for
   supporting BHCPF operations, (c) agreement to use private providers in the delivery of services, and (d)
   diverse socio-geographic characteristics. The selected states provided a cash transfer and signed a
   Memorandum of Understanding with the FMOH outlining their rights and responsibilities for participating in
   the project during project preparation.

      Subcomponent 1a: Strengthening service delivery using fee-for-service payments through the
   NHIS (Appraisal: US$8.9 million; Actual: $1.578 million)

   Before the project, the NHIS covered mainly government employees. The new system would expand this
   coverage and use public funds to subsidize high-impact basic health care services for the poorest and most
   vulnerable Nigerians. Beneficiaries would be selected, verified, and enrolled. They would be able to choose
   which accredited private or public provider to use, and money would follow the patient.

   Public and private facilities would have to meet accreditation criteria in order to become empaneled with the
   BHCPF. They would then sign a service contract with the State Social Health Insurance Agency (SSHIA)
   and would be paid at preapproved tariffs for services provided to enrolled beneficiaries. Accredited
   providers would receive monthly payments based on the number of service bundles provided.

   Private sector providers would not be restricted in how they could use the funds received but would be
   encouraged to use the funding for continuous quality improvement to retain accreditation. Public PHC
   facilities would be required to use the funds exactly as outlined in the BHCPF Operational Manual (OM), to




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Huwe (P163969)



strengthen PHC service delivery. There would be rigorous ex-post verification of public facilities’ use of
funds.

This approach was designed to encourage competition between public and private facilities, improve quality
and staff productivity, and provide beneficiaries with a choice of where to access care. However, in the pilot
project, only one PHC facility would be selected per ward; competition and choice would come once
additional providers were accredited.

   Subcomponent 1b: Strengthening service delivery through decentralized facility financing
under the NPHCDA (Appraisal: US$8.1 million; Actual: US$3.711 million)

Through the NPHCDA, accredited public PHC facilities would receive quarterly grants to complement their
operating budgets, in line with an improvement plan that would be monitored closely. Each ward in the pilot
would be required to nominate at least one public PHC facility (with a maximum of three) for a baseline
assessment by the NPHCDA. A checklist would be used to assess the availability and quality of
infrastructure, equipment, services, drugs, and supply chain capabilities; financial management capabilities;
health management information systems capabilities; governance structures; staff competencies; and
general details of the facility (i.e., catchment area population, opening hours, utilization of services, etc.).
The baseline assessment would be used to select a focal PHC facility for the ward. Accredited facilities
would receive quarterly payments through the NPHCDA. PHC facilities could use the funds to make
upgrades needed for accreditation with the NHIS, which was planned to be more stringent.

The NPHCDA targeted the poor using a geographic approach. Public PHC facilities were the first point of
care for the poor, and the scheme aimed to prioritize at least one PHC facility per ward in urban and rural
areas. Although the OM states that “all Nigerians shall be eligible for the Basic Minimum Package of Health
Services (BMPHS)," in the initial five years of implementation, priority would be given to the rural poor
because of the way the allocation formula was set up. Beneficiaries in both funding mechanisms would be
given a card that entitled them to access free care for key reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health
and nutrition (RMNCH+N) conditions at accredited facilities.



Component 2. Health systems management strengthening to support BHCPF implementation
(Appraisal: US$3 million; Actual: US$882,137)

This component would build and strengthen the institutions and systems needed to implement the BHCPF
at the national level (subcomponent 2a) and state level (subcomponent 2b).

   Subcomponent 2a: Strengthening the BHCPF national institutions and systems (Appraisal:
US$1.5M; Actual: US$254,761)

The BHCPF Secretariat was to serve as the Project Coordinating Unit and oversee all BHCPF operations. A
National Steering Committee Secretariat (or "BHCPF Secretariat") was to undertake the daily
responsibilities of managing the BHCPF, including monitoring and coordinating the activities of the
NPHCDA and NHIS through which most of the funds flowed to providers. The project would finance: (a) the
operational costs of the Secretariat, including office expenditures; (b) hiring of consultants; (c) technical
assistance and capacity building to monitor and coordinate the activities of implementing entities at federal
and state levels; (d) establishment of a transparent facility accreditation system to improve quality of care;
(e) development and piloting of a verifiable payment and information and communication technology (ICT)

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Huwe (P163969)



  system for the BHCPF; (f) design of a citizen grievance redress mechanism to allow citizens to provide
  feedback of negative experiences; (g) hiring of external auditors for the project; and (h) staffing of project
  implementing units within the NPHCDA and NHIS. Accountants would be seconded from the Office of the
  Accountant General of the Federation (Federal Project Financial Management Division) to monitor the
  project’s fiduciary arrangements.

      Subcomponent 2b: Strengthening the performance of state-level implementing agencies
  (Appraisal: US$1.5 million; Actual: US$627,376)

  This subcomponent was to provide operational support and performance frameworks for the state-level
  agencies responsible for implementing the NHIS and NPHCDA systems. The project would provide the
  operating costs to enable the SPHCDAs (State Primary Health Care Development Agencies) and SSHIAs
  to implement their functions under the BHCPF. These would include: (a) supervising and mentoring public
  and private health facilities to meet quality standards; (b) making timely payments to providers; (c) ensuring
  timely and accurate ex ante verification of quality and quantity of services by providers; and (d) training and
  orientation of providers on the NPHCDA.

  State-level verification would ensure that states and local government authorities would identify one PHC
  per ward that met all criteria and would complete mandatory capacity building exercises. These agencies
  would accredit public and private facilities to deliver services of acceptable quality, verify and process
  claims, and strengthen the supervision and mentoring of public facilities. The project would provide some of
  the operating costs for the SPHCDAs and SSHIAs to implement these functions under the BHCPF, with ad
  hoc staff support. Their functions would include: a) supervising and mentoring public and private health
  facilities to meet quality standards; b) ensuring timely and accurate ex-ante and ex-post verification of the
  quality and quantity of services by providers; and c) the training and orientation of providers on the
  NPHCDA and NHIS systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs, Financing, and Borrower Contribution:

  Total project costs were estimated at appraisal at US$20 million, fully financed by a grant through the
  Global Financing Facility for Women and Children. No formal contribution was expected from the Borrower.
  A total of US$11.5 million was advanced to the Designated Account, but the project disbursed only
  US$6,172,069.31, leaving US$5,327,930.69 to be refunded to the World Bank. The Ministry of
  Health processed the refunds through the Central Bank ahead of the December 31, 2021 deadline, but
  procedural errors prevented the transaction from being completed. Reimbursement was more complicated
  than usual because the funds sat in the Government of Nigeria account rather than in a dedicated project
  special account. The refund was finally completed on June 30, 2022

  There were several reasons that the project spent much less than expected. Soon after the project became
  effective, the Ministry of Health made changes to the OM. These changes triggered a suspension in
  disbursements that was resolved after 8 months. The uncertainty caused by the OM changes, and lower
  reimbursement rates than those in effect under the NHIS, deterred private providers from seeking to be
  accredited. These factors, and the disruptions caused by COVID-19, resulted in a considerably lower
  volume of services reimbursed under the project than expected, and only partial use of the project funds.


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)



   Dates: The project was approved on August 13, 2018, signed on October 25, 2018, and became effective
   on January 17, 2019, within the 90-day deadline specified in the GA (p. 2). The project closed on June 30,
   2021, earlier than originally expected. The PAD stated the expected closing date as December 31, 2021,
   but the GA specified the closing date as June 30, 2022. The project team later explained that it was
   expected that the accreditation, verification, and payment mechanisms would be set up within the first year
   of project implementation, and that during the remainder of the project period the system would operate and
   be monitored and evaluated. A later closing date would also enable sustained supervisory support and
   application of the usual project fiduciary and other safeguards, and continuity until an expected follow-on
   project was prepared and appraised. The ICR incorrectly listed the original closing date as June 30, 2021.
   The project was not restructured.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was an important step towards implementing Nigeria’s ambitious plans to improve
primary health care, as explained in the ICR (pp. 5-6). There were serious issues to address. At appraisal,
health outcomes in Nigeria were amongst the lowest globally, with large inequalities across income groups
and between rural and urban areas. Low spending on health and inefficient use of funds were key
contributing factors: government health spending of US$11 per capita was among the lowest in the world,
and most went to secondary and tertiary care facilities, leaving PHC facilities dysfunctional or nonfunctional,
even though over 70 percent of the country’s disease burden could have been prevented or treated at PHC
or community levels. Institutional arrangements for delivering health care were complex and fragmented.
Salary payments to providers were often delayed by two or three months. Only a third of publicly owned
PHC facilities received any operational funding, leaving them with few basic amenities, equipment, and
drugs. Three fourths of PHC facilities reported charging user fees for drugs, delivery services, and antenatal
care, all services that were intended to be free. The private sector provided 60 percent of PHC services but
was poorly coordinated with the public sector. The NHIS, set up in 2005, covered only 4.2 percent of the
population (mainly civil servants), and remained voluntary, with no mechanism to cover the poor.

After a decade of planning and advocacy, the NHA had been passed in 2014. It provided the legal
framework for financing a basic package of the most cost-effective services for all Nigerians. This would
require a transformation of the PHC system, including changes in the control of funds and accountability
across multiple levels of the governance and political system. The federal government launched a three-
pronged plan to implement the NHA, of which the project was a central part. The plan included: (a) an OM
that spelled out how the BHCPF would be operationalized, with financial accountability and transparency at
its core; (b) efforts to gain international backing for the HUWE pilot project to serve as a proof-of-concept
and develop the systems needed for nationwide roll-out; and (c) building a coalition among senior
government leaders, civil society, the general public, and donors to support the implementation of the
BHCPF. The design of the project set out the details of a health reform that persuaded the government in
2018 to finally release the financing of one percent of the Consolidated Revenue Fund approved in the
Health Act of 2014 (first through a temporary mechanism, and later through the Statutory Fund) for the
BHCPF. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) had been holding off releasing the funds for health because a
similar two percent earmarked for education had failed to improve education. MOF was persuaded by the
extensive policy dialogue, advocacy from a broad set of stakeholders, the fact that the project would begin
to implement the reform while ensuring transparency, and that the additional funds would go to frontline

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Huwe (P163969)



services and highly cost-effective essential care, giving priority to the poor. This additional one percent
was important because it would provide resources over and above those budgeted for the health sector
through the "regular" budget process and set up a predictable resource stream to finance operating budgets
of PHC facilities (conditional on meeting specific criteria). Fund transfers through this mechanism would
have two important features: they would be paid before the regular budget allocation process, which would
safeguard them from budget cuts and reallocations across ministries, departments, and agencies; and once
transferred, they could be retained, rather than having to be returned to the Treasury if unspent during the
fiscal year. This would enable funds to be held in reserve in case claims were higher than the earmark in
any year, and these funds could cover services that were reported after the year in which they were
delivered.

The project was therefore a crucial step in beginning to implement an important national policy aimed at
improving health outcomes, especially among the poorest, improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the
health sector, and reducing the barriers to health care and the impoverishing costs of out-of-pocket
spending on health care. The government planned to build on what was learned through the HUWE project
to then roll out the provision of the basic package to the rest of Nigeria.

The project's objective aligned with the government’s policy to expand access to and the quality of
primary health care services. The NHA of 2014 codified Nigeria’s commitment to improving financing of
and access to essential healthcare services, as an important step towards Universal Health Coverage.
These goals were reiterated in the National Health Strategic Development Plan 2018-2022 (NHSDP II),
which described the BHCPF as the platform for achieving Nigeria’s Universal Health Coverage aspirations.

The project was reflected in Nigeria’s macroeconomic policies. The project contributed to the second
main pillar of the government's Economic Recovery and Growth Plan (ERGP), which included the aim of
investing in people through human capital development. The BHCPF also featured prominently in the
successor to the ERGP, the Nigeria National Development Plan (2021-2025), which was approved by the
Federal Executive Council in December 2021. The BHCPF is included in the government's fiscal
sustainability plan approved as the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) (2022-2024). The
inclusion of the BHCPF as a statutory transfer in the MTEF is both a fiscal commitment and an
accountability device to secure payment for primary health care.

The project aligned fully with the Bank's partnership strategy with Nigeria. The key expected outcome
of the project was included in the World Bank’s past (FY14–FY17) and current (FY21–FY25) Country
Partnership Frameworks (CPF). The current CPF includes improvement of PHC as its third core objective,
under the “Investing in Human Capital” pillar. The project’s plan to prioritize a package of cost-effective
services, with a focus on services for women and children and a mechanism that would target the poor,
aligned with the equity and inclusion agenda of the World Bank core goals of reducing poverty and
increasing shared prosperity. By targeting public facilities, the project would be inherently pro-poor,
because public PHCs are the main source of care for the poor.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Huwe (P163969)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Establish the accreditation, verification and payment mechanisms for the operationalization of the Basic
               Health Care Provision Fund (BHCPF) in the Participating States

               Rationale
               The theory of change was that project support for activities to establish the accreditation, verification and
               payment mechanisms at the national level and in three states would enable the BHCPF to be operationalized
               and piloted. At the national level, the project would support: the establishment of a small BHCPF Secretariat
               and financing for its operating costs; design of a poverty-weighted formula for allocating resources to states;
               and guidelines for states to transfer funds to accredited facilities. Program accounts would be set up through
               which program funds would flow in a transparent way, consistent with World Bank fiduciary processes. The
               project would support the participating states to identify one facility in each ward at which baseline
               assessments would be done, and infrastructure and staff upgraded if necessary. The facilities would be
               accredited if they met agreed quality and service readiness criteria, including opening a bank account and
               establishing a Health Facility Management Committee (HFMC) with community representation. Accreditation
               would enable them to receive additional operational funds through the project, to be spent within program
               guidelines, to deliver a defined set of essential health services. Facilities would also develop annual quality
               improvement plans. HFMCs would be trained in management skills, including book-keeping, prioritizing health
               care needs, workforce motivation, and quality improvement. States would be supported to review facility
               plans, provide supportive supervision, audit the facility expense statements and accounts, and carry out
               annual assessments of quality at all participating facilities. States also would be supported to define
               mechanisms for identifying (a limited number) of poor beneficiaries, who would receive the designated
               services free. Each SSHIA would be supported to sign contractual agreements with accredited PHC facilities
               to provide reimbursable defined essential health services to the enrolled beneficiaries. States would be
               supported to develop mechanisms and procedures for verifying facility claims for reimbursement, including
               contacting a sample of beneficiaries to verify that services were delivered as reported, and to seek feedback
               on service quality.

               The expected result of establishing the BHCPF was that accredited facilities would provide high-impact PHC
               and RMNCH+N services that would be free to the poor. Accredited private and public providers would receive
               timely performance-based payments through the NHIS. The additional financing and improved readiness to
               deliver services was expected to improve quality, accountability, and transparency in the use of health
               funding. The expected impact was that the project would enable the program to be rolled out nationally, and
               that the increased availability and timeliness of financing to providers, especially public PHC facilities, and the
               availability of subsidized insurance coverage and free essential services would increase utilization of these
               services, reduce out-of-pocket expenditures, and, in the medium- and longer-term, contribute to improved
               health outcomes.



               Outputs




                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Huwe (P163969)



Institutional Development

The states were required to make an upfront payment of N100 million (US$330,000) as "counterpart
funding" used to set up the governance structure; pay for training at the facility and community level on the
new BHCPF operations; finance facility upgrades; and hire new staff. Project funds were used by states to set
up State Steering Committees, develop the legal framework for SPHCDA and SSHIA, and build capacity of
staff.

SSHIAs were set up in all three states. SPHCDAs had already been established before the project began.

Management committees with community representation were set up at all the public health facilities in the
project area. The ICR explained (p. 31) that a committee member co-signed all PHC plans, budgets, and
payments, and that they helped to institutionalize a culture of community participation in the planning and
monitoring of the BHCPF, which was expected to help ensure that the decentralized BHCPF program would
be adapted to local circumstances.

PHC facilities were enabled to set up bank accounts for the first time and received regular quarterly operating
funds.

The project design further increased PHC facilities' accountability to the community by making citizens and
providers aware of their entitlements through community sensitization, and by advertising the services
beneficiaries were entitled to receive on signs outside the facilities and requiring participating facilities to
enable their clients to access a grievance redress mechanism.

Accreditation

A checklist was compiled of the criteria that facilities had to meet to become “accredited” and eligible for
funding. Baseline and follow-up assessments were designed and conducted to monitor adherence to these
criteria during supervision visits and regular reporting.

At least one PHC facility in each ward was accredited, except for two wards in Niger state where there were
severe security challenges in border communities. In total, the NPHCDA accredited 898 public facilities, and
645 of them were also accredited by the NHIS. Initially, the NHIS had planned to set more stringent criteria,
but during the project it was decided to use the same criteria to avoid duplication and inefficiency.

Scorecards were developed through which to hold facilities accountable for quality of care.

Identification and verification of beneficiaries

A process was adopted to enroll and verify poor and vulnerable beneficiaries eligible for the care funded
through the NHIS. The revised OM called for using the National Social Register to identify beneficiaries, but
since states were not fully familiar with the register, they sometimes adopted different identification and
revalidation strategies to confirm poverty status using their own data, while giving priority to women of
reproductive age and children.

Registered beneficiaries were required to have a National Identification Number (NIN). When the National
Identity Management Commission responsible for issuing NINs was found to lack the operational funding and



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Huwe (P163969)



equipment needed to register project beneficiaries, the project adapted the process to allow SSHIAs to issue
their own NINs for the poor and vulnerable.

Verification of facilities’ use of funds

Facility staff were supported to develop explicit quarterly work plans (in collaboration with the management
committees) to guide the use of funds, and to report on the use of funds. The workplans were approved by
the SPHCDAs before funding was released. The OM specified that almost all funds were to be used for
service delivery. A system to verify that funds were used as intended was set up.

The project improved internal audit and controls for ensuring proper management of resources and detecting
and quickly correcting improper use. All public facilities in the project submitted statements of expenses,
payments vouchers, and receipts quarterly to SPHCDAs. These were collated and audited as part of internal
fiduciary safeguards at the state and national implementation levels. The audit verified that these documents
showed no more than ten percent deviation from the claims submitted by facilities to the NHIS.

Training in claims verification was completed in December 2019.

Other outputs

The project channeled funds through the Central Bank of Nigeria’s (CBN) account (using the Treasury Single
Accounts), co-mingling project funds with government funds and funds from the Gates Foundation – the first
ever World Bank project to do so. This is important, because it uses a tool for consolidating and managing the
government’s cash resources that allows traceability of expenditures and fund flows. All funds, including the
government funds comingled in the same CBN account, were subject to the same fiduciary standards as a
World Bank-financed project.

The project established effective audit systems. First, there was a requirement to undertake external audits by
the Office of the Auditor General of the Federation annually. Secondly, the project mandated that an internal
auditor provide additional assurances that all fiduciary controls were in place before implementation and
disbursement of funds.

The project provided technical assistance to help enable states to use funding provided through other World
Bank projects to introduce medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEFs), which introduced predictability
into state budget processes.



Intermediate Results

Ninety percent of health facilities enrolled in the decentralized facility financing payment system received
supervision in the final quarter of the project, surpassing the target of 75 percent. Several levels of supportive
supervision were put in place, including at the ward, Local Government Area (LGA), state, and national levels,
to monitor and hold facilities accountable for conducting activities in line with their work plans.

Management committees with community representation were functioning at 100 percent of the PHC facilities
in the project area, exceeding the target of 75 percent.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Huwe (P163969)




Outcomes

Accreditation

Accredited facilities were reassessed for quality each year. The indicator for the average health facility
quality-of-care score was greatly surpassed. Average scores improved from the baseline of 28 (out of 100) to
over 71, well above the target of 43. The target was exceeded in all three states (62 in Niger, 75 in Osun, and
78 in Abia).

Verification

All of the health facilities financed through the fee-for-service mechanism were independently verified to have
submitted valid claims (verified as less than a 10 percent discordance from claims), surpassing the target of
90 percent.

74,930 beneficiaries received services financed through the fee-for-service mechanism, not reaching the
target of 600,000 beneficiaries.

Payment

The number of public PHC facilities receiving operational expenses via the decentralized facility
financing mechanism reached 898, surpassing the target of 800 facilities. In addition, 19 other states also
accredited PHCs and began disbursing funds under the same mechanism. This mechanism provides facilities
with up-front funding to enable them to deliver services covered by the benefit package, without having to
resort to out-of-pocket payments from individuals. It also gives providers autonomy to use resources as
needed as long as this is in line with the OM guidelines for eligible expenditures.

The number of accredited facilities receiving payments for services financed through the fee-for-service
mechanism was 646, failing to meet the target of 1,000. The disaggregation by public and private showed that
the target of 750 public facilities was substantially achieved at 645, but that no private facilities were included,
compared to a target of 250.

The ICR (p. 27) listed four main reasons that no private providers were empaneled. When it was decided that
the BHCPF should aim to have one accredited health facility per ward, priority was given to public PHCs, and
there were limited resources to also accredit a private facility. Second, when the NHIS began paying
providers on a per capita basis, a cap was set at 150 beneficiaries per ward. Third, private providers were
already receiving N750 per enrollee per year from SSHIAs for existing health insurance enrollees, whereas
the BHCPF offered N500 per enrollee for poor beneficiaries enrolled under the project, undermining the
incentive for private providers to participate. Fourth, in some parts of the participating states, particularly in
remote and rural settlements, there were no private facilities. The project team later explained that the
changes that the FMOH made in the OM and subsequent suspension of disbursement left the terms of
potential contracts with private providers uncertain and were also an important disincentive (conversation with
TTL on 8/26/22).

The target of 950 project facilities receiving on-time payments was substantially achieved, at 898. The
shortfall was entirely the result of no private facilities being enrolled in the new mechanisms. The sub-targets

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Huwe (P163969)



for both kinds of payment to public facilities were surpassed: 795 public fee-for-service facilities received
payments on time, compared to the target of 500; and all 898 enrolled public PHC facilities received on-time
operational expenses through the decentralized facility financing mechanism, compared to the target of 45.

An important aspect of the project's design was that it would change the criteria for allocating funding from the
national to state level from being based on the level of inputs (hospital beds, health personnel, etc.), which
tend to be higher in wealthier states, to being based on poverty rates in the region. The federal
government adopted this allocation model not only for project funding, but also for government co-mingled
funding allocated to the other states. This is intended to help reduce inequality in health care funding.



Impact

The number of outpatient visits per year in the three participating states of Abia, Niger, and Osun increased
from a baseline of 294,915 to 1,181,776 in the final year of the project, surpassing the target of one million.

The percentage of children aged 12-23 months who received their Pentavalent 3 vaccination (taking the
average in the three states of Abia, Niger, and Osun) increased from 57 percent at baseline to 68.7 percent,
exceeding the target of 67 percent.

The number of people who received essential health, nutrition, and population services in participating states
reached 945,420, surpassing the target of 850,00. The target number of 650,000 for females was also
surpassed, at 756,336. The sub-target of 200,000 for the number of children immunized was also exceeded,
at 302,534.

The percentage of births attended by skilled health personnel in the three states increased from 70 percent to
79.5 percent, surpassing the 75 percent target. However, the number of deliveries attended by a skilled
attendant of 60,506 did not meet the target of 100,000.

By December 2021, six months after the end of the project, 6,409 facilities had been authorized to receive
funds, one in each of 70 percent of the wards in Nigeria, and 5,829 of them had begun to receive funds
specifically for service delivery, a significant improvement over the baseline where only a third of publicly
owned PHC facilities received any form of operational funding.

The BHCPF program health insurance coverage for the poor had enrolled almost a million people by
December 2021, expanding access to services and providing financial protection. The package of essential
services included treatment for malaria, which Yamey et. al. (2016) (ICR, p. 62) estimated as having an
average cost-benefit ratio of 1:5. The ICR noted that malaria alone accounted for about half of all out-of-
pocket spending on health care in Nigeria, and, with 76 percent of all health spending being out-of-pocket in
2018, this could lead to substantial reduction in financial burden on households.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Huwe (P163969)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The accreditation, verification, and payment mechanisms were fully established for both funding mechanisms
                            supported under the project and were operationalized in public facilities, but not in private facilities. The fact
                            that the program had been scaled up well beyond the initial three pilot states included in the project helps
                            demonstrate that the project went beyond the “proof of concept” goal and enabled the program to begin being
                            rolled out nation-wide.

                            The ICR (p. 32) noted that the processes and procedures set up under the project were adopted for the
                            national operationalization of the BHCPF. By the time the ICR was written, all 36+1 Nigerian states had
                            started to operationalize the BHCPF through the NPHCDA and NHIS in selected public facilities. Although the
                            project did not engage private sector facilities as planned, the systems and structures were developed to be
                            able to do so.

                            Many of the results measured by the project indicators were highly project-specific, and thus clearly
                            attributable to the project. The ICR noted that there was “a global coalition to support the implementation of
                            the BHCPF, including the World Bank, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Director General of the
                            World Health Organization, Gavi, the Global Fund, and other donor organizations” that contributed to the
                            project results. A prerequisite for the project to become effective was that the OM be completed; this was
                            done with support from the Gates Foundation. However, it can reasonably be assumed that under the
                            counterfactual of what the situation might have been without the project, the ambitious reform program might
                            well not have begun to be implemented. The World Bank played a significant role in advocating for the health
                            reform and helping give strategic direction. The NHA had languished unimplemented for four years because
                            of the failure of the similar two percent budget earmark for education to achieve the expected results. The
                            federal government needed reassurance that the funds for health, if released, would be used well. It is quite
                            likely that the release of the one percent of funds and the significant health reforms in the BMPHS would not
                            have happened without advocacy from the Bank and other stakeholders (including civil society organizations
                            and non-government organizations) and the project, especially the dialogue during project design and
                            preparation, and the health financing analysis that informed the project design. The project team
                            later described the project as “a very small project punching way way above its weight” in impact (discussion
                            with TTL on 8/27/22). Without the project and the fund allocation principles it adopted, it is quite likely that
                            even if the funds had been released, they would have been allocated similarly to other government funding
                            for health – mostly for tertiary care, rather than most of it going to front-line care as ensured by the project.

                            The project results framework included indicators for increased utilization of essential services. This was an
                            expected impact of removing financial barriers for the poorest citizens, and improving the ability of PHC
                            facilities to deliver essential services and improving the quality of service delivery. The ICR reported
                            substantial increases in service utilization in the pilot states and noted that the increases in services delivered
                            were achieved despite only one PHC facility per ward being accredited, and without the expected contribution
                            of private providers (since the project was unable to accredit any private providers). This increase may have
                            been the result of the project, but the ICR did not present data to support this assumption (such as data
                            showing significantly greater increase in service utilization in facilities that participated in the project
                            compared to facilities that did not), so the service delivery increases cannot be attributed to the project with
                            confidence. Furthermore, although these increases are measured in the results framework and clearly the
                            purpose of the health reform, they were not captured in the PDO as an explicitly stated project objective.


                                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Huwe (P163969)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Ex-ante analysis of efficiency

The PAD (p. 40) provided a qualitative discussion of the reasons the project was expected to be an efficient
investment. It noted that the project design was built on the implementation experience of related programs in
Nigeria and on extensive analytical and technical work conducted during project design. The design of the
BHCPF largely relied on the demonstrated effectiveness of performance-based financing (PBF) in Nigeria
through the ongoing federal government implementation of the National States Health Investment
Project (US$315 million, 2012-2020) in several Nigerian states, as well as demonstrated efficiency gains using
PBF in Rwanda and Burundi.

The PAD's analysis described three sources of expected efficiency gains of the BHCPF. The first was enhanced
allocative efficiency through increased resource allocations to primary care services, especially to the maternal,
neonatal, and child health conditions that accounted for 67 percent of the burden of disease in Nigeria and were
the leading causes of premature death. The second was an expected increase in technical efficiency expected
to come from new increased availability of operational expenses through the decentralized facility
financing system that would allow public PHC facilities to stock up on essential commodities and supplies and
provide them the enabling environment to do the right things the right way. Furthermore, the accreditation,
subsequent enrollment of accredited providers, and service-based mode of payment under the fee-for-
service system would create incentives to providers to deliver quality care, since reimbursement would be based
on services delivered. Thirdly, a leveraging effect was expected, in which the BHCPF would leverage the
existing infrastructure and human resources and mobilize the capacity of private sector providers to deliver high-
quality primary care. Public PHC facilities would be incentivized to use their operational expenses to increase
the coverage and quality of their services to receive fee-for-service accreditation.

The investments in institutional coordination were expected to improve overall coordination of the health sector
and further increase resource efficiency. Finally, because the project would set up mechanisms and processes
that would later be used at scale for a nationwide deployment of the BHCPF, the relatively small project
investment would generate large gains.

Ex-post analysis of efficiency.

The ICR (pp. 31-33) explained why it judged the project to have achieved high allocative and technical
efficiency, and modest implementation efficiency. It did not attempt any quantitative estimate of project returns
or efficiency, but it is difficult to see how this could have been done.

The project design was highly efficient (what the ICR called “allocative efficiency”) in funding activities that
are cost-effective, and/or have high returns. It focused on financing an explicit package of highly cost-effective
interventions to prevent or treat conditions that account for roughly 72 percent of the disease burden in Nigeria,
beginning to redress the extreme mismatch between the disease burden and public financing allocations to


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Huwe (P163969)



health in Nigeria. Annex 4 in the ICR cited typical cost-benefit ratios for some of these interventions ranging from
$3 to $48 for every $1 of spending (Yamey et.al., 2016).

The project’s modest investment of $6.2 million leveraged N87.99 billion (~US$218 million) in domestic funding
between the start of the project and December 2021, over and above what was allocated through the regular
budget process. In addition to the federal funding through the Service Wide Votes and Statutory Transfers,
participating states provided counterpart financing for facility upgrades, hiring of staff, and other investments to
improve the functioning of the selected facilities. The project team later stated that they thought it unlikely that
the additional national-level funding would have been released without the project and the concerted advocacy
by a wide range of stakeholders that helped persuade the MOF that the funds were likely to be spent well
(conversation with TTL on 8/26/22), and the additional funds from the states were a condition of their
participation in the project.

The project accreditation of PHC facilities and provision of quarterly funding that facilities could use within
guidelines to cover basic operating costs improved their ability to deliver the package of basic essential health
services in poor, underserved rural communities. This was enhanced by the project investment in quality
improvement at PHC facilities through accreditation and improved management and supervision. The project
design included an innovative comingling of project funds and government funds and made all funds subject to
mechanisms for transparency, accountability, and World Bank fiduciary procedures, which is likely to have
enhanced efficiency in the use of those comingled funds.

The TTL noted that the project was able to learn from the failures of the Education Fund that is administered by
the Universal Basic Education Commission with a staff of 2,000, and set up a lean administrative structure with
a staff of only ten people (conversation with TTL on 8/26/22), an additional element of project design efficiency
not noted in the ICR.

Some delays could have been better anticipated by the project; notably, the system for targeting the poor and
issuing NINs proved problematic and slowed progress in implementing the NHIS. This, and an understanding of
private sector incentives and payment levels, could have used more investigation and discussion during project
preparation and appraisal.

The ICR rated implementation efficiency as modest because of substantial implementation delays. These
included delays in claims verification training and in developing the ICT platform that was intended to be part of
the verification mechanism. The ICR noted that many delays were outside the control of the project: the review
and changes to the OM and subsequent negotiations over the dissolution and re-constitution of the BHCPF
Secretariat and changes in the fiduciary mechanisms; bureaucratic delays in opening facility bank accounts and
transferring funds from the federal to state level; and delays because of the low capacity of SSHIAs. The
COVID-19 pandemic led to lower volumes of service delivery and inhibited and delayed training and in-person
supervision.

The ICR (p. 34) noted that despite the challenges and implementation delays, the project achieved most of its
targets, at less cost than expected, and commented that “in this respect, the project was highly efficient in its
implementation.”

Project implementation was completed within the original project time frame, at about one third of the appraised
cost, with most planned activities completed. The main activities not completed were: the ICT platform was not
developed; no private providers were accredited; fewer poor beneficiaries were identified and verified than
intended; and an evaluation to compare the participating states with “control” states was not done. Most of the


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Huwe (P163969)



expected institutional and systems/mechanisms development was accomplished (Component 2) at the national
and state levels at about half of the appraised cost. Component 1 funding was for PHC facility operating costs
and to reimburse providers for service provision; the lower spending than appraised reflects the failure to
operationalize the program in the private sector, implementation delays, lower than planned beneficiary
identification, and reduced use of health services due to COVID-19.

An important aspect of implementation efficiency is whether activities were done at least cost. No standards or
norms are provided by which to judge this, but a total expenditure of $0.9 million seems modest for setting up
and supporting systems and institutions at the national level and in three states and providing training
(Component 2). The decision during implementation to use a single accreditation system for both project funding
mechanisms rather than using separate standards, criteria, and processes, as originally designed, saved
resources and effort (ICR, p. 23). That, and the decision to use the existing government grievance redress
mechanism instead of setting up a new mechanism specifically for the health system, also enhanced
implementation efficiency. The high cost-effectiveness of the $5.3 million disbursed (Component 2) on
reimbursing selected essential services, and of providing additional operating budgets to accredited PHCs, has
already been noted.

The ICR rated the technical efficiency of the project as high because of the measures introduced to improve the
efficiency of health expenditures in the country. Although these refer to sectoral efficiency rather than project
efficiency per se, it is reasonable to include them in a discussion of efficiency, since they are the intended gains
of the health reform for which the project established key implementation processes. Accountability mechanisms
were introduced at the facility, ward, and state levels. Quality and functionality of participating PHC facilities was
improved. The project piloted a low-cost model of care that channeled most of the funds to the front lines to
deliver a package of essential, cost-effective services addressing the easily treatable and preventable conditions
that account for a large part of Nigeria’s burden of disease. The requirement that all implementing entities
maintain financial records of transactions and the audit arrangements should contribute to improved
governance, accountability, and transparency, and help ensure that funds are used only for the intended
purposes.

The project catalyzed other gains in health system efficiency by beginning a shift in funding allocations away
from tertiary care and vertical program towards PHC, and using country systems rather than donor- and
program-specific systems. The new ability introduced by the BHCPF to comingle funds while providing strong
fiduciary controls enables better alignment of donor financing with Nigeria’s priority health care needs. The
major financiers of immunization services in Nigeria, Gavi and the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, explicitly
incorporated the BHCPF in their planning.

The overall efficiency rating weighs the substantial design efficiency and the mixed record of implementation
efficiency. IEG Guidelines define a modest rating as one that is below the expectations for the sector, and that a
project rated as having substantial efficiency must meet the expectations for the sector. Using this metric, on
balance, the project efficiency is rated substantial. Despite some clear implementation shortfalls, the project
succeeded in achieving most aspects of its PDO well within the appraised cost, and succeeding in setting up the
key mechanisms of an important and difficult health reform, and testing them with considerable success in all
three pilot states, despite considerable political and technical challenges.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Huwe (P163969)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High because the project addressed important development challenges, and
aligned with country conditions and with current Bank and Government strategies. The achievement of project
objectives is rated substantial because the accreditation, verification, and payment mechanisms were set up,
and the health reform operationalized in the public sector (although not the private sector). Efficiency is rated
Substantial after weighing the efficient, cost-effective, and successful aspects of the project against the delays
and difficulties during implementation. Taken together, these ratings reflect only minor shortcomings in the
project's preparation, implementation, and achievement, producing an overall Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The PDO, as narrowly defined, could be said to have no risk, since the accreditation, verification, and
payment mechanisms were in fact established, and the BHCPF was operationalized in the participating
states in the public sector (but not the private sector). However, a broader view considers the risks to the
mechanisms and BHCPF continuing to operate successfully as designed.

BHCPF financing is secured by being a statutory inter-governmental fiscal transfer from national to
subnational entities, and is included in critical government documents, notably the MTEF 2022 – 2024 and
the National Development Plan. A new National Health Insurance Law has been signed by the President
which makes the BHCPF the key financing arrangement for the poor and vulnerable through the mandatory
insurance program.

There are several sources of risk. As a percentage of the government's Consolidated Revenue Fund, the
actual amount of financing for the BHCPF declines if total revenues fall, and these revenues have been less
than anticipated because of COVID-19 and other global economic shocks. A second key risk is possible
future changes to the OM that might weaken the transparent, accountable tracking of funding flows, or
weaken the incentives or support for sustained quality improvements. A third key risk is that weak capacity of

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Huwe (P163969)



institutions could compromise program implementation and performance. In most wards, except for those
included in the Nigeria States Health Investment Project, this is the first time that facilities are receiving
funds, and there is still low capacity to manage. SSHIAs also require ongoing support to implement social
health insurance. There is overall weak capacity for budgeting and planning at the subnational level.

The risk of not sustaining the gains made under the BHCPF is mitigated through ongoing support from the
World Bank, the federal government, and other donors. A future World Bank project is expected to provide
continued support to national roll out of the BHCPF by further strengthening investments in PHC. The
challenges faced in identifying and enrolling poor people in the program are likely to be eased by the
establishment of a National Social Registry that is being supported by a World Bank-financed US$800 million
credit for the National Social Safety Net Program Scale-Up (NASSP-SU). It is important to be able to identify
the poorest beneficiaries because BHCPF resources are limited, and the federal government has decided to
move to a capitation payment mechanism that can cover only a limited number of beneficiaries.

The failure to attract private providers to participate requires attention in the future if the program is to fully
realize its potential. Since the project closed, some contracts with private providers have been signed to
provide specific services (notably Caesarean sections) that are beyond the capacity of participating PHC
facilities (conversation with TTL on 8/26/22).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   The project addressed important development and health sector challenges in seeking to reorient the
   allocation of health financing towards cost-effective, essential services addressing the bulk of the burden
   of disease, improve the quality of PHC and transparency and efficiency in the use of scarce health care
   resources, and reduce the financial barriers and burdens of out-of-pocket health care spending. It drew
   on extensive analytic work and experience in Nigeria and globally on output-based financing and health
   reform. It was fully consistent with the Bank's country assistance strategy. The design benefitted from
   health financing analysis (Nigeria Health Financing Program: P162108) that also reviewed relevant good
   practices. The World Bank preparation team included a good skill mix, with expertise in public finance,
   governance, health financing, and social protection. The OM incorporated good practices from the
   Nigeria States Health Investment Project and learned from its unsuccessful aspects and from experience
   in the education sector. The project enabled the federal government to begin to implement its stalled
   ambitious health reform plans.

   The project objective was pragmatic and well-focused, appropriate PDO-level indicators were included in
   the results framework, and activities were well chosen to achieve the project objective. The project was
   appropriately selective in its geographic scope, and detailed implementation arrangements were clearly
   described. The risks were identified and described in detail in the PAD (pp. 35-37), and reasonable
   measures were identified and planned to mitigate them, including arrangements for flexible and extensive
   levels of technical assistance.

   The team coordinated well with other development partners during project design and throughout
   implementation. The World Bank helped leverage international partners to commit to the implementation
   of the BHCPF. The Bill and Melinda Gates foundation released US$2 million for BHCPF operational

                                                                                                          Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)



  support and purchase of essential health services, and the United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth
  & Development Office pledged about £70M for purchasing essential health services.

  The main respects in which project design could have been improved were in the arrangements for
  identifying beneficiaries; selection of intermediate results indicators to measure progress in project
  activities rather than impacts (see Section 9a); assessment of incentives and disincentives for private
  providers to participate; underestimating how long ICT systems take to design and implement; and not
  arranging for the planned impact evaluation to begin very early in project implementation. In relative
  terms, these are minor shortcomings in Quality at Entry.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 44) reported that key informants from the state and national implementing entities of the
 BHCPF considered the quality of the Bank team's technical support and supervision to be outstanding. The
 task team had a real challenge in resisting changes that a new Minister of Health wanted to make in the
 OM and working to ensure that the design of the health reform was not compromised. They maintained an
 ongoing policy dialogue and convened many meetings to increase the visibility of the project and overall
 BHCPF reform. The Abuja-based team provided direct continuous supervisory support to the national
 implementing entities. Regular missions were carried out by a state-level health financing specialist to the
 three states included in the project, in person until COVID constrained these to virtual missions. The team
 also supported non-project states when the government of Nigeria began scaling the program nationwide,
 soon after implementation began. They helped the BHCPF Secretariat to train all heads of agencies in all
 states and explain the rationale for the design of the BHCPF, using Health Financing Program ASA
 support. Two workshops were held over five days each in Abuja, sharing lessons from the pilot states. The
 team also held a "Lessons Learned" workshop with government officials to reflect on the lessons and
 discuss opportunities and potential challenges facing the agencies with the nationwide roll-out.

 There were no changes in the TTL during project preparation and implementation. Missions included highly
 qualified World Bank experts to advise on fiduciary management (financial management (FM) and
 procurement), environmental safeguards, and social protection/targeting of beneficiaries. The ICR noted
 that Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were timely, and aides-memoire or back-to-office
 reports for each mission provided a clear picture of project progress. Quarterly reviews and Integrated
 Supportive Supervision at the LGA and state levels helped monitor project progress and enabled timely
 corrective action.

 The ICR identified two minor shortcomings in the quality of supervision. The final ISR reported data for all
 states, instead of only the three project states. It attributed the long delay in the repayment of undisbursed
 project funds to inadequate communication about transition arrangements at the end of the project (ICR, p.
 44). No mid-term review was held because of the disruption to project implementation when disbursement
 was halted in response to the dissolution of the BHCPF Secretariat and changes made to the OM that were
 not agreed to by the World Bank.



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)



 The quality of World Bank supervision is rated as Satisfactory because of the reported high quality of
 support offered to the government during implementation, strong supervision, and innovation employed
 throughout the project. Due to the significant amount of work and the strategic relevance of the project to
 the client, the World Bank continues to lead the development support to the Government of Nigeria on the
 implementation of the BHCPF.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The positive features of M&E design were that the PDO was specific, well-focused, and consistent with the
 design of the project; the theory of change was sound; and a manageable number of clearly defined
 indicators was chosen to track project activities and results, and these met the “SMART” criteria. The
 results framework included baseline and target values for all indicators, data sources, and frequency and
 clearly specified responsibility for data collection. The indicators used a mix of existing sources of data and
 new mechanisms to monitor the quality of PHC services and flow of funds. The M&E system put
 mechanisms in place for using data for course-correction and scale-up. The design included third-party
 monitoring and verification of data by an external auditor. The project planned an impact evaluation in
 which the three pilot states would be compared with three matched control states, to assess the
 effectiveness and efficiency of the BHCPF. This evaluation was expected to use existing household and
 health facility surveys as well as data that would be collected specifically for the evaluation and was
 planned to be contracted to an independent firm. The PAD did not comment on how this impact evaluation
 would be funded.

 The ICR (p. 40) identified several shortcomings in M&E design. More process-level indicators such as
 "number of facilities accredited" or "number of facilities that have opened bank accounts" could have
 helped to monitor whether the pilot was on track. The theory of change could have more clearly shown the
 pathways through which the project was expected to change the health system, especially for people
 unfamiliar with health reform details, and the expected long-term outcomes, including increased public
 financing for health and more efficient use of financing. Three other shortcomings can be added to the list.
 No arrangements seem to have been included to ensure timely collection of baseline data for the impact
 evaluation. Although the PDO had the virtue of being specific and consistent with the project design, it was
 relatively limited in scope. Finally, some of the indicators included as measuring intermediate results
 measured impact, much further along the results chain.




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR listed many strengths in M&E implementation. Most of the data needed for project
  monitoring were collected, collated, and analyzed by the respective national and state implementing
  agencies, and by LGA authorities, both in real time and during integrated supportive supervision visits.
  The project had intended to track health outcomes using the 2019 SMART survey, but results of SMART
  were rejected by the World Bank when operational gaps were identified. Instead, the project team used
  multiple data sources for health indicators through the Federal Ministry of Health Multi-Source Data
  Analytics and Triangulation Platform, which includes data from surveys and routine monthly data from the
  Nigeria Health Management Information System. The project strengthened supervision across state,
  LGA, and facility levels, and the supervisory function included clearly defined M&E roles. For example, all
  facilities underwent a baseline survey before accreditation, and this was repeated over time.

  The main M&E shortcoming identified in the ICR was delayed implementation, which affected the
  establishment and timely use of M&E systems; for example, the National District Health Information
  System created a module to track all the indicators used in the BHCPF, but the indicators were
  incorporated later than planned. The ICR also noted that the final ISR included data from states other
  than the three project states, whereas the results framework and PAD and Grant Agreement referred only
  to the three states of Abia State, Niger State and Osun State. The impact evaluation was not done,
  although the project team later explained that the early start to the country-wide roll-out would have made
  it impossible to find matched states as controls as intended in the IE design (conversation with TTL on
  8/26/22).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 41) noted substantial use of M&E data during project implementation. The World Bank and
  government teams regularly monitored the results framework and used the information to communicate
  progress to decision makers and inform implementation. The BHCPF-Ministerial Oversight Committee
  (MOC), NHIS, NPHCDA, State Implementing Entities, and HFMCs used data to monitor performance
  and identify areas for additional operational support. Quarterly reports provided real time data to monitor
  the level and quality of service delivery at facilities, sometimes catalyzing additional operational
  support. At the national level, NPHCDA and NHIS presented collated reports quarterly to the MOC;
  similarly, state level agencies reported quarterly. On the NHIS gateway, monthly client utilization records
  were used to validate the capitation payments and monitor signs of over-utilization risk and actuarial
  validation. The ICR also said that these data were used by the World Bank to assess progress and
  make decisions or design corrective actions, but it did not offer specific examples.

  Data on progress of the three project states (and other states once the roll-out began) were presented
  regularly to the Nigerian Legislature, the State Executive Council, and development partners and donor
  groups as part of advocacy for improved resource mobilization for BHCPF implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Huwe (P163969)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as a Category B project, with low social and environmental risk, as project
  activities were considered likely to have minimal or no adverse social impacts. Operational Policy (OP) 4.01
  on Environmental Assessment was triggered by the potential environmental concerns around the handing
  of health care waste resulting from project-related activities such as immunizations. The Environmental and
  Social Management Framework was disclosed on March 26, 2018, and the FMOH updated and disclosed
  its health care waste management plan in-country in March 2018 and on the World Bank website in May
  2018. Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) consistently rated safeguards compliance in the satisfactory
  range.

  The PAD included plans for a grievance redress mechanism (GRM), which the ICR (p. 41) described in
  some detail as functioning well, with grievances and complaints channeled through GRM committees at
  facilities and state implementing entities, those related to beneficiary identification and targeting adequately
  addressed on the NHIS gateway, and continuous case management throughout the project implementation
  allowing verification and addressing of appealing households’ cases. It concluded that “the project had a
  good record of GRM utilization and response." However, the TTL noted that although many facilities signed
  on to the existing federal government GRM “Servicom," they did not post the hotline numbers or other
  information about how to submit a complaint (conversation with TTL on 8/26/22).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The financial management arrangements of the project were assessed as Moderately Satisfactory at
  closing and fiduciary risks rated as moderate. In the first year of project implementation, the BHCPF
  Secretariat was dissolved, which meant there were no officers from the Office of the Accountant General to
  document expenditures in Client Connection. Once the BHCPF Secretariat was reconstituted, all
  backlogged and new expenses were uploaded. Financial management compliance continued to improve
  steadily until the project became fully compliant.

  Procurement under the BHCPF followed the World Bank and National Procurement Procedures. Contracts
  administrations were reliable, timely, and transparent. At the facility level, procurements were according to
  business plans, and HFMCs met weekly to review contract administration. State implementing entities'
  oversight of procurement at PHC facilities improved reliability and transparency. There were some
  problems with procurement performance during project implementation, including delays in preparing and
  processing procurement and glitches (like a failure to enter documentation in the Systematic Tracking of
  Exchange in Procurement system), that were resolved by the end of the project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Huwe (P163969)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

These lessons are drawn from the ICR, pp. 46-48, and restated by IEG.

1. Health sector reforms often disrupt the status quo and so have supporters and
opponents; the political economy of reform is challenging and needs careful and sustained
attention.

The BHCPF changed the way resources flow from the national to subnational level and how they are
distributed to states and agencies, and introduced new levels of transparency and accountability. It
strengthened incentives for performance and value-for-money at multiple levels, especially at PHC
facilities. Many of the changes created political challenges, which caused delays in getting the
Operational Manual approved, and then efforts to make changes. Turnover in political positions can
change priorities, and sustained advocacy by stakeholders who support the reforms may be needed.
The broader and more visible the coalition of support, the more likely it is that the reform will be
protected. Health reform projects need to include careful analysis of the politics of the reforms,
understand where opposition might come from, and be aware of political cycles and the possible
impact on project implementation. The HUWE project showed the value of including safeguards in
the grant agreement against policy changes that could undermine the intent or principles of the
reform, and the importance of sustained, strong engagement by civil society and health advocates at
every stage of the reform.

2. Health reforms have many aspects -- financing, governance, management, organization,
payment/incentives for providers, and behavioral responses by providers and users (in addition to
the political aspects commented on above) -- and they all need to be considered, as changes in
one or more aspects can have important implication for other aspects.

The operationalization of the BHCPF supported mobilization of additional public financing from the
federal government in a way that holds subnational levels accountable for using funds and
establishes incentives for better quality, more targeted care. The Statutory Transfer ensured
predictability and allowed a shift towards strategic purchasing and output-based payment. The
increased financing needed to result in increased and improved delivery of services, which required
changes in the way service priorities were set, planned, managed, and supervised; new incentives

                                                                                                Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Huwe (P163969)



to providers in the way services were delivered; and incentives to beneficiaries to make greater use
of available essential services.

3. Beneficiary identification and targeting mechanisms need careful planning.

The project faced delays because of the lack of a common beneficiary identification program and
inadequate guidance to states. World Bank-financed operations in health may need to work closely
with colleagues in social protection to strengthen identification and targeting systems to better
identify the intended target beneficiaries, especially if resource or other constraints require stringent
selectivity. If the expectation is that a national poverty registry or other existing targeting mechanism
or safety net program records will be used, a detailed appraisal or pilot is likely to be useful to check
whether the records/data are adequate and up-to-date enough, and if not, to make plans for
alternative mechanisms for beneficiary identification and selection.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, well written, and very thorough (although long). It provided a comprehensive account of the
project's context and design, the logic and importance of the health reform, project implementation, and results.
The theory of change was well developed and especially helpful for readers unfamiliar with health reform. It
mostly followed guidelines (exceptions noted below). The lessons and recommendations were thoughtfully
selected.

Annex 1 Table B is supposed to list key outputs by component. Instead, it merely listed the indicators. This is a
common shortcoming in ICRs. The Annex 3 project funding summary table was incomplete; instead of showing
the actual amounts disbursed for each line, the table repeated the appraised amounts. There was no
discussion of the reliability of the data on project results, or the extent to which results were likely to be
attributable to the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Huwe (P163969)




                                                                  Page 24 of 24
