     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023087

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P146797                                  Kenya GPE Primary Education Development

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18863,TF-B0830                       31-Dec-2021                                          97,141,427.63

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 18-May-2015                             31-Dec-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          97,875,000.00                                   97,875,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           97,801,967.29                                   97,801,967.29

 Actual                                       97,141,427.63                                   97,141,427.63




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (page 7) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 22), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To improve early grade mathematics competency and to strengthen management systems at
           school and national levels.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Improving early grade mathematics competencies (Appraisal: US$ 34.5 million; Additional Financing
   (AF): US$ 4.0 million; Actual: US$ 40.2 million): This component aimed to improve teacher competencies
   through the scaling up of interventions piloted under the Primary Math and Reading Initiative supported by
   United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and United Kingdom Department for
   International Development. Activities included: in-service teacher training for Grades 1 and 2 teachers on
   pedagogical techniques to improve pupil mastery of basic numeracy skills; training of teacher advisor tutors;
   instructional materials; classroom supervision visits; and sensitization for teacher colleges on the early
   grade mathematics (EGM) model.

   2. Strengthening school management and accountability (Appraisal: US$ 38.8 million; AF: US$ 4.0 million;
   Actual: US$ 43.0 million): This component aimed to strengthen management and accountability of Boards
   of Management at the school level, including in mobilizing and utilizing school resources more effectively.
   This component targeted 4,000 primary public schools that were considered low-performing (those with a
   Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE) score below the average of 243 for public primary schools in
   2012 and 2013). Activities included: provision of detailed KCPE performance reports to schools to identify
   teacher weaknesses; implementation of a teacher performance and development framework; support to
   schools for preparing school improvement plans (SIPs); and school audits to improve transparency and
   accountability in the use of grant funds.

   3. Strengthening capacity for evidence-based policy development at national level (Appraisal: US$ 10.8
   million; AF: US$0.5 million; Actual: US$ 10.1 million): This component aimed to strengthen Ministry of
   Education (MOE) capacity for evidence-based sector policy development. Activities included: capacity
   building of the Education Management Information System (EMIS) unit to collect data; conducting of
   Standard 3 national assessments; and studies on potential models to serve disadvantaged groups and on
   the effectiveness of the use of capitation grants.

   4. Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (Appraisal: US$ 4.3 million; AF: US$ 1.0 million; Actual:
   US$ 3.8 million): This component aimed to support management and monitoring of all project activities.



   At the time of additional financing, the following activities were added/revised:

         Component 1: Enhanced supervision/pedagogical support to teachers on EGM, centered around a
          School Based Teacher Support (SBTS) initiative implemented in a parallel Secondary Education
          Quality Improvement Project (P160083) for English, science, and mathematics teachers.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



        Component 2: Integration of effective school management practices and accountability mechanisms
         (drawn from the school improvement plan activities) into the nationwide student capitation grant
         program.
        Component 3: Migration of the paper-based EMIS system to the online National Education
         Management Information System (NEMIS), publication of a statistical booklet on secondary
         education, and capacity building of the National Assessment Centre (NAC) for effective monitoring
         of learning achievement.

  Lastly, three disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were added, as required by the Global Partnership for
  Education (GPE), that focused specifically on quality of learning, equity of learning, and efficiency in
  learning. These DLIs were as follows: development of a competency-based assessment for early years
  education; adaptation of the competency-based assessment for learners with special needs; and share of
  public schools complying with selected key elements of the new school capitation grant
  guidelines (including availability of costed annual work plan, maintenance of updated cash books, evidence
  of appropriate store ledgers, adherence to procurement procedures, and school level public disclosure of
  relevant information.)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The project cost at appraisal was US$ 88.4 million. With additional financing, the project cost was
          revised to US$ 97.9 million, of which US$ 97.2 million disbursed.

  Financing

        The project was originally financed by a GPE grant of US$ 88.4 million, which disbursed in its
         entirety. Additional financing through another GPE grant of US$ 9.475 million was approved, of
         which US$ 9.402 million disbursed.
        Of the additional financing approved, US$3.0 million was allocated to DLIs.

  Borrower contribution

        There was no planned Borrower contribution.

  Dates

        November 2018: The project closing date was extended from March 2019 to March 2020, in order to
          allow preparation of the AF proposal and completion of activities under the parent project.
        December 2019: The project was restructured to add/revise activities (see above) and to add
          US$9.48 million in AF. The results framework was also modified to add intermediate indicators for
          the new activities and increase the number of primary beneficiaries due to scaling up of
          activities. The project closing date was extended from March 2020 to December 2021.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Kenya is a lower middle-income country and the ninth largest economy in Africa, with recent decades of
growth fueled by strong consumption, investment, and broad-based growth. Human development indicators
have also been steadily improving over the last couple of decades, including life expectancy at birth, infant
mortality, and fertility rate. Poverty has also been declining (46% in 2005 to 34-42% in the last decade), but
inequalities remain high. In the education sector, specific interventions and increased public spending have
resulted in near universal primary enrollment and reduced gender gaps in school enrollment. Free primary
education was introduced in 2003 and led to expanded access to education (net enrollment rate in primary
school was 95.9% in 2013). However, enrollment and completion rates are lower in arid/semi-arid land
(ASAL) areas and in urban slum areas. In addition, the rapid expansion of the education system has
affected Kenya's capacity to maintain and improve the quality of education nationwide. This has been
reflected in low competency levels in early grade mathematics and reading and declining national test
scores (UWEZO survey findings throughout 2009, 2011, and 2012 indicate that fewer than a third of
children enrolled in grade 3 have basic grade 2 level numeracy skills). These low levels of learning have
been attributed to low teacher productivity (absenteeism, time on task), low teacher pedagogical
competency, insufficient budget and instructional resources, and ineffective management and accountability
at the school and system levels.

Kenya's economic development plan - Kenya Vision 2030 - sets the goal to become a newly industrializing
middle-income country by 2030, including through developing a globally competitive quality education
system. The National Education Sector Plan for 2013-18 is the sector implementation strategy linked to the
Vision 2030 plan, and it prioritizes raising literacy and numeracy levels, reducing disparities, and improving
the quality of education with a focus on teacher quality, school leadership, and monitoring results.

The project objectives are also well aligned with the GPE goals to ensure mastery of basic literary and
numeracy, build national systems, and target marginalized groups (note: USAID was implementing a
parallel project in the domain of basic literacy). The Bank's Country Partnership strategy for FY2014-18
(later extended to FY20), in place at the time of project appraisal, identified human resource development
as a primary domain of engagement, although there were no specific outcomes for education in the results
framework. The new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY22-27 was being prepared at the time of
ICR Review preparation and will include reduced disparities in learning outcomes as part of the
second CPF outcome of "inclusion and equality institutionalized" (as reported by the project team).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)




                                                                                                         Page 4 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve early grade mathematics competency

               Rationale
               The theory of change for this objective was clear. As articulated in the ICR (page 7), the results chain drew
               on national and international evidence that more effective teaching was required for improving learning
               outcomes. Project outputs therefore were to center on increased technical training and
               supervision/pedagogical support for teachers in EGM and provision of EGM textbooks/teaching materials. At
               the time of project restructuring, the supervision and support for teachers had been identified as an area of
               weakness, and therefore the AF was to strengthen teacher support on EGM methodologies, including
               formative assessment, to increase the monitoring of quality learning. The project was to focus on rural areas,
               poor urban areas, and ASAL counties. The long-term goal of the theory of change was to improve the
               learning outcomes of children in Kenya with higher numbers of learners completing school.



               Outputs

               Nearly 7.5 million students benefited from direct project interventions (target: 7.0 million). Of these, 53% were
               female students (target: 40%).

               Teacher support:

                     Training of 102,157 teachers (grades 1, 2 and 3) on EGM (target: 40,000) and provision of EGM
                      teaching guides and lesson plans.
                     Training of 2,864 teacher advisory tutors (later known as Curriculum Support Officers (CSOs) and
                      Quality Assurance and Standards Officers) (target: 1,000). 81.4% of the teachers rated the training
                      useful to a large or very large extent. These tutors, in turn, supported 52,235 teachers (for grades 1, 2
                      and 3) through in-school peer support that involved peer lesson observation, lesson study, and
                      teacher action research, as well as the formation of communities of practice where they shared
                      experiences, good practices, and working strategies, sought solutions to challenges, and received
                      immediate support and guidance.
                     Conducting of 218,547 classroom observations (target: 100,000). Classroom observations were
                      greatly facilitated by the use of the tablets issued to CSOs under a parallel USAID project for online
                      reporting. This teacher support mechanism has been institutionalized as part of the Teacher
                      Performance Appraisal and Development (TPAD) system.

               Teaching materials:

                     Provision of 10.5 million EGM textbooks (target: 6.0 million), which were adopted for the national roll-
                      out of the Competency-based Curriculum. This resulted in a pupil:textbook ratio of 1:1 in mathematics
                      for grades 1 and 2, in accordance with the textbook policy. The MOE was able to develop content in-
                      house rather than outsourcing it to a publisher, which reduced the cost of textbook
                      production. 91.0% of teachers indicated that provision of textbooks led to ease of teaching


                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



       mathematics concepts, and 88.4% of the teachers reported greater participation of pupils in their
       classrooms.
      Adaptation of EGM textbooks, teachers’ guides, and a competency-based assessment for learners
       with hearing impairment, low vision, total blindness, or physical impairment.

Student assessment:

      Conducting of baseline, midline, and endline student assessments on math competencies.
      Development of competency-based assessment for early years (to support teachers in monitoring
       quality of learning).



In addition to the above outputs, the following DLIs were achieved:

      Development of the Kenya Early Years Assessment Framework for Monitoring Learner Progress
       (KEYA-MPL) framework, and related tools and training manual, which was then approved by the
       MOE. At least 4,000 teachers in grades 1, 2 and 3 received training on the KEYA-MPL.
      Development of the KEYA-MPL framework for learners with special needs and disabilities. At least
       2,450 teachers in schools with learners with special needs and disabilities received training on the
       adapted KEYA-MPL.



Outcomes

      The math competency level of grade 2 students, as measured by an Early Grade Mathematics
       Assessment (EGMA)* in the subtraction domain, decreased from 79.1% in 2017 to 76.6% in 2019,
       and then increased to 81.5% in 2021. This fell short of the target of 84.1%. On this assessment, girls'
       score increased from 80.0% to 82.4%, while boys' scores increased from 78.3% to 81.4%. As noted
       in the ICR (page 18), the mid-line EGMA (2019) pointed to the need to enhance teachers’ pedagogical
       skills and thus led to a mid-course correction with the provision of the AF (and an increase in
       competency level from that point on). The post-endline EGMA**, which was conducted in 2021 post-
       COVID-19 pandemic, showed increased achievement from the 2016 baseline in all five domains of
       addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and number patterns, suggesting a positive impact of the
       project interventions. The standardized mean EGMA score increased from 500 at baseline to 506.1 at
       post-endline, an improvement of 0.26 standard deviations.

* The indicator, which was specific to the domain of subtraction fluency, was selected because subtraction
fluency is moderately correlated with other mathematical subtasks, implying that pupils who can solve
subtraction sums at levels 1 and 2 could also perform the other subtasks at almost the same level. The
performance index was based on the subtraction scores, with the benchmark score being 50 percent correct.
The indicator was measured by a sample-based national assessment for grade 2 mathematics.

** The post-endline EGMA assessment was a national survey, conducted across 47 counties in Kenya, with a
sample size of 300 randomly selected public and private schools previously used in the baseline, midline and
endline studies of the project. The study was carried out among grade 3 learners at the beginning of the

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



second term of 2021 because it was expected that the learners would have completed the entire grade 2
content, and any learning loss mitigated as a result of the COVID-19 school closures.



Achievement is rated Modest due to a significant shortfall in achieving the target for improved mathematics
competency, although improvements following the introduction of focused interventions by the AF are noted.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen management systems at the school level

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. As articulated in the ICR (page 7-8), the results chain was
based on the premise that school improvement planning and better resourcing of schools utilized in an
accountable manner would lead to schools having a more conducive environment for learning. The project
outputs were therefore to center on provision of school grants to improve school resources and increased
supervision of teachers to enhance accountability. The AF activity sought to promote efficiency through
mainstreaming "best practice" processes into the governance of student capitation grants provided to all
public schools.

The activities were to be implemented through a combination of pilot interventions in 4,000 schools, which
were identified by below-average marks on the KCPE (less than 243 out of 500).



Outputs

      Production of school-level KCPE reports for 31,200 schools (target: 4,000). This activity was
       eventually scaled up to all public and private primary schools in the country, due to interest from other
       education stakeholders receiving these reports, and recognition by the MOE of the benefit of
       providing the KCPE reports to all teachers. The KCPE reports were made available in 2015, 2017,
       2018, and 2019. In addition, 188 staff were trained at the county level on utilization of the reports.
      Appraisal of 32,685 teachers using the TPAD system, in particular in the area of teacher contact hours
       (target: 30,000 teachers). The MOE extended the TPAD program to all primary schools nationwide
       such that 225,263 additional teachers nationwide were appraised. The project supported the transition
       of the TPAD from a paper-based to an on-line system, which resulted in an increase in the percentage
       of teachers who completed the appraisal. The TPAD has been fully institutionalized within the MOE.
      Conducting of annual school audits in the 4,000 participating schools (target: 4,000). According to the
       project team, the audits assessed school compliance with the established criteria of: formation of
       Board of Management, development of school improvement plan and budget, updated textbook


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



       ledger, record-keeping for procurement, payment vouchers, etc). Schools that lagged in compliance
       were provided with capacity building support.
      Capacity building in the preparation of school improvement plans, with all 4,000 participating schools
       submitting satisfactory plans and receiving annual school grants (target: 4,000).
      Training of 46,366 members of school Boards of Management on utilizing student capitation grants in
       primary schools (target: 10,000). Of these, 31,993 members were male and 14,373 members were
       female.

In addition, the following disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) was achieved:

      32.4% of all public schools were in overall compliance with the requirements of the new school
       capitation grant guidelines and operational manual. This achieved the target of 31% and included all
       4,000 of the project schools.



Outcomes

      4,000 schools completed the top two priorities in their SIPs. This achieved the target of
       4,000. 88.3% of school heads indicated that the SIP process had greatly improved the management of
       their schools. "Best practices" identified included: directing of government funding to prioritized needs,
       collective training on the SIP process to foster ownership, enhanced capacity of all school
       stakeholders in implementing SIP activities, comprehensive annual school audits to improve
       accountability and transparency, use of a consultative process to increase ownership and effective
       prioritization, and monitoring of the grants to enhance accountability and improve efficiency of service
       delivery.



Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of strengthened capacity and increased use of data for
evidence-based decision-making at the school level.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen management systems at the national level

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. As articulated in the ICR (page 7-8), the results chain was
based on the premise that increased availability of data would lead to sector management and schools


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



                            making more evidence-based decisions. The project outputs therefore centered on collection and
                            dissemination of education statistics and student level performance data.



                            Outputs

                                  Development of the EMIS, including with EGM data. Learners were registered with unique personal
                                   identifiers, linked to their birth certificates. The percentage of primary schools submitting EMIS
                                   data increased from 60% in 2015 to 90% in 2021 (target: 98%).
                                  Technical assistance to MOE for conducting national learning assessments, including training of
                                   64 technical staff at the NAC.
                                  Preparation of an Education Sector Analysis to review issues related to teachers, infrastructure,
                                   community, students, school leadership, school reforms, political dynamics, and language policy in
                                   schools. This analysis contributed to the development of the 2018-2022 National Education Sector
                                   Strategy Plan, also supported by the project.



                            Outcomes

                                  Standard 3 national assessments were conducted in 2016 and 2018, with findings disseminated. In
                                   addition to identifying learning gaps, the assessments informed policy development and curriculum
                                   modifications. According to the ICR (page 24), the MOE has institutionalized a culture of assessment
                                   data utilization through the robust dissemination of data down to the school level.
                                  EMIS data was published in annual educational statistical booklets from 2017-2021. The MOE’s use
                                   of the system data includes student placement, disbursement of capitation for primary and secondary
                                   school grants, and provision of medical coverage to secondary school students.



                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of strengthened capacity and increased use of data for
                            evidence-based decision-making at the sector-wide level.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial due to Modest achievement of the first objective to improve early grade
                            mathematics competencies, Substantial achievement of the second objective to strengthen management


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



  systems at the school level, and Substantial achievement of the third objective to strengthen management
  systems at the national level.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal (PAD, Annex 6), the economic analysis centered on Components 1 (improving EGM) and 2
(strengthening school management). The Component 1 analysis was a cost-effectiveness analysis comparing
the EGMA intervention proposed by the project (specific instructional model with materials, teacher training, and
in-classroom teacher support) with alternative interventions, in terms of cost per increase of one additional
standard deviation test score. The estimated cost for the EGMA activities was $2.31 per pupil. Other
interventions (in Kenya) were estimated at the following cost per pupil (note: these test scores increases
were overall, not specifically for math): teacher incentives in year 2 ($15.90); girls' scholarships ($72.26);
streaming by achievement ($2.87); and extra contract teacher + streaming ($50.74). For Component 2, a cost
benefit analysis was presented, using benefits from wage premiums for increased years of education and costs
derived from project costs, public costs of education, and associated private education costs. The net present
value (NPV) was estimated at US$ 164.1 million, and the internal rate of return (IRR) was 32%.

At completion (ICR, Annex 4), the cost-effectiveness analysis is revisited for both Components 1 and 2, which
comprise 76% of project costs. Benefits are again derived from the additional years of education yielding higher
income (the ICR noted that beyond wage premiums, other benefits from rising female education levels
include not only higher skills, employment opportunities, and income, but also reduction in early marriage and
teenage pregnancy; higher education levels for the general population also reduce crime). Component 1 is
estimated to have benefited 7.5 million primary students, and therefore project benefits are estimated as the
number of children with improved test scores, multiplied by the lifetime earnings gained from this improvement in
test scores. For component 2, strengthening management and accountability in 4,000 schools impacted an
estimated 1.7 million students, and therefore the project benefits are estimated as the number of children
completing primary school who would not have done so without the project, multiplied by the average wage
difference between workers with incomplete and complete primary schooling. The NPV of both components was
estimated at US$ 342.0 million, with an IRR of 23%. The NPV for Component 2 only was estimated at US$ 36.1
million, with an IRR of 16.8%, which is lower than at appraisal.

There were indications of efficient use of project resources. For textbook procurement, MOE moved from
a school-based system to a centralized procurement and distribution process, contributing to an improved
turnaround time from procurement to delivery of materials. Also, the content was developed in-house by the
MOE rather than outsourced to a publisher, further reducing costs and contributing to the surpassing of the
textbook indicator. Additionally, the MOE modified the teacher training venues from costly hotels (that were far
from the teacher’s duty stations) to local school facilities close to teachers, which made it easier for teachers to
participate and led to cost savings that allowed for an additional 62,157 teachers to benefit from
training. COVID-19 slowed down implementation of the school-based teacher support activities, which was a
school-based initiative, because of school closures; however, once schools reopened in January 2021, the
MOE was able to roll out and complete the activity as planned. Efficiencies were also gained from the use of

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



technology (tablets provided to schools by a parallel project were used to conduct classroom observations, and
the teacher appraisal system migrated from paper-based to on-line). All project funds disbursed for the original
project essentially during the original project period, with AF disbursed during the project extension
period. Despite the COVID-19 closures, all project activities were completed successfully, and targets were
met. However, there were some moderate inefficiencies noted, including delays in the baseline study
and procurement of the EGM textbooks, although these delays were resolved and activities were completed.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     44.00
 Appraisal                                                 32.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     76.00
 ICR Estimate                                              16.80
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country condition and with country and Bank
strategies. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial due to Modest achievement of the first objective to improve early
grade mathematics competencies, Substantial achievement of the second objective to strengthen management
systems at the school level, and Substantial achievement of the objective to strengthen management systems
at the national level. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to evidence of implementation efficiencies, although the
cost-effectiveness analysis of part of the project indicated less favorable NPV/IRR at completion compared to
original estimates.

Overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to the shortcoming in achieving the project objective to
improve early grade mathematics competencies, as evidenced by significant shortfalls in achieving the key
project indicator target to increase math scores of Grade 2 students (as measured by an Early Grade
Mathematics Assessment in the subtraction domain).




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

Project outcomes are likely to be sustained due to mainstreaming of numerous project activities and
structures into the government's education management system. The teacher performance appraisal and
development system (including classroom observations), guidelines for the use of school capitation grants,
the school-based teacher support model, and the peer support clusters were all institutionalized in the
MOE. Also, as the MOE had primary responsibility for project implementation and management, capacity
was strengthened to continue activities. Key project activities will be continued and scaled up in the follow-up
Primary Education Equity In Learning Project (P176867). Although there are some macroeconomic
uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, overall medium-term economic prospects appear favorable.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives were closely aligned with country and Bank strategies and GPE goals, and drew
  upon well-established understanding of increasing effectiveness of teaching and learning. The EGMA
  activities built upon lessons learned from implementation of a USAID early reading project, while the
  school/sector management activities were designed as a pilot approach with integrated interventions. In a
  similar manner, lessons learned from the implementation of the parent project (and a parallel secondary
  education project) significantly influenced the design of the AF activities (including the use of results-
  based financing) to leverage improved management of the school capitation grants, scale-up of SIP
  activities nationwide, adoption of the SBTS initiative, and adapting of teaching practices for learners with
  special needs.

  The results chain and M&E arrangements were clearly identified. The overall project risk was rated
  Substantial due to capacity constraints at the school level (including Boards of Management)
  and capacity constraints in learning assessment and fiduciary management. Mitigation measures were
  provided for on-going training and technical assistance throughout implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular and appropriately staffed with fiduciary and technical specialists. The
 Bank team used the opportunity provided by the AF to apply lessons from ongoing implementation
 experience as well as other relevant operations in the education sector, leading to the addition/revision
 of activities to further the gains in basic mathematics competency and broaden the project's impact on
 improving school management and accountability. The results framework was revised accordingly to
 account for the new activities, while maintaining focus on the project's objectives. There were some initial
 implementation delays—contracting a firm to conduct the baseline EGMA, NEMIS development, school-


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



 based procurement of teaching and learning materials—but these were resolved sufficiently to ensure
 timely completion of activities. Institutional support was strongly focused on developing in-country capacity
 to sustain activities and outcomes.

 As reported in the ICR (page 31), the MOE, with Bank guidance, took actions to build the capacity of senior
 management regarding gender and sexual harassment issues. The Bank and government also began an
 important dialogue on gender and sexual harassment in the workplace.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results chain and indicators to measure outcomes were specific and clearly articulated. The first
 objective was to be measured by improvement in mathematics competency level of grade 2 pupils
 (disaggregated by gender) in the subtraction domain. The second objective was to be measured by not
 only the preparation of SIPs but also capacity to execute each individual plans' top two
 priorities. Monitoring arrangements were developed as part of project activities (EMIS and TPAD), and
 evaluative activities were also included to assess project impact (student learning assessments, and
 evaluations of TPAD, SIP and EGMA).



b. M&E Implementation
  The implementation of the EMIS, and subsequently the NEMIS, and the development of the TPAD
  were critical activities to monitor project progress and outcomes. Monitoring data was collected
  on registered learners with unique personal identifiers, placements, capitation grant information, school
  visits, and teacher observations. The school and county level implementing agencies provided reports on
  a regular basis to contribute to national level reporting on project progress. The project also supported
  student learning assessments and policy studies related to teacher deployment and utilization, cost
  effective models for enhancing participation in ASALs and informal settlements including for children with
  special needs, and equity-based financing for primary and secondary education in Kenya.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to monitor project progress, provide school level data, determine distribution of
  school capitation grants, secondary school student insurance, teacher training, and teacher
  promotions. The ICR (page 33) also reported that results of the learning assessments have been used
  as follows: (i) EGMA results have led to increased teacher training efforts, particularly school-level

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



  support and peer-to-peer support activities; (ii) the SIP audit showed that SIP design was effective, such
  that SIPs have been institutionalized in the Government Policy Guidelines on Utilization of Learner
  Capitation Grants and Other School Funds and used nationwide; and (iii) the SIP audit also led to
  improvements in the training of school Board of Management members, and informed development of
  the next education sector plan.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project with the safeguard policy on
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) triggered. An Environmental and Social Management Framework
   was prepared to provide guidance on and mitigation measures for potential adverse impacts from
   construction and/or rehabilitation of sanitation facilities, as well as disposal of e-waste (i.e. tablets). The
   safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) was also triggered due to the focus on vulnerable
   and marginalized groups. The government prepared a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework to
   ensure inclusion of and support from those communities.

   According to the ICR (page 33), safeguards were monitored consistently during project implementation, and
   Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) consistently rated safeguards compliance in the satisfactory range.
   The MOE ensured that there was an environmental and social management plan checklist included in the
   SIP manuals related to small SIP repairs, and Boards of Management were sensitized through training on
   indigenous peoples issues and inclusion. There were no safeguard problems reported.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: The Bank’s financial management specialists provided capacity development
   workshops for project coordination unit (PCU) staff on record keeping and reporting. The financial
   management performance rating was in the satisfactory range throughout the project period. As reported in
   the ICR (page 34), the PCU submitted unaudited interim financial reports of acceptable quality, albeit with
   slight delays on occasion. The required audits were submitted to the Bank with unqualified opinions.

   Procurement: The Bank’s procurement specialists conducted regular procurement assessment missions
   and training to the PCU and counties to ensure compliance. The procurement performance rating was in
   the satisfactory range throughout the project period. As reported in the ICR (page 31), in 2017, there were
   three procurement complaints related to gender sensitive allegations. The procurement cases were
   addressed by the PCU/MOE in accordance with Bank procedures.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Overall outcome is rated
                                                                               Moderately Satisfactory due to
                                                                               the shortcoming in achieving the
                                                                               project objective to improve
                                                                               early grade mathematics
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               competencies, as evidenced by
                                                                               significant shortfalls in achieving
                                                                               the key project indicator target to
                                                                               increase math scores of Grade 2
                                                                               students.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           High

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 35-36), adapted by IEG:

      Project designs that include pilots as demonstration models can be an immediate catalyst for
       system-level change, if lessons are widely shared in a timely manner. In the case of this
       project, the school management activities were initially implemented in 4,000 schools, but the
       timely feedback (due to data generated by the monitoring system, the learning assessments,
       and the evaluations) led to immediate scaling up of activities, by way of both the government
       budget and GPE Additional Financing.
      Improving learning outcomes can be an achievable project objective if accompanied by a
       strong M&E framework and monitoring arrangements. In the case of this project, the project
       was able to establish a robust M&E system capable of systematically tracking progress, and
       project activities included relevant assessments and studies that influenced decision making
       and policy development. For example, the regular assessment data collection allowed for an
       evidence-based correction at the time of project restructuring, when assessments indicated
       that learning levels had decreased. Remedial action was taken, by introducing more targeted
       teacher pedagogical skills training and peer-to-peer learning to complement ongoing
       activities.

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya GPE Primary Education Development (P146797)



        School-based teacher support systems are a critical ingredient for ensuring on-going quality
         improvements in schools. In the case of this project, ongoing support in content and
         pedagogical practices was provided by teacher advisory tutors/curriculum support
         officers. Teachers also received timely feedback on teaching approaches. Peer-to-peer
         collaboration also enabled teachers to work together, share experiences, and find solutions
         to challenges. Equally important was the feedback loop developed with the National
         Assessment Council to ensure teachers were familiar with learning gaps, particularly after
         the COVID-19 school closures. All of these were important for helping to motivate teachers
         and necessary for improving the quality of teaching.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is notable for its clear and strong articulation of the theory of change. Along with the strong quality of
evidence, the clear results chain allowed for a coherent analysis of project achievements. The narrative of
project implementation experience reflected good practice in using evidence (from monitoring data) to assess
project progress and make mid-course corrections, in order to achieve outcomes. Lessons were relevant and
clearly derived from project experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
