     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022976

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P110959                                    PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Papua New Guinea                           Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1240,COFN-C1370,IDA-                 30-Jun-2016                                         55,653,066.00
 47160,IDA-54110,TF-17577

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Apr-2010                                31-May-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         55,724,862.24                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Floris Dalemans             J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (par. 20) and the original Financing Agreement (page 5) of
   2010, the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to improve the livelihoods of smallholder cocoa and
   coffee producers through the improvement of the performance and sustainability of value chains in the cocoa-
   growing areas and the coffee-growing areas.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



   The PDO was simplified at restructuring and Additional Financing (AF) in 2014: as per the Amendment to the
   Original Financing Agreement (page 6), the PDO was amended to: improve the livelihoods of smallholder
   cocoa and coffee producers supported by the project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Feb-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Industry Coordination

   (Appraisal Estimate US$5.7 million; Actual at Project Closing US$18.0 million)

   The specific objective of this component was to improve the performance of sector institutions and to
   enhance industry coordination in the cocoa and coffee sectors. It included four subcomponents: industry
   coordination & policy development, communication and information management systems, quality and
   sustainability management, and project management and monitoring & evaluation.

   Component 2: Productive Partnerships

   (Appraisal Estimate US$9.2 million; Actual at Project Closing US$19.8 million)

   The specific objective of this component was to foster the integration of a greater number of smallholder
   producers in performing and remunerative value chains, by developing and implementing productive
   alliances between smallholders and the private sector aiming at improving market linkages in the project
   areas. Partnerships were demand-driven and consistent with the specific priorities of the coffee and cocoa
   sectors. This component was split into one subcomponent for cocoa and one for coffee, with both
   subcomponents aiming to increase commodity productivity, quality and sustainability, but their
   implementation under responsibility of different institutions.

   Component 3: Market Access Infrastructure

   (Appraisal Estimate US$10.1 million; Actual at Project Closing US$12.6 million)

   The specific objective of this component was to improve market access for smallholder cocoa and coffee
   growers in the areas targeted under Component 2 of the project. It comprised identifying, selecting and
   financing priority investments to rehabilitate and maintain transport infrastructure.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



  Note: as noted in Annex 3 of the ICR, the sum of actual component costs differs from the total project cost
  in the data sheet due to exchange rate application differences between the World Bank system and the
  client’s accounting.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  Total project cost at appraisal was US$46.3 million. Through AF at restructuring, this was increased to a
  total of US$119.3 million.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution

  At appraisal, the project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Specific
  Investment Credit of US$25 million, an International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Loan of
  US$14 million, and financing from the Government of Papua New Guinea (GoPNG – US$1.5 million) and
  beneficiaries (US$5.8 million). At restructuring, AF was provided by each of these parties (IDA Credit of
  US$30 million; IFAD co-financing of US$22 million; financing from GoPNG (US$4.5 million) and the
  beneficiaries (US$10.1 million)), further complemented by a European Union Recipient-Executed Trust
  Fund (RETF) of US$6.4 million. Actual disbursement at project closure stood at 86.7%, with particular
  shortfalls for beneficiaries (only 8% disbursed). The ICR attributes these shortfalls to elevated and varying
  co-payments amounts for farmers that were causing multiple delays and subsequently reduced (ICR par.
  85) and to contributions from local governments and communities that were in kind, not systematically
  tracked and overestimated at project design (ICR par. 89).

  Project Restructurings and Dates

  The project was approved on April 29, 2010, and became effective on February 7, 2011. The original
  closing date was June 30, 2016, while the project effectively closed on May 31, 2021.

  The project was restructured five times:

        First Restructuring (February 28, 2014). This major restructuring (Level 1) followed the mid-term
         review of November 2013. First, it encompassed revisions of the PDO and Results Framework (see
         above) which increased the project’s level of ambition. Second, through the AF the project was
         scaled up, including budget increases for all three components, additional activities (such as
         enhancing the focus on poverty and gender, and increasing the geographic scope) and
         corresponding revisions to implementation arrangements. Third, the restructuring involved an
         extension of the closing date from June 30, 2016, to June 30, 2019, to allow completion of all
         activities under the three components. In subsequent sections, the term “restructuring” will refer to
         this first restructuring, except when specified otherwise.
        Second Restructuring (May 13, 2019). A smaller restructuring (Level 2) encompassed (i) a six-
         month extension of the project closing date to December 31, 2019, to compensate for a variety of
         delays (see ICR Table 2); (ii) a reallocation of proceeds between disbursement categories; and (iii) a
         reduction of two intermediate indicator targets.
        Third Restructuring (December 16, 2019), Fourth Restructuring (June 15, 2020) and Fifth
         Restructuring (December 15, 2020). Finally, the project closing date was further extended thrice

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



            (first to June 30, 2020, then to December 31, 2020, and finally to May 31, 2021) to allow full project
            completion, given delays in specific activities as well as constraints linked to COVID-19.

   Rationale for not applying a split rating

   The PDO was revised at restructuring as specified above. Concurrently, PDO indicators and their targets
   were revised (see ICR Table 1):

   PDO indicators at project appraisal:

       1. Number of smallholder farmers adopting improved farming practices
       2. Number and coverage of productive partnerships successfully implemented and/or scaled up and
            likely to be sustained
       3. Net incomes of smallholder cocoa and coffee growing households in the project areas
       4. Share of the export price including quality premium received by smallholder farmers in the project
            area

   PDO indicators after restructuring in 2014:

       1.   Number of beneficiaries segregated by gender
       2.   Number of partnerships funded by the project and likely to be sustained
       3.   Net incomes of smallholder cocoa and coffee growers supported by the project
       4.   Cocoa and coffee yield among project beneficiaries

   The AF and restructuring added to the scope of the project, extending the project’s geographic coverage to
   new provinces and intensifying activities in existing provinces. This increased the project’s ambition, and
   correspondingly several indicator targets were increased. The PDO was revised but did not change
   fundamentally; it was rather sharpened, maintaining the outcome part and dropping the intermediate
   outcome / output part in the “through” clause. In line with OPCS and IEG guidelines, a split rating is not
   warranted, and project achievement will be assessed based on the revised objective and targets. This
   conclusion is also adequately explained in the ICR (par. 20).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The ICR contains an excellent description of the alignment of the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture
Project (PPAP) with World Bank and national development priorities. The ICR convincingly illustrates the
project’s continued relevance for World Bank priorities in PNG throughout its 10-year implementation period
up to closure: PPAP directly contributed to the FY08-11 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) (ICR par. 7),
was recognized as a strategically important operation in the FY13-16 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
(ICR par. 21) and remained aligned with the FY19-23 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (ICR par. 4
and 21). Similarly, the ICR demonstrates continued alignment with the GoPNG’s national development
plans (examples listed in ICR par. 22). The PDO is also appropriately pitched given the country’s



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



               institutional, political and economic development. Furthermore, it linked PPAP with other World Bank
               engagements (ICR par. 7) and PPAP explicitly informed its successor project (P166222).

               It should be noted though that there is no mention of alignment with the country SCD of 2018 nor with
               related World Bank strategies and priorities in the agricultural sector beyond PNG. In addition, the ICR
               could have expanded on how key contextual factors for PPAP at appraisal (such as climate change-related
               hazards, fragility and conflict, weak governance) evolved over time, and in turn what this implied for project
               relevance. The relevance of targeting specific provinces could have been elaborated in ICR paragraph 15
               (instead of only in paragraph 79); it was better justified in the PAD (paragraphs 4 and 80) which clarifies
               that these provinces represent 90% and 70% of coffee and cocoa production, respectively).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the livelihoods of smallholder cocoa and coffee producers supported by the project

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             An explicit Results Chain / Theory of Change (ToC) was unavailable at appraisal as it was not yet required in
                             the PAD (see ICR footnote 5). The project restructuring largely revolved around project upscaling in terms of
                             geographical coverage; as the ICR argues in paragraph 20 “(…) the AF and the restructurings resulted in
                             minor modifications to the implicit ToC and did not affect the original results chain”. The ToC as reconstructed
                             by the ICR was clear, well-structured, comprehensive (including a set of assumptions), and convincing in its
                             causal chain logic (except for how the outcome “Women have greater involvement in…” follows from the
                             outputs under Component 2).

                             The ToC assumes that the PDO is achieved through a combination of three sub-results chains, each
                             corresponding to a project component and each having their own outcome. The ICR assesses the
                             achievement of the PDO indirectly through assessing achievement of these three underlying outcomes (ICR
                             par. 24), rather than assessing the PDO directly. This strongly depends on the validity of the final step in the
                             ToC (from outcomes to the extent of PDO achievement), on the interaction between the three pathways /
                             outcomes (which is not discussed in the ICR), on the ToC’s underlying assumptions, and on the impact of
                             exogenous factors. These caveats spill over to the Results Framework, which lacks a direct measurement of
                             the achievement of the project’s PDO. While emphasizing this as a shortcoming in the ICR, this Review will
                             similarly organize this Section along the three sub-results chains and corresponding outcomes but in addition



                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



justify an overall conclusion on the extent to which the PDO (“improve the livelihoods of smallholder cocoa
and coffee producers”) was achieved.

Achievement for Outcome 1 – Improved productivity and quality of coffee and cocoa delivered by
smallholder farmers resulting in improved income

The ICR lists four “PDO indicators” to assess achievement within this sub-results chain, while only one is
effectively at the outcome level according to the ToC. They are rather spread along the results chain,
covering outcome level (net smallholder income), intermediate outcome level (yield) and output level (project
beneficiaries and partnerships funded). Their designation as “PDO indicators” in the PAD (par. 22) and in the
ICR (par. 11 and 17) created confusion, also in terms of their order in the results chain as compared to the
“intermediate outcome indicators” listed in Annex 1 of the ICR.

Through these four indicators, the ICR argues along the lines of the results chain – although implicitly. Moving
from outputs over intermediate outcomes to the outcome, indicator achievements are listed for:

      Partnerships funded and likely to be sustained: 57 compared to target of 50
      Project beneficiaries: 60,494 compared to target of 60,000 – Female project beneficiaries: 4,567
        compared to target of 24,000
      Cocoa yield among project beneficiaries: 1,249 kg/ha compared to 600 kg/ha target and 169 kg/ha
       baseline. Yield increases are attributed to the new technological package and trainings provided by
       PPAP partnerships.
      Coffee yield among project beneficiaries: 853 kg/ha compared to 600 kg/ha target and 382 kg/ha
       baseline. Yield increases are attributed to the new technological package and trainings provided by
       PPAP partnerships, as well as PPAP efforts on market empowerment.
      Net income of smallholder cocoa growers: US$2,618 compared to US$1,800 target and US$1271
       baseline. Income increases are attributed to higher yields and quality.
      Net income of smallholder coffee growers: US$3,832 compared to US$3,700 target and US$2000
       baseline. Income increases are attributed to higher yields, quality and prices.

with the last five targets all increased at restructuring.

In combination with statistical comparisons to non-PPAP farmers and with further qualitative clarifications and
arguments, the ICR builds a strong case for attributing the achievement of Outcome 1 to the project. The ICR
(paragraphs 37-38) and interview IEG held with the World Bank project team for the ICRR, provided insights
on how partnerships were at the center of the project’s intervention strategy towards increased productivity
and incomes. According to the Bank's project team anecdotal evidence shows partnerships provided
demand-driven knowledge and technologies at larger scale than the underfinanced, top-down public
extension system that had failed to revive cocoa and coffee production. The impact evaluation shows farmer
satisfaction rates of 78% to 99% with trainings and seedlings provided through the partnerships. Furthermore,
partnerships empowered farmers’ human and social capital, and provided market linkages. Some farmer
groups even took over the operation and management of PPAP-financed communal facilities (such as the
cocoa solar dryers, coffee storing building and wet mills).

Further notable observations nuance the success story:




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)




      It is notable that the target for the number of partnerships (50) was not increased at restructuring,
         despite the AF and corresponding extension of geographical coverage. This contradicts the ICR claim
         of increased ambition at restructuring. The World Bank project team clarified during an interview held
         with IEG for the ICRR that the difficulties for private partners to engage and operate in remote areas
         may have been underestimated during project preparation, and correspondingly that the original target
         of 50 partnerships was unrealistically high. Hence, the target was simply maintained at restructuring
         rather than increased. Nevertheless, it was eventually surpassed with an achieved number of 57.
        Yield and net income achievements were much stronger for cacao than for coffee. For coffee,
         indicator values for PPAP farmers are only marginally better than for non-PPAP farmers. Limited
         achievement is principally attributed to a 5-year delay in approval of the PNG Coffee Grades and
         Standards and corresponding lack of price incentives (ICR par. 28), while there were also spillover
         project effects to non-PPAP farmers. For cacao, the ICR attributes income effects exclusively to yield
         and quality increases (ICR par. 27), while omitting to comment on potential effects of export price
         evolutions over the extensive project implementation period. Although cocoa price trends found in
         Annex 4 indicate substantial fluctuation over the implementation period, prices levels at baseline and
         end line measurement are relatively comparable.
        While almost all “PDO indicator” targets were achieved, this was not the case for all “intermediate
         outcome indicator” targets. This may relate to the above-mentioned issue of poor correspondence of
         these terms with the actual results chain and/or to target setting issues. In any case, targets for
         indicators such as number of hectares of cocoa replanted/rejuvenated (80% of target), number of
         hectares of coffee applying improved management practices (51% of target), coffee quality premium
         recipients (33% of target) and number of female project beneficiaries (19% - not even discussed in the
         ICR) were not achieved. Although underlying reasons are discussed in the ICR and further expanded
         by the World Bank project team during an interview held with IEG for the ICRR, the lack of
         achievement suggests doubt about the sustainable and inclusive achievement of the outcome.
        The project restructuring replaced the indicator on “Number of households adopting improved farming
         practices” with “Number of project beneficiaries”, increasing the target from 24,000 to 60,000 and
         claiming this reflects higher ambition (ICR par. 17). However, it is problematic that the ICR equates
         these indicators (ICR par. 20) as the former is at intermediate outcome level while the latter only at
         output level. Target achievement for the latter does not necessarily imply an equal achievement for
         the former.
        Only half of the “commercial lead partnerships” has continued beyond the completion of project
         support and is assessed as likely to be sustained. The World Bank project team clarified during an
         interview held with IEG for the ICRR that this level was acceptable, considering there were no formal
         agreements within the partnership on marketing arrangements (to allow farmers liberty to sell their
         produce to buyers offering a better price than the lead partner, in a context of vast unmet demand of
         coffee and cocoa) and services provisioning.

On the other hand, the ICR makes a valid case for widespread outcome impacts on "non-beneficiaries" in
paragraph 49 and for the realization of improved livelihoods in the project area due to the project’s full
maturation after its closure (paragraphs 34-35).

Achievement for Outcome 2 – Improved market access in selected areas

The Results Framework is very thin for this sub-results chain, with only an indicator at output level:




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)




      Roads rehabilitated: 121 km compared to 115 km target (200 km original target)

The low value achieved relative to the extensive geographical coverage implies that no significant effect on
transport times or costs was found across the entire sample in the quantitative impact evaluation.
Furthermore, the degree of maintenance varies across the roads rehabilitated and systematic data on
maintenance are lacking.

The ICR does note, based on the qualitative survey, significant and widespread effects on people living close
to roads – including increased market sales and revenues – as well as rehabilitation of roads in other areas.
Effects on market sales and revenues do suggest a contribution of the project to the intended outcome
(“improved market access”) in targeted areas.

Achievement for Outcome 3 – Improved policies, coordination and information in the cocoa and
coffee industries

The Results Framework provides no evidence for the achievement of the outcome for this sub-results chain.
There is only one indicator at output level:

      Number of policy, strategy, and regulatory measures adopted or implemented: 10 compared to target
       of 6

The argumentation in paragraph 56 relies largely on theoretical discourse and assumptions. While the claim
in footnote 25 that “the ICR shows how these outputs contributed to achieving PPAP PDO and outcomes” is
unsubstantiated given the lack of evidence, the degree of association between these project inputs and
outputs with intended outcomes and impacts is plausible.

In summary:

      Incomes for cocoa and coffee farmers increased to above the project targets due to the successful
       productive partnerships, and hence Outcome 1 was achieved, although targets for some other
       indicators within the sub-results chain were not achieved.
      No outcome indicators were available for Outcome 2; whereas the road rehabilitation target was
       achieved, there is no evidence in the ICR that it led to a substantial reduction in transport times while
       evidence on road maintenance was highly variable. Achievements are further only discussed in
       qualitative terms.
      No outcome indicators were available for Outcome 3; but it is plausible that there was some
       association between policy, strategy, and regulatory measures adopted or implemented, and the
       achievement at outcome/PDO level.

Given these, the ICR claim in paragraph 57 that “the project has almost fully achieved its intended outcomes
and delivered the main benefits to the beneficiaries” is not entirely substantiated by the evidence provided.

Nevertheless, it is noted that the ICR adds confusion by embedding the indicator “increased net income”
within the sub-results chain for Outcome 1 (see ToC on page 8 of the ICR), while it is not only determined by
productivity but also by market access and institutional arrangements. The ICR actually implies this as well in
paragraph 65, where it suddenly gives high weight to this indicator and correspondingly to outcome 1, while a
difference in importance of the three outcomes is implied nowhere else (see for instance ICR par. 24 and 118


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



                            and the ToC). This ICR Review considers “increased net income” an appropriate measurement of the project
                            objective of “improving livelihoods”. As the targets for this indicator have been achieved – presumably through
                            a combination of the three sub-results chains rather than merely through productivity enhancement - Efficacy
                            for the project objective of “improving livelihoods” is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given there is only one objective, the overall rating follows from the rating of this singular objective.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analyses

   An economic and financial analysis was carried out in the PAD, Restructuring Paper and ICR:

                               At project appraisal, the total investment was estimated to result in an economic rate of return (ERR) of
                                 14% and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 28%. Cost per beneficiary was estimated at US$1,842.
                               At project restructuring, the ERR and IRR at appraisal were revised to 20% and 34%, respectively, based
                                on updated data and costs and on correction of a few errors. For the AF, the ERR was calculated at
                                28%, the IRR at 44% and the estimated cost per beneficiary at US$1,665.
                               At project closure, the ICR reported an ERR of 22%. The estimated cost per beneficiary amounted to
                                US$1,515. The economic net present value (NPV) was calculated at US$14.4 million at a discount rate
                                of 13%.

   Operational efficiency

   The disbursement rate of World Bank, EU and IFAD financing amounted to 90.1%, with an underspending in
   US$ terms and an overspending in Papua New Guinea Kina (PGK) terms. Despite lower project expenditures
   than budgeted, the project still achieved almost all the PDO indicators as amended at restructuring.

   In terms of aspects of project design and implementation that influenced project efficiency, the ICR mentions
   that weak capacities of GoPNG agencies led to delays but not cost overruns.


                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              22.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high on the basis of the PDO being highly relevant to the government
development strategy and Bank assistance strategy, and it being appropriately pitched. Efficacy is rated
substantial since the PDO was effectively achieved. Efficiency is also rated substantial because, despite some
institutional weaknesses, the project’s economic rate of return was 22% at its close. This project thus had no
shortcomings in the relevance of its objective and minor shortcomings in its efficacy and efficiency. The project’s
overall outcome is therefore rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR candidly reports on a set of risks (and mitigation measures) to outcome sustainability, including:

      Technical risks: degraded road conditions and inadequate maintenance of rehabilitated roads.
      Environmental risks: although PPAP developed pest control methods, substantial extension efforts
       will be required to enable farmer adoption. Moreover, PNG is one of the countries at highest risk for
       natural disasters; while PPAP similarly developed some adaptation measures, further long-term
       adaptation measures are required for increasing household resilience.
      Institutional risks: the sustainability of partnerships and farmer organizations established under PPAP
       is fragile.
      Other risks: incursion of oil palm development onto cocoa cultivation areas and lack of resources for
       corresponding legal action.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed in line with World Bank development priorities and on-going engagements in
  PNG, as well as with national development plans. Project design capitalized on prior World Bank
  experience and on value chain diagnostics (funded with a grant mobilized by the team), although the ICR
  candidly reports there were still a few shortcomings in design (ICR par. 80 and 109). The PDO was
  relatively straightforward – especially after restructuring - and project components and activities designed
  in a clear and relevant way for achieving it. The PAD was clear on objectives and outcomes (PAD par.
  20-21). Commodity and regional targeting were appropriate (ICR par. 79), as were the implementation
  arrangements (ICR par. 81). M&E was extensive in design, although data collection issues were not
  anticipated, and the Results Framework had several moderate shortcomings (see Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team provided strong implementation support to the project – including fiduciary,
 safeguards and M&E – thereby building strong relationships with the PCU/PMU and implementing
 agencies. Comprehensive Aide Memoires were prepared after biannual Implementation Support Missions
 jointly with IFAD, and their frequency increased when implementation progress was rated Moderately
 Unsatisfactory. The project was successfully restructured to scale up impact and add relevant activities on
 gender, disadvantaged groups and road maintenance. M&E challenges were overcome, allowing to collect
 an extensive set of M&E data which were proactively used in project management and adaptation (see
 Section 9).

 Nevertheless, the project had to deal with severe delays, including (i) lead time for achieving effectiveness
 and setting up the PCU and PMUs; (ii) a 28-month administrative delay in signing the amended Financing
 Agreement and final Disbursement Letter; (iii) a 24-month delay in distributing CPB-tolerant plant clones;
 (iv) delayed procurement and safeguards assessments for feeder road rehabilitation; and (v) a 5-year delay
 in approval of the PNG Coffee Grades and Standards. These delays caused repeated extensions of the
 project closing date – leading to an implementation period of 10 years instead of the 5 years initially
 foreseen – while also severely impacting upon achievements of results (such as weaker achievements for
 coffee - ICR par. 28). Although the ICR attributes these to weak GoPNG agency capacities (ICR par. 91),
 the extensive length of these delays and their timing relatively late in project implementation raises the
 question whether the World Bank could not have anticipated better or acted more proactively to reduce
 them. The World Bank project team re-emphasized during an interview held with IEG for the ICRR the
 institutional weaknesses, capacity constraints and multitude of stakeholders involved, which in combination
 led to these delays. The team also indicated the WB anticipated these delays and acted proactively in
 organizing weekly meetings and increasing ISM frequency.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



 On a related note, financial management was Moderately Unsatisfactory due to delays and slow
 disbursement (see Section 10).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E was extensive in design, including panel surveys (baseline, year 3, year 5), separate monitoring
 mechanisms for Components 2 and 3, and management information systems. The PAD was clear in
 assigning M&E roles to different parties, although the ICR mentions it underestimated the various
 challenges for data collection at partner level. The PAD (par. 53) stated that “an outcome-oriented
 approach (…) has been developed that would allow corrections during implementation to achieve the
 objectives and efficient incorporation of lessons learned”.

 The Results Framework (Annex 3 in PAD) contained “PDO indicators” and “intermediate outcome
 indicators”, yet as noted in the Efficacy section above, the PDO was not directly measured nor did these
 terms appropriately reflect measurement along the causal chain. The Results Framework was relatively
 extensive, yet without it being mapped to any results chain or theory of change, its logic and
 comprehensiveness is hard to assess. Further Results Framework shortcomings have been discussed in
 the Efficacy section.



b. M&E Implementation
  The original Results Framework was revised and simplified at restructuring, through streamlining,
  combining, revising or dropping a substantial number of indicators. The resulting indicator set was largely
  clear and measurable, although the ICR notes some indicators could have benefitted from additional
  specification. However, as the causal chain was only postulated in the ICR, and even there not linked to
  the Results Framework, it was insufficiently recognized that the Results Framework almost exclusively
  focused on Component 2. This hindered proper assessment of project progress and attribution for
  Components 1 and 3, as noted in the Efficacy section, and it would have probably been better to retain or
  add more indicators at restructuring.

  The ICR notes the project team managed to develop a working M&E system overcoming the data
  collection challenges at partner level. This was done through the commodity-specific management
  information systems and through proactivity in identifying bottlenecks and solutions, reviewing and
  refining processes, and recruiting adequate technical staff. Both sectors demonstrated commitment to
  future deployment of the systems.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



  At project closure, the ICR used several data sources for assessment, as the project M&E system was
  further supplemented by a GoPNG completion report and an end-of-project impact evaluation. The latter
  was a full-fledged evaluation (baseline – midterm – end term), consisting of an extensive quantitative
  survey, focus group discussions, key informant interviews and a survey of non-beneficiaries, along with
  methodological and compensatory approaches for correcting biases. This impact evaluation allowed for
  statistical impact results, analysis of contributing factors and assessment of spillover effects. Moreover,
  the ICR is very explicit on corroborating and triangulation information (ICR par. 25).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used for steering implementation partners, through discussing performance and
  identifying measures for improvement. The impact evaluation was utilized at different stages: (i) results
  from the baseline survey helped in designing the project restructuring; (ii) results from the midterm
  survey induced a more thorough assessment of spillover effects; and (iii) the end-term survey provided
  orientations for the follow-up project P166222.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category “B” and triggered the following safeguards:

           Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
           Pest Management (OP 4.09)
           Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
           Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

   The ICR notes that the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and associated
   documents adequately outlined requirements, implementing arrangements and resources. Some concerns
   were raised on adverse environmental impacts associated with pest management, coffee processing
   facilities and feeder road rehabilitation, but all have been addressed in line with the ESMF although
   compliance is not explicitly assured in the ICR. Similarly, all social safeguard requirements have been
   satisfactorily complied with, including informed consultations, community land use agreements and right-of-
   way consent. Right to compensation was largely waived by affected people, nor has there been involuntary
   land acquisition. Compliance with social safeguards was explicitly stated in the ICR (par. 105).

   According to the Restructuring Paper of 2014, the scaling up with AF did not involve a change in the
   environmental assessment category nor trigger any new safeguard policies.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR notes fiduciary compliance was only Moderately Satisfactory, due to a complex multi-level
  fiduciary arrangement, a lack of experienced procurement World Bank officers and limited exchange
  between the two PMUs

  Financial management was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory at project closure, due to late report
  submissions, slow disbursement, and limited project management skills and familiarity with World Bank
  fiduciary procedures. The lack of replacement of the international financial advisor in 2016 contributed to
  delays and compliance gaps.

  Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory from 2016 to 2021. Initial problems included lack of PMU
  proactivity, lengthy delays with contract approval and awarding, slow adoption of the Systematic Tracking
  of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system, and variable quality of goods procurement. These all
  improved over time.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR lists a range of project spillovers and unintended impacts:

        Trainings were opened and partnership benefits extended to non-PPAP farmers as well (ICR par.
           49).
          The commodity boards adopted technological improvements and training materials nationwide (ICR
           par. 49).
          Through road rehabilitation: access to various public services, access to supplies, benefits accruing
           to women specifically and rehabilitation of roads in other areas (ICR par. 52).
          Capacity building of the commodity boards and institutionalizing public-private partnerships (ICR
           par. 68). It is remarkable though that this central element to the approach should be considered a
           spillover, raising the question why it was not explicitly integrated into the components, ToC and
           Results Framework.
          Mobilizing private sector financing (ICR par. 69) and capacity building of commercial partners (ICR
           par. 75). Similarly, it is remarkable that this key element was not included as an indicator in the
           Results Framework, despite the PDO being exclusively farmer centered.
          Communal facilities built or rehabilitated with PPAP funding are now providing services to non-
           PPAP farmers in the vicinity as well (ICR par. 73). Similarly, PPAP participants shared knowledge
           with their communities (ICR par. 74).
          Replication of partnership modalities and extension models by other donors and research institutes
           (ICR par. 77).



d. Other
  Gender

  At restructuring, participation of women and other disadvantaged groups was strengthened to ensure they
  would fully share project benefits. This was enabled through capacity building to lead partners and

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



   extension agents, through revising implementation and M&E processes for mainstreaming gender aspects,
   and through literacy training and nutrition education. A total of 50,706 women received training organized by
   PPAP (127% of target). The small pilot intervention on child nutrition and breastfeeding demonstrated high
   potential for upscaling through national systems.

   A shifted balance of within-household gender roles was reported, with women’s participation in agricultural
   practices, farming oversight and domestic finances increasing.

   Nutrition

   While not foreseen in the project design, a small pilot nutrition program was introduced after the midterm
   review because of the high levels of child malnutrition. It had positive impact and high potential for upscaling
   through national systems (par. 72).



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR contained six lessons. The following three lessons are emphasized from the ICR with
adaptation of language:

      Productive partnerships – either with a commercial agribusiness firm or in the form of
       farmer organizations – constitute an effective model for expanding farmers’ access to
       services and markets and for securing reliable and high-quality supplies to buyers.
       The partnership model delivers mutual benefits to both parties. On the one hand, it provides
       farmers with services that enable them to increase production volumes and quality in line
       with market demand, on a substantially larger scale than through public extension (ICR par.
       37-38). On the other hand, by offsetting risks it allows buyers to engage with smallholders for
       sourcing produce.
      Improved technologies may only increase yield and income when complemented with
       farmers’ market empowerment and supportive institutional reforms. Project
       implementation demonstrated that optimal support packages combine best management
       practices with marketing empowerment, under an improved policy and coordination
       framework (ICR par. 118).
      Feeder road rehabilitation typically leads to widespread spillover effects and is often
       the most appreciated intervention in rural areas; projects can enhance their utility by

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)



         focusing on road designs that minimize maintenance needs after project closure as
         maintenance is often difficult to achieve. Road rehabilitation leads to significant and
         widespread effects on people living close to roads, including market sales and revenues but
         also spillover effects such as access to various public services, access to supplies, benefits
         accruing to women specifically and rehabilitation of roads in other areas (ICR par. 52). To get
         more impact for available resources, priority needs to be given to spot improvements, full
         rehabilitation of short stretches, and maintenance-free improvements (ICR par. 121).

The following lesson is added by IEG:

        Lack of explicit Results Frameworks mapping to a results chain or ToC can lead to
         improper indicator labelling, to inadequate coverage of sub-results chains and to
         inability for assessing project progress and attribution. As expanded upon in Section 4
         of this review, none of the “PDO indicators” measured the achievement of the PDO explicitly
         comparing to the ToC. Moreover, they all covered the same sub-results chain, while few
         indicators were proposed for measuring achievements in the other two sub-results chains.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well-written, appropriately structured and comprehensive, with a solid and detailed
discourse, adequate clarifications (including in footnotes) and rich in information (including elaborate sections
that are not explicitly rated, such as Section II.E on other outcomes and impacts and Section III on key factors
that affected implementation and outcome). It provides substantial evidence and adequate analysis beyond the
Results Framework in numerous sections, while Section IV.E contains well-defined and evidence-based
lessons elaborated with concrete specifications. In particular the full-fledged impact evaluation is highly
appreciated. The non-application of a split rating is logically justified.

However, the ICR could have been more concise, with the main text amounting to 36 pages (compared to a
typical maximum of 15 pages prescribed by OPCS Guidance on ICR for IPF operations). Information is
regularly repeated and/or dispersed throughout the document, while several paragraphs are long and
cumbersome to read. Moreover, cross-references gave the impression of being from a previous version and
were hence often not logical or interpretable, whereas further confusion is added by the different numbering of
corresponding outcomes and components.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PNG Productive Partnerships in Agr. (P110959)




                                                                             Page 17 of 17
