     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022956

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P163857                                    Somalia Urban Resilience Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A8112                                   30-Sep-2021                                           8,972,081.30

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Aug-2018                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              9,000,000.00                                   9,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               9,000,000.00                                   8,972,081.30

 Actual                                           8,999,329.11                                   8,972,081.30




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Fernando Manibog             Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 18)
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase I (SURP) was "to
   strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level and support the reconstruction of key
   urban infrastructure in targeted areas."

   This Phase 1 project is part of the Somalia Urban Resilience Program, to strengthen urban resilience of key
   cities in Somalia. Three projects – Somali Urban Investment Planning Project (SUIPP, P150374), this project

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



   Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase I (SURP, P163857), and Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase
   II (SURP-II, P170922) – constituted this program. A Series of Project (SOP) program is a World Bank
   instrument that assembles successor projects over a well- defined period as a holistic approach to achieve a
   long-term goal.

   This review will assess the performance of the Somalia Urban Resilience Project against the following
   objectives:

         To support the reconstruction of key urban infrastructure in targeted areas; and
         To strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Mogadishu Municipality: (US$6.5 million at appraisal, US$6.5 million actual). This component was to
   finance 4 sub-components - infrastructure, capacity building, operations and maintenance (O&M), and
   project management. The infrastructure sub-component was to finance the use of labor-intensive methods
   to construct secondary roads with side drains, pedestrian walkways, and solar streetlights across 7 districts
   (allocated 1 km per district for equity purposes). Since Somalia did not have standard construction codes
   (ICR, footnote 13) the infrastructure work specifications were to be followed to ensure quality. Labor-
   intensive construction methods meant the use of precast interlocking concrete paving blocks
   with compacted sub-base and base materials (ICR, footnote14) to create short-term income-generating
   opportunities for the vulnerable population such as women, internally displaced persons (IDPs), and the
   poor. (ICR, footnote 15). The capacity building sub-component was to finance training in the areas of
   financial management (FM), procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and engineering to
   build the capacity of the municipal government Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The operations and
   maintenance (O&M) sub-component was to finance the development of O&M plans for the road and
   drainage investments, guidelines to help municipalities establish and coordinate maintenance committees,
   and conduct training of district-level maintenance committees and other staff on routine maintenance,
   community mobilization, and monitoring and reporting. The project management sub-component was to
   finance project management costs of the PIU, including staffing, grievance redress and feedback
   mechanisms, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

   2. Garowe Municipality: (US$2.5 million at appraisal, US$2.5 million actual) This component was to
   finance four sub-components, similar to the activities funded for the Mogadishu component above -
   infrastructure, capacity building, O&M, and project management. The infrastructure sub-component was to
   finance four secondary roads with side drains, pedestrian walkways, and solar streetlights across seven
   districts using labor-intensive construction methods. The use of Otta seal surfacing with
   compacted materials was intended to support the traffic load to generate employment opportunities for the
   poor in the area. The capacity building sub-component was to finance training and technical assistance to
   build the capacity of the Project Implementation Unit in the areas of financial management (FM),
   procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and engineering. The O&M sub-component was to

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



   finance the development of O&M plans for the road and drainage investments, guidelines to establish and
   coordinate maintenance committees, and training of district-level maintenance committees on maintenance,
   community mobilization, and monitoring and reporting. The project management sub-component was to
   finance the project management costs of the PIU, including staffing, grievance redress and feedback
   mechanisms, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The PIU was also to contract the engineering
   supervision of the civil works by an independent engineering supervision firm and another firm to conduct a
   project baseline survey.

   3. Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million at appraisal, US$0 million actual) This component was
   to allow for rapid reallocation of uncommitted project funds in the event of a natural or manmade crisis
   during the implementation. This component was to finance eligible emergency needs under the conditions
   established in an operations manual. This component had no initial funding allocation initially and would
   draw resources from the other expenditure categories at the time of activation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was US$9.0 million. The grant was fully disbursed.

   Financing: This project was financed by the 2014 Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF) under the Somalia
   Reconstruction and Development Facility (SRDF) administered by the International Bank for Reconstruction
   and Development (IBRD). The SRDF pooled US$447 million from 11 international donors to provide grants
   for government-led state building and service delivery. The German Government provided US$6 million to
   Mogadishu and the World Bank financed US$2.5 million to Garowe through the SMPF (ICR, footnote 24).
   The task team clarified the World Bank financing to be US$3.0 million.

   Borrower Contribution: None.

   Dates: The project was approved on August 2, 2018 and became effective on October 18, 2018. The Mid
   Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 18, 2020. The project closed as originally planned, on
   September 30, 2021. There were no project restructurings.

   Split Rating: No split rating was applied to derive the outcome of the project. The PDOs or the outcome
   indicators were not revised




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: The September 2013 Brussels Conference created the Somali Compact. This compact
included peacebuilding and state-building goals. The compact created a Somaliland Special Arrangement
because the country had no access to International Development Association (IDA) funds. Somalia had
been in non-accrual status since 1991. Access to IDA was restored in 2020 after the government cleared
its arrears to international financial institutions. The country was categorized a Decision Point under the



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. The August 2012 provisional constitution led to the formation of
the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS).

Since 1991, the country has undergone armed conflict. Natural disasters have displaced people and
damaged much of the infrastructure. Forced migration brought by conflict, insecurity, and natural disasters
has accelerated the rate of urban migration in Somalia. This urbanization contributed to an increase in
poverty rate and food insecurity. The 2017 drought weakened the economy and further increased the
country's vulnerability. Services in urban areas were unable to match the pace of rapid urbanization. A
holistic approach to create resilient cities appealed to the government because of its limited capacity and
resources to address these challenges. The approach adopted five dimensions - spatial, physical,
economic, social, and institutional aspects - that constituted a series of projects comprising an urban
resilience program for Somalia.

Country Programs: The PDOs were relevant to the National Development Plan of the Federal Government
of Somalia for 2017-201 9. In particular, the PDOs supported activities under the infrastructure and the
resilience pillars. The infrastructure pillar aimed "to lay out the foundations of resilient infrastructure systems
that contribute to the country's stability and provide services for all." The resilience pillar aimed "to create
opportunities for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugee returnees to participate in local and urban
development processes," and "to enhance their absorptive capacity" to services delivered.

World Bank Partnership: This project was part of the World Bank's reengagement with Somalia after the
2012 constitution created its Federal Government. The PDOs were relevant to the focus area 1 of the
World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Somalia for FY 2019-2022. This Focus area aimed
to strengthen institutions and expand access to services while addressing cross-cutting considerations of
building resilience to fragility and shocks.

World Bank experience in the sector and in the country: The World Bank has provided a Special
Financing Facility for Local Development (P156257) to finance the strengthening of the institutional capacity
of the federal government, its public financial management (PFM), and recurrent costs. This facility
developed procurement and supervision functions at the federal Ministry of Finance and financed small-
scale investments in small secondary and tertiary cities. The facility expanded the use of the public financial
management system for a capital investments in Federal Member States. Another World Bank-financed
Somalia Capacity Injection Project (CIP, P149971) focused on the strengthening of the basic PFM capacity
of Somalia. This first phase project served to build upon those early interventions. This project was both an
urban resilience and a local governance project.

Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The PDOs directly supported both government
plans and the World Bank reengagement strategy for the country.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To support the reconstruction of key urban infrastructure in targeted areas.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: At appraisal, a Results Chain framed a Theory of Change (ToC) (PAD, Section D,
               following paragraph 37). This ToC was replicated at closing (ICR, Figure 1) providing a logical causal
               sequence from the project activities and inputs to intermediate/final outcomes. However, the ToC was simply
               stated and provided the link between outputs and intermediate outcomes, and not necessarily the final
               outcomes of the project activities.

               Inputs were to include physical investments to rehabilitate secondary urban roads, improve drainage,
               establish pedestrian walkways, and install street lighting in the target cities of Mogadishu and Garowe. By
               using labor-intensive construction methods, such as using precast, interlocking concrete paving blocks, and
               seal surfacing with compacted base materials to support anticipated traffic load, the works were expected to
               generate short-term employment for the vulnerable population such as women, internally displaced people
               (IDP), and the poor in the target cities. An assessment of the road connectivity and drainage network in
               Mogadishu was also to be prepared

               Outputs were to include the length of rehabilitated roads and improved drainage, the number of income-
               generating opportunities for the urban poor, expressed in person-days, and an assessment report on road
               connectivity and drainage network in Mogadishu. The feasibility studies and preliminary designs of the
               infrastructure investments were completed under the preceding Somalia Urban Investment Planning
               Project (SUIPP).

               Outcomes targeted the beneficiary residents including the urban poor, IDPs, and returnees, who were to
               benefit from improvements in connectivity, provision of access to markets and services, improvements in
               conditions of safety and security from pedestrian walkways and streetlights, and increases in incomes from
               employment. Outcomes were represented by the number of beneficiaries and respondents who expressed
               that the interventions satisfactorily met their needs, without distinguishing which aspects were being
               addressed (e.g., access, safety, security, income improvements). The ToC did not include any critical
               assumptions that needed to be in place for the objective to have a greater likelihood of being achieved. The
               achievement of the above objective would contribute to the long term institutional, physical, spatial and
               economic resilience of the urban areas and demonstrate visible and tangible improvements in the lives of its
               citizens, strengthen legitimacy of the government, and lead to social and political stability in the
               country. However, the number of beneficiaries was not sufficient to indicate that this outcome was achieved
               (see Section 9 M&E below).

               OUTPUTS:

                     The following non-rural roads were rehabilitated:
                           o In Mogadishu - 11 roads with 7.4 km were rehabilitated in six districts of Bodhere, Hamar Jaja,
                              Hamar Weyne, Howlwadag, Shangani, and Warta Nabada Districts (the target of 19 roads, in
                              seven districts with 7.5 km, was almost achieved). The PAD noted that the specific number of
                              roads to be rehabilitated were subject to change due to budgetary, security, and political
                              economy considerations (PAD, paragraph 21). The 12th road Agoonta in Abdiaziz district was

                                                                                                                Page 5 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



              partially built for 753 m but construction work was stopped due to noncompliance with
              safeguards (see Section 10 Other Issues below).
           o In Garowe - 4 roads with 4.93 km were rehabilitated (the target of 4 roads, 4.4 km, was
              achieved). These prioritized roads connected the urban poor communities and IDP settlements
              to key socio-economic facilities.
    Person days of employment were created consisting of unskilled and skilled workers. “Unskilled” are
     workers who lack technical training, industry experience, and are often trained on the job site, e.g.,
     flag man, security, manual hold digger, etc. The average daily rates for unskilled workers was
     $12. “Skilled” are workers who attended a vocational school, university, college, or any other technical
     school, e.g., site engineer, foreman, welder, mechanic, excavator operator, distributor operator, hot-
     oiler, laboratory technician, survey technician, etc. The average daily rates for skilled workers was
     $20.
           o In Mogadishu, the road construction created 63,324 person-days of temporary employment
              (the target of 22,000 was exceeded). The labor created involved over 1,088 workers - 20.0%
              female, 9% IDPs, 37% from host communities, 4% returnees, and 50% from other
              communities (no targets). In addition, the newly established businesses along the new roads
              increased employment and livelihood opportunities for those residing in the target settlements
              but these were not monitored or reported. Unskilled workers were recruited based on certain
              criteria (vulnerability, female-headed households, households with more than 6 persons,
              households with elderly parents, persons with disabilities, orphans) and displacement status to
              ensure that IDPs and returnees were targeted. The employment generated exceeded
              the conservative target because manual labor was favored over machines to maximize the
              impact on the community.
           o in Garowe, the road construction created 42,512 person days of temporary employment (the
              target of 18,000 was exceeded). This involved over 600 workers from the host communities
              (67.6%) and IDPs (32.4%). 89.8% were males,10.2% were females. In addition, newly
              established businesses along the new roads increased employment and livelihood
              opportunities for those residing in the target areas but this was not monitored or reported.
    The Global Fund for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) financed a drainage master plan and road
     connectivity assessment for Mogadishu.

OUTCOMES:

    People with access to all season roads within a 500-meter range was improved.
         o In Mogadishu, 148,800 people benefited from the 11 rehabilitated roads (the target of 2,000
             was exceeded). 1,600 households, with an average household size of eight, were estimated to
             benefit from each rehabilitated road. Beneficiaries included 50% female, 19% IDPs, and 81%
             from the host communities. The original target of beneficiaries was acknowledged to be overly
             conservative.
          o In Garowe, 8,000 people benefited from the four rehabilitated roads (the target of 2,000
             was exceeded). The beneficiaries were 50% female, 25% IDP, 75% coming from the host
             communities. 250 households with an average household size of eight, were estimated to
             benefit from each rehabilitated road. The Garowe roads created a by-pass for motorists to
             have an alternate route through the city and decongested the main Garowe road (no data on
             reduced volume or impact on road safety).
    91.5 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied that the rehabilitated infrastructure met their needs (the
     target of 90 percent was exceeded). According to the surveys at closing, the roads improved

                                                                                               Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



       accessibility, economic activity, security, and the general environment. However, there was no data to
       support these outcomes. The vast majority of respondents from both municipalities also agreed that
       the road project was relevant, addressed a pressing need, and positively changed the fortunes of the
       settlements served by the four upgraded roads in Garowe.
             o In Mogadishu - using a sample size of 536 respondents, 89.4 percent overall (89% female, and
               91% IDPs) confirmed that the rehabilitated roads met their needs.
             o In Garowe - with a sample size of 386 respondents, 94.3% overall (93% female, and 93%
               IDPs) confirmed that the rehabilitated roads met their needs.
      The GFDRR-financed plans for Mogadishu informed the roads to be financed under the follow-on
       project SURP-II (ICR, paragraph 40).

The following additional outcomes of improved access to services by reducing travel time and travel costs to
health facilities and schools were reported at closing. Not all the indicators were supported by data. These
were not part of the results framework or the TOC and were not monitored during implementation. No study
was undertaken to quantify economic gains from the project (ICR, paragraph 35). The Bank Team clarified
that outcomes were limited to general observations on quality.

      Travel times were reduced:
           o in Mogadishu, the average travel time decreased by four minutes (no baseline)
           o In Garowe, the average travel time decreased by 10 minutes (from 30 at baseline) and travel
               costs reduced to an average of US$1.5 per trip (from US$2.1).
      No data was provided to support the claim that diverse and larger businesses were opened, minimal
       changes to rental and property values but noted increase in business rentals, access to goods and
       services, such as extending electrical services to IDP camps in Jilab Road, and increased municipal
       revenues. Anecdotally and with no quantifiable evidence to support the claim, the improved roads
       reduced flooding and stagnant water, and contributed to improved health conditions of residents. The
       new pedestrian walkways, speed bumps, traffic signage, and streetlighting improved road safety and
       security.
      Extended working hours in the markets were reported,
            o In Mogadishu 38 percent opening at 6:00 a.m. and 23 percent closing at 10:00 p.m. (29
               percent and 8 percent at baseline, respectively).The average number of daily customers in
               Mogadishu increased to 25 (from 19 at baseline)
            o In Garowe, more businesses operate for longer hours, with 51 percent opening at 6:00 a.m.
               and 44 percent closing at 10:00 p.m. (14 percent and 27 percent at baseline, respectively).The
               average number of daily customers in Garowe to 36 (from 28).

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated substantial with moderate
shortcomings. The outputs were achieved or exceeded. The outcomes were that the beneficiaries gained
access to markets through temporary employment and improved connectivity presumably to the transport
network although these were qualitatively described but not quantified. The outcomes were measured as
nearly achieved or exceeded based on the favorable response by the sampled population. The FCV context
of the country limited the quantifiable evidence of final outcomes. The FCV environment did not allow for
additional surveys to capture higher level development outcomes such as increase in trade of goods and
services. There is a reasonable expectation that the series of projects under this program, would
incrementally lead to improvements in the lives and livelihoods of the beneficiaries of target cities in the long
run.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level.

This objective supports the overarching PDO of the long term Somalia Urban Resilience Program, which
states "To strengthen the capacity of municipal governments to perform core functions and strengthen urban
resilience in cities across Somalia (PAD, paragraph 41).

Rationale
Theory of Change: The results framework at appraisal reflected the ToC. This same ToC was presented at
closing (ICR, Figure 1). The ToC in both cases was logical and provided a causal link between the inputs and
outputs and outcome. However, the outcome indicators were pitched at the level of processes and
intermediate outputs rather than the final outcomes of the project activities.

Inputs were budgets to finance training and capacity building for the staff of the Benadir
Regional Administration (BRA) and Garowe Municipality to build their respective capacity in subnational level
government systems, including the establishment of committees to oversee the maintenance of secondary
roads. Inputs in Mogadishu were to include budgets for financing road connectivity and drainage network
assessment.

Outputs were the number of persons trained from the PIU and other civil servants in public administration
skills such as in the areas of financial management (FM), procurement, safeguards, Monitoring and
Evaluation (M&E), participatory planning, and operating and maintenance (O&M). Another output was the
number of maintenance committees formed.

The outcome was to be the strengthened performance of the municipal governments to deliver public
services and improved accountability to its constituents. This improved performance was to be measured by
the establishment of community engagement/O&M plans for the rehabilitated roads (an output or intermediate
outcome at best) and the results of end line surveys expressing satisfaction with government performance in
delivering the rehabilitated roads. The outcome of the training received was that the Benadir Regional
Administration (BRA) to which Mogadishu belongs and Garowe would adopt participatory planning,
stakeholder engagement, and grievance redress to reflect better accountability to its constituents. This is
more a process outcome. The achievement of the above objective was limited to having established
community engagement/O&M plans to demonstrate strengthened local government capacity to improve the
lives of its citizens. The ICR did not include critical assumptions.

OUTPUTS:

      Project and Government staff formally trained:
            o in Mogadishu 159 project and government staff were trained (target of 30 was exceeded). A
               total of 207 individuals (39% women) received formal training; 159 were project and
               government staff. Training included public financial management (20 participants);

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



           procurement (45 participants); human resources management in local government (10
           participants); M&E (57); operations and maintenance (O&M), environmental and social
           safeguards and grievance redress (75). Training was provided to representatives from BRA /
           Mogadishu (159) the Project Implementation Unit (PIU, 6), the contractor (4), the United
           Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS, 4), and community members (40).
         o in Garowe, 72 government and project staff were trained (target of 20 was exceeded). A total
           of 79 individuals (19% women) received formal training in public financial management (27
           participants), procurement (10 participants), human resource management in local government
           (5 participants), M&E (12 participants), contract management (1 participant), project
           management (4 participants), environmental and social safeguards and grievance redress (5
           participants), and technical aspects and maintenance (15 participants). Training was provided
           to government staff (54), PIU staff (18), UNOPS (2), the contractor (2), the O&M committee (2),
           and the Grievance Redress Committee (1).
    Maintenance Committees established and functioning:
         o in Mogadishu, 6 committees were established for each district (target of 7 was almost
           achieved). Each committee had 7 members (5 male, 2 female), 2 representatives from the
           administration and 5 from the communities including IDPs. The initial list of prioritized roads
           covered seven districts, but the final set of roads covered six districts. Some of the committees
           were operational, others covered recently finalized roads. More time is needed to assess
           whether the committees are functioning as planned to maintain the most recently finished
           roads.
         o in Garowe one O&M committee was organized and conducted its first clean-up campaign in
           the 2nd quarter of 2021 (target of 1 was achieved). The committee consisted of 7 members
           (3 female). Of these, 4 were district commissioners, 2 were representatives from the host
           communities and one an IDP representative from the Jilab Road. The Committee covered all
           four roads. Three roads run through two adjacent neighborhoods (Koowda Agoosto and
           Hantiwadaag). The district recommended that one committee would handle the O&M of those
           roads.

OUTCOMES:

    All 16 completed sub-projects were accompanied by post-construction community engagement/O&M
      plans. The original target of 23 was not achieved because the number of roads was reduced, although
      the overall length of rehabilitated roads exceeded original targets.
           o In Mogadishu, the original plan was to finance the construction of 19 roads in 7 districts but
              variation orders during construction reduced the number of roads to 11 roads in 6 districts,
              covering an estimated total distance of 7.5 km. Variations were due to compliance issues with
              Environmental and Social Safeguards. Some roads were to pass through areas with
              underground septic tanks and lacked space for proper drainage. Others were dropped due to
              budgetary constraints.
           o In Garowe, four roads were constructed with 4.93 km exceeding the target of 4.4 km. The
              roads created a bypass that served as an alternative route through the city and decongested
              the main Garowe Road. The Jilab Road connected the city’s largest IDP settlements to the
              urban center, leading to better access to jobs and services by IDPs. The roads included
              drainage on one side and pedestrian walkways on both sides of the road. In both
              municipalities, these roads were prioritized based on their strategic importance that provided
              connectivity of urban poor communities and IDP settlements to key socioeconomic facilities.


                                                                                              Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)




                                   People surveyed were satisfied with the municipal government's performance on road rehabilitation.
                                        o In Mogadishu, the baseline survey showed 25.0 percent of respondents held a positive view
                                           (either satisfied or very satisfied). The end line survey showed 88.3 percent were
                                           satisfied.(88.2 percent of men, 88.4 percent of women, 97 percent of IDPs, and 86.7 percent of
                                           the respondents from the host community)
                                         o In Garowe, the baseline survey showed that 0 percent said they were very satisfied. The end
                                           line survey said that 47.4 percent were satisfied and 37.4 percent were very satisfied.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest. There were shortcomings in the
                            outcomes. The project achieved the narrowly defined outcomes associated with the delivery of the
                            rehabilitated roads by having established community engagement/O&M plans. However, the ICR
                            acknowledged that more time is needed to assess the effectiveness of these plans to maintain the road
                            investments (ICR, Annex 1). In addition, outcomes associated with establishing accountability to its
                            constituents, e.g., the publication of periodic report cards on service standards to deliver public services
                            would have been useful to support assertions that the municipal governments capacities have
                            been strengthened.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve the first objective is rated substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings. The roads were indeed completed as planned in both Mogadishu and Garowe, accompanied
                            by O&M plan and short term income generating opportunities. However, there was a shortcoming in terms of
                            the limited evidence provided related to the achievement of service and safety standards, such as the volume
                            of traffic facilitated, or reduced incidence of accidents involving motorists and pedestrians.

                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective is rated Modest because the outcomes reflected
                            the strengthening of public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level only in a very limited sense and
                            with moderate shortcomings. Moreover, the accountability features of the strengthened capacity is
                            inadequately reflected by the level of satisfaction expressed at the end line surveys. Other outcome indicators
                            would have been useful in terms of how the built capacity translated to effective accountability, such as the
                            adoption of a regular score card reporting on how access has improved businesses or service standards
                            associated with improving access to services. Social benefits from training and capacity-building activities (for
                            example, local investments based on better planning, better transparency and accountability, reduced
                            incidence of waterborne diseases due to improved drainage on roads, better O&M provisions, increased
                            economic activity, and access to public services) were noted under Other Impacts but were not included in
                            the ToC and thus were not part of the results framework or regularly monitored.

                            Nevertheless, the overall efficacy of the project -- taking into account the narrow focus only on the services
                            associated with the rehabilitated roads in Mogadishu and Garowe, and the difficult implementation

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



  environment in an FCV context -- is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings due to this limited
  evidence.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, no economic and financial analysis was undertaken due to the lack
of economic data, the ongoing conflict in Somalia, and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits.
Comparative traffic flow analyses for before and after the project were also not possible due to data limitations.
However, a framework for economic analysis was to be developed during project implementation to collect data
on economic impact (PAD, paragraph 64). Benefits were to be derived from improved access to markets and
services, short term income generating opportunities, and improved safety for all residents, both pedestrians
and motorists in Mogadishu and Garowe.

At closing, an economic and financial analysis was conducted based on the US$9 million project cost of the road
infrastructure investments in Mogadishu and Garowe. Economic benefits included travel time and cost savings
for commuters, the worth of improved skills of new labor force entrants as well as those
returning. Costs included all project disbursements along with O&M costs. A 12 percent discount rate was used.
The net present value (NPV) was estimated at US$8.4 million. An economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated
to be 34 percent. Using a 5 percent discount rate to represent the cost of capital to the Government of Somalia,
the estimated NPV was at US$12.2 million. Using a 12 and 15 percent discount rate, which represented risk-
adjusted discount rates, the estimated NPV was US$4 million at 12 percent and US$2.3 million at 15 percent
(ICR, footnote 20).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: This project was the second of a planned time-series projects to
support Somalia's long term urban resilience program. The project closed as planned. There were no
restructurings or extensions. The project was not complex, but several factors affected appraisal
and implementation without extending the implementation period. First, appraisal was delayed by almost a year
as other donor partners did not support the original project design that called for US$86 million investment to
cover Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Garowe (ICR, paragraph 41). This resulted in reducing the scope and ambition
of the project, loss of momentum and loss of institutional memory. Second, design features of the roads
investment delayed implementation. For Mogadishu, equity considerations (approximately 1 km road per district)
led to disjointed sections of prioritized roads, not connected to existing, or proposed trade routes or commercial
hubs, socioeconomic facilities, or other road networks. In addition, the UNOPS completed designs were not
road-specific and did not take into account specific sites or locations of existing utility lines, whether above or
underground. Physical plans that detailed the urban environment, showing the location of its unregulated public
utilities, or its underground lines were absent, thus hampering implementation (see Section 10 Other Issues,
Procurement).This led to redesigns during construction, hence, change orders and extensions, exposing the
limited procurement and contract management capacity of the PIUs. Third, Mogadishu was led by five
mayors over the course of the project. The president appoints Mogadishu's mayors, who tend to be more
accountable to top political leaders rather than their constituents. The high turnover constrained implementation
because of the need to reestablish relations, aware that each new executive would call for their own quick wins

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



and high visibility roads. In addition, achieving political consensus was difficult when mayors did not appoint their
own deputies or secretaries. Fourth, replacing the BRA PIU Project Coordinator almost a year later after he
resigned in December 2020 affected the implementation of resettling project affected persons (PAPs).

Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial based on the economic returns of the project
investments at closing. The administrative and operational efficiency of the project, while noting reductions in
the project's ambition and implementation delays did almost use up all of the resources on time.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               34.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project's objectives is substantial because the PDOs were relevant to both the country's
plans and the Bank's reengagement strategy embodied in its partnership framework. The efficacy of the project
to achieve its objectives is overall rated substantial with moderate shortcomings. The outcomes achieved for
both capacity and investments were limited to the roads rehabilitated and did not include the institutionalization
of the accountability built by the project interventions. Efficiency is rated Substantial. The overall outcome of the
project is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of the moderate shortcomings in evidence on higher level
outcomes.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the outcomes achieved by the project:

       Political and economic risks. This is a high risk. Somalia continues to experience armed conflict.
        The institutions remain weak and vulnerable, and this had affected project implementation. There is a

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



    provisional 2011 Constitution in place. The federal government was established in 2012. Five new
    Federal Member States were formed subsequently. Somalia’s new federal map created a new, albeit
    incomplete political development space. Somalia continues to rebuild economic institutions but
    the incomplete political process jeopardize the recovery from fragility. These risks are to be mitigated
    by the Bank's reengagement strategy focusing in two areas to address the structural drivers of
    fragility: (i) building institutions to deliver services, and (ii) restoring economic resilience and
    opportunities. 
   Risks from environmental and natural hazards, including the pandemic. This remains a high
    risk. In this project, implementation delays and increase in construction costs were attributed to
    COVID-19, which restricted mobility and caused supply chain disruptions. Works in Garowe were
    completed by March 2021 (ICR, footnote 29). Heavy rains in 2019 and 2020 damaged completed
    works, hampered access to material, and delayed the works. The country’s high exposure to
    repeated climate change-related shocks poses risks to development outcomes. To mitigate this risk,
    the government committed to building resilience in its national plans and mirrored in the World Bank’s
    Country Partnership Framework for Somalia (FY19–FY22).
   Risk from the adequacy of the financing modality. This project was part of a set of projects with
    the next phase dependent on completing the preceding phase. The minimal funding envelope (US$9
    million) of this phase tested the studies that were prepared, and all the funds channeled through the
    government system down to the municipal government level for the first time to show the
    strengthened capacity of the nascent national public financial management (PFM) system. This is a
    moderate risk since there is a commitment to follow through with this series of project approach by
    undertaking the next phase, the expansion of the interventions to cover two other cities.
   Security remains a significant risk, particularly for Mogadishu. This is a high risk. In this
    project, police officers were deployed to protect sites and workers. Increased security risks led to
    dropping initially prioritized districts. A PIU vehicle was attacked in July 2020. This was among
    several near misses experienced during implementation. Expanding the works to less secure districts
    led to an increase in cases where security barricades hindered transportation of construction
    materials. Access to sites by UNOPS supervision was hampered by security-related travel
    restrictions. The task team initiated monthly check-ins and weekly consultations toward the end of the
    project. To mitigate this risk, additional police officers were engaged for the protection of the project
    office and personnel. However, there is limited availability and timeliness of UN security support.
   Risk from maintaining investments. There is a high risk that the investments made will not be
    maintained after the project closes. In this project, there was a sense of ownership, some capacity
    built at the PIUs and municipalities. To mitigate this risk, subsequent projects need to provide
    incentives and recruit civil servants into the PIU. This would facilitate integration and build capacity for
    the municipality to lead implementation. The financial ability of the municipality to maintain assets is
    at risk without commitments and investments in municipal urban plans and budgets. To mitigate this
    risk, the Garowe Municipality has secured an initial O&M budget. Both cities, however, need to
    evaluate and routinely update infrastructure needs and formulate a budget and mobilize the political
    will and resources.
   Risk from externalities. This is a moderate risk. In this project, the small-scale investments did
    not increase land value to displace residents. The municipal governments need to monitor the impact
    of urban investments as the project expands to other cities. For Garowe, there is the risk that
    increased access to IDP camps may provide incentives to increase inflow and overwhelm the
    capacity to deliver limited services. To mitigate this risk, the government must remain vigilant and
    prepare for these scenarios.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team designed this project as the first phase to implement the Series of Project (SOP)
  approach of the Somalia Urban Resilience Program. The US$84 million, 7-year program reflected the
  World Bank's commitment to building institutions and urban resilience in states with Fragile, Conflict, and
  Violence (FCV) conditions like Somalia. The Somalia program would build urban resilience of key
  cities by improving their urban governance, planning, and social cohesion (PAD, paragraph 41). The
  preparatory phase laid the groundwork for establishing an implementation capacity and financed studies
  of road infrastructure investments. Phase 1 implementation was to cover the cities of Mogadishu and
  Garowe. Phase 2 was to expand to the cities of Kismayo and Baidoa. Phase 3 was to return to
  investments in Mogadishu and Garowe and waste management facilities in Hargeisa, subject to available
  funds from the multi donor trust fund for Somalia (PAD, paragraph 42).

  The project was strategically relevant to the country's development plans and the World Bank's
  reengagement strategy (see Section 3 Relevance of Objectives above). The technical, financial, and
  economic aspects were adequately assessed, as well as the environmental and social safeguards. Of
  particular importance was engaging the different vulnerable groups and establishing consultative means
  for their participation in identifying investment priorities and benefiting from temporary employment. The
  implementation arrangement focused on an area-specific PIU - one for Garowe, one for Mogadishu
  through the Barowe Regional Administration (BRA), which administers Mogadishu. The BRA was to
  manage the engineering supervision consultant for both Mogadishu and Garowe (see Section 10 Other
  Issues, (b) Fiduciary Compliance below). Risk assessments were adequate. Mitigating measures
  included supplementing the expected low capacity with training support, hiring a third-party monitor to
  assist in monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The Bank team contracted UNOPS, who sub-contracted Apex
  for the feasibility, designs, and prioritization of Mogadishu roads; and IPE Global for the Garowe roads
  (ICR, footnote 26). The scope of the investments (the roads) was area wide to mitigate social
  tensions from different vulnerable groups - refugees, returnees, IDPs, and the poor in the host beneficiary
  communities to distinguish the chronic needs of the urban poor in the host communities and the acute
  needs of those forcibly displaced (returnees, refugees, internally displaced persons or IDPs).

  Several lessons informed project design such as (i) use of government systems to strengthen local
  government institutions by building local capacity; (ii) use of a programmatic approach for flexibility; and
  an area-based approach to address the host communities' perception that IDPs and returnees, often from
  minority clans, were being favored for assistance; (iii) complementing development efforts by other
  development partners working in various sectors to maximize impact and leverage limited resources in
  countries with FCV conditions; and (iv) use of participatory decision-making to strengthen ownership
  (PAD, paragraphs 45-52).

  At entry, the Bank team sought to complement other partners in Somalia. The project originally planned
  to link with ongoing district-level Operations and Maintenance (O&M) committees that were financed by
  the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) through its Transition Initiatives for
  Stabilization (TIS+) and the United Nations Joint Program for Local Governance. However, partner
  programming had closed by the time the Bank team completed its project appraisal. New committees


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



  were to be created to support the project. Actual maintenance costs were to be funded by the
  participating municipalities, although this financing was not secured at project start.

  Overall, the Bank performance at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted seven supervision missions over the course of the 3-year implementation
 period. The Task Team Leader (TTL) was based in Nairobi with local technical support including
 engineering and procurement consultants. The co-TTL transitioned as Team Leader providing smooth
 transition. The team developed close working relationships with each PIU, implementation partners, and
 development partners throughout the life of the project (ICR, paragraph 67). This was evident in short,
 intensive missions the Bank team conducted to each PIU accompanied by truncated, achievable action
 plans with specific goals and deadlines to address implementation challenges. The corrective measures
 were framed in a learning-by-doing’ approach to build PIU capacity. The Bank team also provided
 additional training in the Bank safeguards, fiduciary, and procurement policies. The Bank team
 supplemented the lack of implementation experience by hiring a Third Party Monitor (TPM) to assist the
 PIUs to help with M&E. The TPM recommended corrective measures at the midterm and toward the end of
 the project. In an effort to establish synergy with work done by other development partners, project start
 was delayed by almost a year. Nascent local capacity was also supplemented by UNOPS’s technical
 supervision. UNOPS performance met with several implementation challenges. These included the lack of
 formal transition from the two UNOPS teams (different staff were employed), limited on-the-ground
 presence in Mogadishu due to security risks, including limited availability and timeliness of UN security
 support. Coordination across UNOPS and counterparts improved over time.

 Overall, the Bank team's performance at supervision was Satisfactory. Efforts were made to address
 security risks, lack of local capacity, shortcomings in compliance with Bank policies and procedures. The
 Bank team did not address the modest M&E system that was designed, including the need for appropriate
 indicators to reflect capacity to deliver urban services (see Section 9, M&E below).

 The overall Bank team's performance at entry is rated Satisfactory with moderate shortcomings. The Bank
 performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory with efforts to adequately address the shortcomings at
 design, except for the weak M&E system. The overall Bank performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the PIUs were to establish a project monitoring system to assess progress against indicators
 in the results framework. The PIUs were to prepare regular monthly and quarterly reports using inputs from
 the supervision agent and the Project Engineer. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system was to be
 participatory, engaging community beneficiaries of the districts – including women, youth and the displaced
 - accompanied by targets (PAD, paragraph 58). A baseline and end-line beneficiary surveys were planned.
 Case studies were to document the gender dimension, impact on vulnerable or marginalized groups,
 intercommunity dynamics between the IDPs and the host communities, and how these groups contributed
 to urban resilience. Quantitative assessments were to identify lessons to be used in designing similar
 projects in the future (PAD, paragraph 59).

 The theory of change was simply stated and limited to road investments. Indicators were adequate to
 monitor progress toward achieving the first objective and could reasonably test the links of the results
 chain. However, the ToC of objective 1 was stated simply and provided the link mainly between outputs
 and intermediate outcomes, and not necessarily the final outcomes of the project activities. The outcome
 indicators of the second objective were pitched at the level of processes and intermediate
 outputs (kilometers of road rehabilitated, number of O&M committees formed). These could have included,
 for example, impact on the social compact/state-society relations, such as those noted at closing ICR,
 paragraph 37). Some outcome indicators could have focused on tracking the effectiveness of training or the
 functionality of committees established, instead of outputs (the number of people trained or the number of
 committees formed). Results were disaggregated by location but not all targets were location-specific
 causing some confusion among the PIUs on expected outcomes for each municipality. M&E design did not
 include a Management Information System (MIS) or a GeoEnabling initiative for Monitoring and
 Supervision (GEMS) to include contract management as part of a streamlined M&E reporting.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented by the PIUs of the local governments assisted by a Third Party Monitor (TPM,
  Abyrint). Data was regularly collected by the PIUs in Mogadishu and Garowe. The TPM triangulated
  progress and issues from difficult-to-reach areas (ICR, paragraph 20) and (i) verified activities, (ii) tracked
  implementation, (iii) measured results achieved, and (iv) monitored social and environmental
  sustainability of the interventions following the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP, ICR,
  footnote 30, Section 10 Other Issues below). Both the contractor and UNOPS submitted monthly M&E
  reporting to the PIUs and the TPM confirmed its quality and reliability. Baseline and end line surveys
  were conducted as planned. The PIU initiated the adoption of the GEMS but without a project MIS or
  geo-referenced data. One firm conducted the baseline and end line surveys in both municipalities to
  reduce the risk of divergent approaches on qualitative indicators. Several outcome targets were
  exceeded because the initial targets were conservatively set (see Section 12 Lessons
  below). Beneficiaries were involved in defining target indicators, particularly in prioritizing the road
  investments. However, there was no report that beneficiaries were involved in assessing their
  achievement. Engaging females in stakeholder consultation processes provided job opportunities in civil
  works. Fair working conditions were promoted, such as sufficient and suitable toilet and washing facilities,
  separate for men and women workers (ICR, paragraph 37). The quality of the evidence would have



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



  benefited from a more evaluative tracking of the results over time, not simply updating tables.
  Weaknesses in outcome indicators, particularly with regard to Objective 1, remained unaddressed.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data informed project management and decision-making. The following TPM findings led to
  improvements by the time of the midterm review: (i) poor quality of works due to inadequate adherence
  to technical designs and workmanship standards; (ii) inadequate contract management; (iii)
  insufficient reporting on social, environmental, health and safety, and GBV/SEA risks; and (iv)
  deficiencies in community engagement, particularly with the integrity of grievance redress approaches.
  M&E data and extensive community consultations were reported to have informed the reallocation of
  resources (ICR, paragraph 33). M&E data was also used to report on achievements of targets. Noted
  shortcomings (e.g., MIS and GEMS, were not used) were to be considered for the subsequent phases of
  the program.

  Overall, the M&E is rated Substantial. There were moderate shortcomings in the M&E system’s design
  and implementation. The outcome indicators were not revised during implementation to better test the
  links in the results chain of the theory of change for the second objective to strengthen public service
  delivery. Utilization of M&E data was substantial. The M&E system as designed and implemented was
  generally sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives but was cognizant of the difficulty in
  reporting outcomes in an FCV context. At closing, the end line survey added qualitative aspects to
  support M&E use.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as a category "B" and triggered the following
   safeguards policies: OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.04 (Natural Habitat), and OP 4.11
   (Physical Cultural Heritage). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was cleared by
   the World Bank and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank website. The relatively moderate scale of
   the civil works in the urban areas meant that the anticipated adverse environmental impacts were minor,
   temporary, and confined to the construction site.

   Social safeguards: The project triggered OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The PIUs prepared
   a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with subproject-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The limited size and nature of the individual
   physical works meant moderate resettlement impacts. No physical displacement occurred in the project.
   The economic displacement was related to temporary livelihood impact on mobile vendors or roadside
   businesses during the construction (approximately for one month at a given project road section under the




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



  project). All project-affected stakeholders were compensated (105 in Mogadishu and 14 in Garowe). The
  project was not ‘gender-tagged’.

  Compliance with the safeguards was rated Satisfactory (S) or Moderately Satisfactory (MS) from project
  start but was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) in January 2021 because of the delay in
  implementing Gender-Based Violence (GBV) risk mitigation measures in Mogadishu and the findings of the
  TPM after site visits. The following GBV-related corrective measures were implemented: a GBV action plan
  was adopted, training and awareness-raising activities were conducted for the PIU, community members,
  and contracted workers; GBV service providers were identified; and a code of conduct for project workers
  was enforced. The TPM findings on labor and working conditions, occupational safety and health measures,
  grievance redress mechanism (GRM), and reporting were also addressed. Compliance with safeguards was
  rated Moderately Satisfactory by July 2021, and until the project closed (ICR, paragraph 58).

  GRMs were established at the district, contractor, and PIU levels. High illiteracy rates and the oral culture of
  the target communities resulted in almost all grievances being made orally, either in person or by telephone.
  Grievances were addressed in a transparent and inclusive manner. In Mogadishu, 130 grievances were
  recorded revolving around water drainage/flooding problems, damage to septic tanks, and access to
  households. Grievances were attributed to deficient road design. No civil works were conducted in roads
  with land disputes. All grievances were resolved by the time the project closed, except for two pre-existing
  land disputes between the municipality and landowners. In Garowe, 185 grievances were recorded during
  construction around traffic safety, air pollution, disruption to utilities (water supply and electricity), access to
  households, and engineering design. All were resolved by the time the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) were submitted on time. Audited
  annual financial statements were also submitted on time except for FY2019 and FY2020. Delays in hiring
  the firm to support the Auditor General caused the late submission. No significant audit findings were
  noted. However, the external audit report for the year ending December 31, 2020 reported the following (i)
  in FY2020, the Federal Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee (FIMSC) meetings were held twice - February
  29, 2020 and September 9, 2020 - instead of quarterly; and (ii) instances of weak payment verification
  process - one on works completion certificates and another for Puntland, where sourcing for an internet
  provider did not obtain at least three quotations or no justification for single source. Despite these findings,
  the project received an overall unqualified (clean) audit opinion (ICR, paragraph 61). The 2021 project
  audit was due for submission to the World Bank on or before June 30, 2022.

  Procurement: Procurement complied with the World Bank’s ‘Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers’
  2018 edition. The National Procurement Law was not yet fully operational, so World Bank Standard
  Procurement Documents were used. Weak contract management was observed. The PIUs were unfamiliar
  with World Bank procurement regulations. The PIUs had insufficient understanding of safeguards planning
  or monitoring requirements and lacked contract management capacity. The PIUs had limited knowledge
  of local contractors. For example, the PIUs hired local contractors who lacked safeguards management,
  reporting capacity, or experience working with design specifications. Disputes arose because of late
  completion of contracts; incomplete documentation or lack of budgets for changes in scope. The Bank
  team contracted UNOPS (who sub-contracted Apex for the Mogadishu roads) to prepare preliminary road
  designs but these designs did not specify drainage and utilities for each road, or the link to the overall city

                                                                                                       Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



   drainage system. Adjustments were made during implementation to accommodate community
   requests and accommodate existing drainage and utilities. Rainwater flooded neighboring houses or other
   roads because these were now lower than the rehabilitated roads. In Mogadishu, poor adherence to
   technical designs, poor workmanship, and insufficient supervision by both the UNOPS and the PIU led to
   problems with the quality of some of the works. All procurement-related transactions required prior review.
   Procurement improved over time except when COVID19 emerged. Mitigation measures included allowing
   the electronic submission and subsequent opening of bids/proposals.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Limited evidence on higher-level
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   development outcomes.
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The operation resulted in 7 lessons (ICR, paragraphs 74-80). Five of the more important ones are
reported below with slight modifications.

      A simplified design using a decentralized implementation arrangement may also
         enhance federal capacity to build its strategic oversight. In this project, simplified
         components (infrastructure investments) and interrelated activities (capacity building, O&M,
         project management) implemented at the municipal level provided flexibility in
         implementation. Design included adaptive specifications to overcome implementation
         challenges. The municipal governments were empowered to play a central role in project
         implementation. This reduced political interference because of clear division of labor across
         different tiers of government. However, the arrangement missed an opportunity for a central
         agency, like the State Ministry of Public Works, to use the project's local design
         specifications to lay the groundwork for building road standards. Future decentralized
         implementation arrangements may find it useful to take advantage of fostering local
         capacity by also facilitating strategic oversight or establishing standards at the federal line
         ministry level.


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



 Using an international firm to design and supervise engineering works could
  supplement nascent local capacity. In this project, Somalian implementation capacity was
  still limited. Partnering with an international engineering firm supported timely project
  implementation. Building local capacity may benefit from delegating specialized functions to
  third parties while the government maintains its leadership. All stakeholders are enjoined to
  closely monitor functions assigned to third parties, how these are engaged, how well they
  deliver their services, adjusting the collaboration as needed, to ensure successful
  partnership.
 Infrastructure investments require multiyear budgeting and substantial allocations. In
  this project, the allocation was small (US$9 million). The municipal governments focused on
  small, single sector investments. The smaller, and more cohesive city of Garowe, focused on
  small investments within the city. In Mogadishu, prioritized investments were influenced by
  equity considerations. Smaller, disjointed investments were made in 17 relatively
  autonomous districts of 1 km of community road each. The investments were considered
  peace dividends with limited impact. It also created a path of addressing dependency in that
  SURP-II funding in Mogadishu continues to be allocated for the construction of outstanding
  community roads, making it difficult to embark on a more holistic urban development.
 A communications strategy may guide the use of consultations to inform project
  planning and management in an FCV context. In this project, early, inclusive, and ongoing
  consultations provided an understanding of needs by the government and the community.
  The consultations managed stakeholder expectations and helped identify project risks;
  identified complementary investments to build impact; and devised timelines to monitor
  implementation targets. The benefits of community consultations need to be informed by
  good practices so that it is not excessive or its resources are spread thinly. The project could
  also partner with existing non-governmental organizations (NGOs), other community-based
  organizations (CBOs), and the private sector to take advantage of their relevant expertise.
  For example, the project could develop contracts with utility firms on how to address
  obtrusive utilities, or explore partnerships with CBOs/NGOs to foster effective participatory
  planning. A project communication strategy may be useful to outline the flexible approaches
  to guide and document transparent engagement.
 Promoting structured and transparent approaches for the recruitment of unskilled
  labor is useful in FCV contexts. In this project, no formal procedures guided the
  recruitment of vulnerable groups as unskilled labor. Contractors approached districts to
  recruit unskilled labor based on broad typologies of vulnerability, rather than a participatory,
  criteria-based approach that targets both vulnerable and marginalized groups. For
  Mogadishu, district administrations recruited using quotas from pre-existing community
  groups (religious leaders and elders, youth, and women), which are mostly made up of
  lower-income groups. Recruitment was less organized in Garowe and relied more on
  informal recruitment through relatives or neighbors who knew that the contractor was looking
  for workers. According to female beneficiaries, woman would like more job opportunities, not
  only as cooks, sweepers, and flag person but also in laying PICB (light manual labor) in
  some sites. Additional strategies are required for promoting female employment, such as
  improving awareness of job opportunities, setting minimum quotas for women employment,
  and offering childcare services through women’s groups.




                                                                                              Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well prepared, generally followed the guidelines, and provided a detailed overview of the project.
The narrative supported the ratings. The justification for supporting the rating of supervision was well
presented. The evidence and analysis were aligned with the theory of change to help the reader better
understand project performance. It was accurate, internally consistent, and generally aligned to the PDOs. The
detailed explanations in Annex 1 were helpful as well as the supporting information found in the footnotes. The
report was candid, offering the shortcomings of the M&E system as designed and implemented as well as the
drawbacks resulting from the low expectation associated with the lack of local implementation capacity and
familiarity with Bank policies. Lessons and recommendations were derived from the operations. The annexes,
particularly Annexes 8 and 9, helped the reader understand how the project progressed. Annex 10 detailed
recommendations that is expected to strengthen the design of the subsequent operation of this Series of
Projects operation. Other impacts from the project were useful in providing additional insights into the
benefits from the project, particularly the results of the consultative processes, and its impact on engaging
vulnerable groups. A minor shortcoming was the insufficient treatment of the outcome associated with
strengthening the intergovernmental transfer system and the absence of CERC in the theory of change.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
