     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023001

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P154185                                   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Malawi                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2913                                  31-Dec-2020                                          43,654,999.25

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Aug-2016                               30-Jul-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           44,900,000.00                                   44,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            44,900,000.00                                   43,654,999.25

 Actual                                        43,658,000.00                                   43,654,999.25




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt     Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in Schedule 1 (p. 5) of the Global Partnership for Education Fund Grant Agreement, dated
   September 22, 2016, between the Republic of Malawi and the International Development Association, acting
   as Administrator, the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve the equity and quality of primary
   education service delivery in early grade levels, with an emphasis on improved accountability and functioning
   at the school level.”



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



   Following the mid-term review (March 2019), the PDO was slightly amended through a formal Level II
   restructuring, approved on October 3, 2019, and captured in an Amendment to the Grant Agreement dated
   October 9, 2019, reworded as follows: "to improve quality, equity and efficiency of primary education in
   selected districts and schools.” Despite the revision of the PDO statement in 2019, a split rating is not
   warranted. The original PDO supported three objectives: improved quality, improved equity, and improved
   accountability and functioning at the primary school level. The ICR (pp. 5-6) notes that: (i) the project's original
   intent to improve accountability and functioning at the school level was ultimately about enhancing efficiency,
   and "the PDO was revised to make this focus more explicit"; (ii) changes to the results framework "were valid
   and consistent with the original scope of the project, fully in line with the original theory of change" and meant
   to provide better measures of intermediate results and outcomes; and (iii) "the components and
   subcomponents were not revised during project implementation."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Performance-Based School Improvement Grants for Improving Promotion and
   Retention (ESIP-II reform theme 3: Learner Retention) (original estimate: $10.24 million; actual cost:
   $10.27 million, or 100 percent of estimate). A pilot in 800 schools was to test the effectiveness of various
   interventions and incentives to improve promotion and retention. Four groups of 200 schools each would
   pilot a different package of support and incentives, respectively: (a) base grant with instructions; (b) base
   grant with instructions and training/sensitization; (c) base grant with instruction and performance grant; and
   (d) base grant with instruction and performance grant with training/sensitization. Thus, half of the schools
   would be eligible for the performance grant based on their achievement of improved promotion rates, and
   half were slated to receive training and sensitization on the issues in line with best international practices.
   Schools were to use grants to develop and implement strategies to reduce repetition and dropout, with
   attention to girls' dropout rates. This design aimed to test whether incentives have an impact on
   performance or whether it is the provision of adequate resources that matters most, and was expected to
   influence the government's policy and strategy for improving retention and promotion. Reduction of
   repetition and dropout in Standards 1-4 was expected to lead to better retention and promotion rates, which,
   in turn, were expected to lead to improved learning and teaching resulting in higher achievement in the long
   run, enhancing learning outcomes.

   Component 2: Improving Equity for the Most Disadvantaged, Including Girls (ESP-II reform theme 3:
   Learner Retention; and reform theme 6: Education Access and Infrastructure) (original estimate:
   $9.60 million; actual cost: $9.60 million, or 100 percent of estimate). The component aimed to help: (i)
   reduce pupil-classroom ratios in the eight most disadvantaged districts (Kasungu, Dedza, Lilongwe Rural
   West, Mzimba South, Thyolo, Mangochi, Machinga, and Chikwawa) to ensure smaller class sizes, enabling
   a better teaching-learning environment, and (ii) reduce teaching “under the sun”/ outside open-air
   classrooms, which undercut needed conditions for teaching and learning. It was also focused on improving

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



the retention of teenage girls by improving availability of sanitary facilities, identified as a constraint for
girls. At appraisal, Malawi needed an estimated 27,000 new classrooms, including 350 schools destroyed
during the 2015 flood. The component aimed to support construction of 500 classrooms; 300 latrine blocks,
with attention to girls’ sanitation needs; and 150 water points. All new school construction was to ensure
proper access for physically disabled children. An estimated 150 communities/local artisans were to be
trained and their skills upgraded for low-cost classroom construction, building, and management.

Component 3: Improving Learning Outcomes, Accountability, and Cost-Effectiveness at School
level (ESP-II reform theme 1: Early Grade Learning; reform theme 2: Teacher Training and
Infrastructure; and reform theme 3: Learner Retention) (original estimate: $6.91 million; actual cost:
$6.87 million, or 99 percent of estimate). This component aimed to pilot cost-effective interventions
supported by the above-cited themes by building on experiences of other donors and civil society
organizations (CSOs)/non-governmental organizations, guiding teachers and headmasters at the school
level on how to improve classroom management in a resource-constrained environment, including: (i)
allocation of teachers in schools; (ii) improving accountability of teachers and pupils (empowering schools)
by using management information systems (Education MIS and Human Resources MIS) more effectively
and in a new manner (building on successful UNICEF/CSO pilots); and (iii) improving the retention of
teenage girls in Standards 6-8 through communications/awareness programs targeting communities and
mothers' groups.

Component 4: Variable Part/Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) (original estimate: $13.47
million; actual cost: $12.22 million, or 91 percent of estimate). This component aimed to support the
development, endorsement, and operationalization of strategic policy frameworks to: (a) improve the
learning environment in early grades, (b) improve retention of girls in upper primary grades, and (c) promote
efficiency measures to reduce repetition in lower primary grades. The proposed areas of focus ultimately
became the project’s three DLIs, proposed by the government and reflecting priority areas in ESIP II, and
considered “stretch” indicators, whose achievement would require institutional change. The DLIs, all
focused on the eight most disadvantaged districts, were: (a) reduction in pupil-to-qualified-teacher ratio
(PqTR) in Grades 1 and 2; (b) increase in female-to-male teacher ratio in grades 6-8; and (c) reduction in
repetition rates in lower primary grades. Moreover, the DLIs were linked to key national policy or system-
wide reforms on teacher deployment and distribution and enhanced gender equity; cost-effective measures
at the school level to reduce repetition and dropout in lower primary school; and improved internal
efficiencies at the school level.

Payments against the achievement of these “stretch” DLI indicators were to be made on a reimbursement
basis, with government pre-financing of eligible expenditures and then application for reimbursement when
a particular DLI was achieved. Year 2 targets were timed for verification to take place by March 30 to
coincide with the budget cycle. Verification of Year 3 targets was to be done in July, after the completion of
the academic year. Year 2 targets could be met early but not carried forward to the following year, while
Year 3 targets could be met early or carried forward to next year. Partial achievement of Year 3 targets
would receive partial disbursement, with the remaining balance rolled over to the next year for
reassessment and disbursement if the target was met.

Component 5: Project Management, and Sector Program Support and Coordination (original
estimate: $4.68 million; actual cost: $4.76 million, or 102 percent of estimate). This component aimed
to finance activities, core consultant staff, technical assistance, and recurrent costs related to project
management and sector program facilitation and coordination, including communication and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E), and to fund an independent verification of attainment of Year 3 targets for three DLIs

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



   under the variable part of funding. This component also aimed to finance the establishment and functioning
   of a Program Facilitation Team and capacity building of the Ministry of Education’s (MOE’s) financial
   management (FM), internal audit, and procurement units. It included support for capacity building at the
   national, district, and local (that is, school and community) levels to support project implementation, and
   development of a communications strategy and plan.



   Revisions to Components

   The project’s two restructurings notwithstanding (see Section 2e, above), there were no revisions to the
   project components as originally designed.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. Total actual cost at project closing was $43.72 million. As itemized in the ICR's Annex 3 (p. 62) and
   captured in Section 2d of this ICRR, actual costs of each of the components were very close to the original
   estimates.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was 100 percent financed by an Education for All
   Fast Track Initiative Grant (TF-A2913) in the amount of $44.9 million, which was almost fully (97 percent)
   utilized. World Bank system data presented in the ICR (pp. ii and iii) shows an actual disbursement of Trust
   Funding in the amount of $43.66 million, a slightly different amount than the total project cost presented in
   the ICR (p. 62) of $43.72 million, likely attributable to exchange rate calculations. No Borrower contribution
   was planned or provided.

   Restructuring. The project underwent two restructurings. The first one, following the March 2019 mid-term
   review and approved on October 3, 2019, revised the PDO and the results framework for purposes of clarity
   and better measurement. The second one, approved on December 23, 2020, introduced additional minor
   changes to the results framework, extended the closing date by seven months to July 30, 2021, and
   amended the implementation schedule as a consequence.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions, both in its original conception and in its
revised form, post-restructuring. The Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnosis (SCD), issued in 2018,
identified the slow pace of human development outcomes as a binding constraint to Malawi’s sustainable
growth and development and, specific to the education sector, identified constraints to learning outcomes at
the primary and secondary levels, including poor infrastructure, limited school finances, poor accountability
and transparency in school management, inequitable access, and low quality. While the SCD noted that
significant progress had been made on these fronts in preceding years, it also asserts that these challenges
remain pervasive.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



               The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. Malawi’s National
               Education Sector Investment Plan (NESIP) (2020-2030), as was the case with its
               predecessor, NESP (2007-2017), focused on three thematic areas across its education system, perfectly
               aligned with the PDO: (i) access and equity; (ii) relevance and quality; and (iii) governance and
               management. Moreover, the government's recently launched Malawi 2063 articulates a set of prioritized
               policy and programmatic actions to improve human capital outcomes to realize the vision of Malawi as an
               “inclusively wealthy and self-reliant nation.” Education sector targets set under its human capital
               development pillar include: well-equipped and staffed primary and secondary schools throughout the
               country; improved availability, accessibility, and quality education to improve learning outcomes; and
               expanded disability-friendly and gender-sensitive school infrastructure.

               Moreover, the PDO is highly relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY21-
               25. The PDO is directly aligned with the CPF's Focus Area 3, “strengthening human capital development,”
               particularly the education-specific Objective 3.2: Improving learning outcomes and skills, with a special
               focus on girls’ education and women. The CPF articulates the following interventions in support of this
               objective: (i) grow engagement in the sector, from early childhood through tertiary education to strengthen
               systems and improve learning outcomes; (ii) implement a programmatic approach to address system-wide
               inefficiencies in spending and provide targeted, needs-based financing to address low learning at the lower
               primary level and gaps between schools; and (iii) foster entrepreneurship skills through targeted vocational
               and technical training and apprenticeships. In short, the education-specific objective, together with
               intervention themes supporting its achievement, focus on improving quality, equity, and efficiency in
               Malawi’s primary education system, with the goals of improving access and learning outcomes.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of primary education in selected districts and schools

                             Rationale
                             The project supported various interventions to improve the quality of education with a focus on Malawi’s eight
                             most disadvantaged school districts. These interventions included the construction/renovation of school
                             infrastructure in order to improve the quality of the learning environment, as well as to provide adequate and
                             appropriate sanitation facilities meeting the respective needs of boys and girls. The project provided school
                             grants to 800 schools in these districts to help them implement their school improvement plans. Eligible
                             school grant expenditures included: construction/rehabilitation of low-cost learning facilities; the recruitment
                             and payment of auxiliary teachers; teaching and learning materials; motivation of teachers and learners; and
                             school governance and management. The project also supported and nurtured the design and
                             implementation of systematic learning assessments. Moreover, DLI1 provided payments in project Years 2

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



and 3 against the achievement of reductions in PqTR in Grades 1 and 2. This DLI was linked to and sought to
incentivize national reform seeking to accelerate and increase teacher deployment and to achieve a more
equitable distribution of teachers. Together, these investments in classrooms, teachers, learning materials,
and other supports were expected to result in smaller classes and improved PqTR ratios in lower grades,
creating an improved learning environment, which would, in turn, contribute to greater retention of students, a
reduction in dropout rates, and improved learning outcomes.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

Investments in infrastructure:

      A total of 500 standard classrooms were built in the eight most disadvantaged districts, fully
       achieving the target of 500. Some schools that previously had no permanent structures now have
       adequate teaching facilities, contributing to quality teaching and learning.
      A total of 1,345 low-cost learning facilities were built for lower primary schools in the eight most
       disadvantaged districts, by school communities using school grants and applying approved, low-cost
       infrastructure. This exceeded the target of 1,000 facilities. These facilities were built to reduce class
       sizes and overcrowding in schools and to prevent children from learning in open-air classrooms.
      Together the standard classrooms and low-cost learning facilities have accommodated more than
       79,500 pupils in Standards 1-4, many of whom were previously learning in a low-quality outdoor
       space.

Grants for 800 schools:

      Over and above school improvement grants provided to all schools through the government’s Primary
       School Improvement Plan, in support of a pilot to test the effectiveness of various interventions and
       incentives to improve promotion and retention, 800 schools in the eight disadvantaged districts
       received a base school grant and guidelines for the grants' use, and then were divided into four
       groups of 200 schools, receiving in addition to the base grant and guidelines, respectively: (Group 1)
       nothing additional; (Group 2) training; (Group 3) the eligibility to apply for a performance-based grant;
       and (4) both training and the eligibility to apply for a performance grant.
            o An amount of $3.56 million in base grants was provided to these 800 schools in three tranches
               over three years, FY2016/17 – 2018/19.
            o An amount of $754,303 was disbursed to 340 schools (or 85 percent of the 400 schools in the
               performance-based funding (PBF) treatment groups). While the original target was to provide
               performance-based grants to all 400 schools in the treatment group, the ICR notes that, in
               retrospect, the 100 percent target was not realistic, since eligible schools needed to apply for
               these grants and meet a set of requirements in order to qualify for them.
            o Of all the grant funding received by the 800 schools, almost 40 percent was spent on
               infrastructure; 18 percent on teaching and learning materials; 10 percent on learner and
               teacher motivation; 8 percent on continuous professional development; and 7 percent on
               governance and management. (The remaining 15 percent is reported as “other.”) These
               patterns of spending were largely consistent across the four pilot groups.

Learning assessments:


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)




     The project supported the design and administration of systematic learning assessments so
       that learning outcomes could be tracked, disseminated, and used to monitor and improve the
       effectiveness of quality improvement interventions. To this end, the following targets were 100
       percent achieved:
             o A framework for conducting low-stake zonal tests was endorsed by the Local Education Group;
               and
             o Common zonal tests were conducted in Grades 3 and 4 in the eight disadvantaged districts,
               and their results disseminated.

Teachers:

     While not made fully explicit in the ICR, the task team informed IEG during their September 23, 2022
      meeting that the project did indeed support the deployment of an increment of teachers, especially to
      the eight most disadvantaged districts. Supplemental information and data was sent to IEG in an email
      dated September 27, 2022 to substantiate this:
            o During project implementation, teacher deployment picked up substantially. From a pre-project
              (2015) baseline of 0 new teacher deployments and a pattern of highly inequitable distribution
              of new teacher deployments in previous years, between 2016 (the year of project
              effectiveness) and 2019, the government deployed a total of 18,657 new teachers to schools
              across the country: 4,645 in 2016, 4,518 in 2017, 5,927 in 2018, and 3,567 in
              2019. Recruitments in 2018 covered two cohorts of graduates of formal teacher training
              institutions, decreasing the lag between graduation and deployment from two years (in pre-
              project and early project years) to one year. Of these 18,657 new recruits, 8,458 (or 45
              percent) were deployed to the eight most disadvantaged districts, reversing the pre-project
              trend of over-deployment of new teachers to better-off/better-performing districts and to
              schools with more desirable locations. Although the project did not finance the costs of these
              new deployments, the task team noted to IEG that the project's DLI 1 (payment for
              improvements in PqTR in the eight most disadvantaged regions) incited the increased
              deployment and more equitable allocation of these new, qualified graduates.
            o Additionally, schools from these eight districts participating in the Component 1 pilot used a
              portion of their school grants (base grants and performance-based grants) to recruit 478
              auxiliary teachers (from the pool of fully qualified graduates, who were waiting to be deployed)
              and assigned most of them to lower grades to meet the PqTR targets for Grades 1 and 2.
     A total of 1,598 head teachers and deputy head teachers received training in school leadership,
      management, and improving teaching behavior, fully achieving the target of 1,600.
     By the project’s end, 84 percent of teachers in targeted schools were observed at least once a term by
      their head teachers, up from a baseline of 58 percent and slightly exceeding the target of 80
      percent.
     By the project’s end, the average teacher utilization rate for lower primary school was 52 percent. This
      is a measure of what proportion of teachers within a school are assigned to lower primary grades,
      which typically suffer from under-allocation of teachers. Not only did this fall short of the target of 62
      percent, it also represents a decline from the baseline level of 56.8 percent. The task team, in its
      September 23, 2022 meeting with IEG, clarified that this measure's denominator was all schools in
      Malawi (as opposed to the PqTR measure, whose denominator was schools in the eight most
      disadvantaged districts). The majority of auxiliary teachers hired with project-funded school grants in
      the eight most disadvantaged districts were deployed to work in lower primary classes, but the rest of
      schools nationwide were asked (under Component 3.1) to redistribute their existing pool of teachers

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



       (including those without an increment in staff), which is more difficult. Nationwide trends on this
       indicator thus hide the effect the project had on the eight most disadvantaged districts.
      The average learner attendance rate in targeted schools increased from a baseline of 62 percent to 69
       percent by the end of the project, falling short of the target of 72 percent.



Outcomes

      The PqTR in grades 1-2 in the eight most disadvantaged districts decreased by 35 percent, from a
         baseline of 166:1 to 107.3:1, exceeding the target of a 20 percent reduction (or a ratio of 132:1). This
         was a DLI (DLI1) and also an intermediate results indicator.
        The average teacher attendance rate in targeted schools increased from a baseline of 82 percent to
         89 percent, substantially achieving the target of 90 percent.
        While reported as a major outcome of efficiency gains (under Objective 3), the increase in promotion
         rates in lower primary grades in targeted districts (increasing from 65.4 to 68.0) exceeded the target
         of 67.4 by 23 percent, likely an outcome of investments in education quality and improvements in
         students’ attendance rates.
        Learning outcomes of students in the eight disadvantaged districts targeted by the project improved
         significantly. The Malawi Longitudinal Schools Survey (MLSS), which conducted learning
         assessments with more than 10,000 Standard 4 students across Malawi in 2016 and retested more
         than 5,000 of them (randomly selected) in 2021, reveals that during the project’s life students in the
         eight project districts achieved: a 28 percent improvement in English scores (from 476 to 609); a 27
         percent increase in Math scores (from 473 to 600); and a 26 percent increase in Chichewa scores
         (from 482 to 606). Moreover, as detailed under Objective 2: (1) the gap in scores between these
         disadvantaged districts and the 22 (better off, better performing) districts not supported under this
         project was essentially closed; and (2) the gaps between male and female students in the
         disadvantaged districts were substantially reduced.
        Schools that constructed a learning shelter with base grants or performance-based grants, and were
         able to reduce their pupil-to-classroom ratio to below 90 as a consequence, earned learning scores at
         the project’s end that were 9-12 points higher (on a mean-adjusted scale centered at 500, across
         English, Math, and Chichewa) than control schools in the same zones. This gain in learning is
         equivalent to around half a term’s additional learning.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the equity of primary education in selected districts and schools

Rationale
The project sought to address two dimensions of primary education inequities: (1) those between the most
disadvantaged school districts and the better-performing/better-off ones; and (2) those among vulnerable

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



students, who encounter particular constraints to access, retention, and success in school, especially
girls. To address the first dimension of inequities, the project targeted the eight most disadvantaged school
districts in the country. Targeting criteria weighted the needs for additional classrooms, and large classroom
sizes as measured by high pupil-classroom and PqTR ratios. Investments in quality improvements in the eight
most disadvantaged school districts were expected to reduce gaps between these districts and the 22 better-
off districts not supported under the project. To address the second dimension of inequalities, the project
factored into the design of its interventions the constraints to access faced by vulnerable students, especially
girls, with a view to lifting these constraints, improving vulnerable students' retention rates, and reducing their
dropout rates. These design features included: guidelines for the use of school grants, which included
strategies to support female learners; separate and appropriate sanitary facilities for girls and boys; efforts to
improve female-to-male teacher ratios; ramps and other infrastructure design considerations for
accommodating disabled students; and school construction to reduce travel time (and safety/security risks,
especially for girls).



Outputs and intermediate outcomes:

Closing the gap between the most disadvantaged school districts and the rest:

      Beyond their contributions to improved quality and learning outcomes, the outputs and intermediate
         outcomes supporting education quality in the eight most disadvantaged school districts (itemized
         under Objective 1) also contributed to significant reductions in gaps in quality and learning between
         the eight disadvantaged project districts and the 22 non-project, better-off, better-performing school
         districts (as itemized in Outcomes below).

Lifting constraints of girls and other vulnerable students:

      Construction of low-cost learning facilities to improve access paid particular attention to girls’
         accessibility by reducing the distance they had to travel, cognizant of the particular (safety and
         security) challenges this posed for girls.
        Newly constructed schools under the project took steps to ensure accessibility for children with
         physical disabilities, including ramps and other accommodations.
        Construction of low-cost learning facilities included 542 change rooms for girls’ sanitary needs to
         enhance retention rates in upper classes.
        A total of 330 sanitary facilities were constructed in target schools to respond to the needs of boys and
         girls, exceeding the original target of 300 and substantially achieving the revised target of
         342. Of these:
               o 115 sanitary blocks were for boys, fully achieving the target of 114; and
               o 215 sanitary blocks were for girls, substantially (94 percent) achieving the target of
                  228. This addressed a significant and acknowledged constraint in Malawi to girls' retention in
                  upper grades: access to adequate and appropriate sanitary facilities.
        The project supported mothers’ groups to encourage female attendance and retention.
        Female-to-male teacher ratio in Grades 6-8 in the eight most disadvantaged districts increased from a
         baseline of 0.31:1 to 0.34:1, fully achieving the DLI Year 2020 target of 34:1. By 2021 (the project's
         extended year), the ratio increased to 0.37:1, exceeding the target of 0.34:1, even though the DLI
         reimbursements process was no longer in effect. Endline ratios range across the eight districts from a

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



       low of 31.1 (Chikwawa and Dedza districts) to a high of 0.46 (Lilongwe R. West). Evidence indicates
       that gender-sensitive school environments benefit the participation of both genders, particularly
       girls. As such, this achievement contributes to Objective 1 (improved quality), as well as this
       Objective.



Outcomes

The project culminated in the closing of performance gaps between the most disadvantaged and better-off
school districts and between girls and boys.

      Prior to the project (Education Management Information System [EMIS] 2015), the average school
       PqTR in the eight project districts (all grades) was 20 percent higher than in the non-project districts
       (87:1 versus 72:1). By the project’s end (EMIS 2020), the PqTR in the eight districts was just
       3 percentage points higher than in non-project districts (72:1 versus 69:1). While both project and non-
       project districts made progress on this front, regression results show that PqTRs for Standards 1 and
       2 declined by 25 students per teacher more in project than non-project districts. Evidence suggests
       that these improved ratios are likely to have contributed to substantial improvements in test scores
       within project districts (reported below). Forthcoming analysis will assess the learning impact of these
       reductions.
      Not only did learning assessment scores of students in the eight disadvantaged districts improve
       significantly between 2016 and 2021 (see Objective 1), the differential between these scores and
       those of students residing in the 22 (better-off/better-performing) non-project districts was virtually
       eliminated. In 2016, students’ baseline scores in the eight disadvantaged districts lagged behind those
       of students in the other districts by an average of 35 points: 36 in English, 39 in Math, and 31 in
       Chechewa. By the project’s end, the gap was virtually eliminated, with only a 3-point average gap,
       with average scores in the disadvantaged districts slightly better than those in the 22 better-off
       districts.
      According to an email sent by the task team on September 27, 2022, a disaggregation of scores by
       gender reveals that between 2016 and 2021 girls in the eight most disadvantaged districts fully caught
       up to the level of students' scores in the 22 better-off, non-project districts, and boys in the eight most
       disadvantaged districts actually surpassed the scores achieved in the 22 non-project
       districts. Supplemental data sent by the task team on September 29, substantiate these findings. In
       the eight most disadvantaged districts supported by the project, female students' overall scores
       (across Math, English, and Chichewa) rose from an average of 391 in 2016 to 590 in 2021, and male
       students' scores rose from an average of 406 to 596. During this same timeframe, female students'
       scores in the 22 non-project better-off districts rose from an average of 422 to 587, and male students'
       scores rose from an average of 424 to 588.

The decline in girls’ repetition and dropout rates slightly exceeded targets.

      Girls repetition rate in Grades 1-4 in the eight most disadvantaged districts declined from 23.20 to
       20.77, slightly exceeding the target of 20.90, and also slightly exceeding the average achieved
       for boys and girls together of 20.97.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)




      Girls’ dropout rate in Grades 5-7 in the eight most disadvantaged districts declined from 27.1 to 15.83
       percent, slightly exceeding the DLI and intermediate results target of 16 percent (101 percent
       achieved).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve accountability and functioning at the school level / improve the efficiency of primary education in
selected districts and schools

Rationale
The project supported the government's education sector priority of school empowerment through activities to
strengthen governance, efficiency, and capacity at the school level, including the implementation of the
Primary School Improvement Program. To this end, the project’s provision of grants to be used at the
discretion of schools was to contribute to the strengthening of school-based management capacity and
autonomy. Project investments to support greater parental and community awareness and involvement in
education activities was instrumental in leveraging: (i) their support and encouragement of students staying in
school and succeeding, and (ii) their monitoring of school performance (e.g., teacher and student attendance
rates) and accountability. Grants, training and guidelines, low-cost community-based constructions, and the
conduct of student learning assessments were all expected to culminate in more rigor and transparency in
school management and improved cost-effectiveness of additional classrooms, contributing to efficiency
gains at the school and community levels, including reductions in repetition rates, increased promotion rates,
and improved attendance of teachers and learners.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      Base grants and performance-based grants provided under the project (totaling $4.3 million) helped
       address, at least in part, the low level of domestic spending on schools in Malawi. Furthermore, the
       project's disbursement directly to schools to enable them to manage and account for these funds and
       use them to implement school improvement plans was an important tool for developing and nurturing
       school management capacity and autonomy at the local level and learning-by-doing.
      Construction of low-cost learning facilities (also contributing to the quality objective) constitutes a large
       improvement in the efficiency of the education system by: (i) creating a new, innovative, and replicable
       design to reduce the cost of classroom construction in Malawi; and (ii) demonstrating the importance
       of trusting and empowering schools and communities, showing how they can work together more
       effectively and efficiently to improve school infrastructure.
      Training of head teachers and deputy head teachers (detailed under Objective 1) was an important
       output of the project’s support to the government's School Leadership Program, which sought to
       strengthen school leadership and management capacity, and the management and oversight of
       teacher quality.

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)




    From a baseline of 1.8, the number of meetings schools held with parents during a school year
     increased to 2.5, falling short of the target of 3.0.
    By the end of the project, a total of 4,824 unique community members sent messages through the
     Community Dialogue Platform, of which 3,035 communicated through SMS and 1,789 through voice
     mail. This far exceeded the target of a 20 percent increase over the Year 3 baseline of 721.



Outcomes

    The share of targeted schools meeting minimum standards of the National Education Standards in the
       eight project districts increased from a baseline of 62.7 percent to 71.1 percent, falling short of the
       target of 78.4 percent, or only 54 percent achieved. The minimum standards for this indicator were: (i)
       a school having an approved School Improvement Plan (SIP) in place; (ii) demonstrable
       implementation of SIP activities through verifiable monitoring documents; (iii) open display of key
       school information to ensure transparency; and (iv) the availability of mechanisms to monitor learner
       and teacher school attendance. Initial delays in the implementation of the school leadership program
       (including training of head and deputy head teachers), combined with prolonged disruption of
       schooling during COVID, cut the implementation period short, thus undermining the achievement of
       this outcome.
      The conduct of learning assessments (reported under Objective 1) has been an important tool for
       informing the strategic management of SIPs at the school and community levels.
      Grade-wise promotion rates in lower primary grades in targeted districts reached 68 percent, up from
       a baseline of 65.4 percent, and exceeding the target of a two-point increase (or 67.4 percent). This
       achievement indicates improved internal efficiency at the school level, through strengthened
       accountability and functioning, and enhanced parent involvement, resulting in more students
       advancing through the system and lower repetition and dropouts.
      Repetition rate in Grades 1-4 in the eight most disadvantaged districts declined from 23.7 percent to
       21.40 in 2020, not achieving the DLI 3 target of 20.90 by Year 2020. However, in the project's
       extended year of 2021, the repetition rate declined further to 20.97 percent, exceeding the adjusted
       intermediate results target of 21.30.
      The dropout rate in project schools declined from 56 percent in 2015 to 49 percent in 2020.
      From a baseline of 55.4 in 2015, the survival rates in Grade 4 rose by 9.4 percentage points to 64.8
       percent. This increase was greater than that achieved by neighboring schools, whose survival rate
       rose by 7.0 percentage points (baseline: 57.2 percent; endline: 64.2 percent) (ICR estimates based on
       Malawi EMIS 2015-2020 and project data).
      Substantial improvements in average teacher attendance rates in targeted schools (reported under
       Objective 1) were also an outcome of project interventions to strengthen school management and
       leadership, which included enhanced monitoring of teacher attendance.
      The average learner attendance rate in targeted schools rose from 62.20 to 69 percent, almost
       achieving the target of 72.2 percent (or about 70 percent achieved). This outcome is a result of
       ongoing community efforts to promote attendance.
      During the September 23, 2022 meeting with IEG, the task team noted that the impact evaluation is in
       the late stages of drafting, and confirmed its finding that the PBF piloted under Component 1 did not
       add any value or have any impact on repetition rates. The team is still exploring underlying reasons



                                                                                               Page 12 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



                                    why this was the case. In the meantime, and as a result of these findings, PBF is not included in the
                                    follow-on project design.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            By the project's end, all three objectives were substantially achieved. The project improved the quality of
                            education, as evidenced by enhanced student teacher ratios, improved and less crowded classrooms, and
                            strong learning outcomes. It improved equity by closing the gaps in key quality measures between the eight
                            most disadvantaged school districts targeted by the project and the 22 better-off/better-performing districts,
                            and between girls and boys, and reduced girls' repetition and dropout rates. The project also improved school
                            management and autonomy; enhanced monitoring and evaluation for a stronger results focus and evidence-
                            based decision-making; achieved significant cost effectiveness in the expansion of low-cost classroom
                            construction without compromising on quality; and improved transparency and accountability through the
                            sharing of school performance data with communities and involving communities in school management. All
                            of these contribute to improved efficiency at the school level.

                            During the September 23, 2022 meeting between the task team and IEG, the task team shared their views of
                            the project's attribution and counterfactual as follows.

                            Attribution/Contribution. There are a number of development partners supporting education, both at the
                            national level and in sets of targeted districts different than the Bank's focus on the eight most disadvantaged
                            ones. The task team expressed confidence that the outcomes documented in the ICR, especially the
                            substantial reduction of gaps in learning outcomes between the disadvantaged districts and the 22 districts
                            not supported by the project, and between girls and boys, are directly attributable to the project. The project
                            underpinned the Bank's policy dialogue with the government and with other development partners supporting
                            education, serving as a catalyst for a more coordinated and concerted focus on pupils-to-classroom and
                            pupils-to-qualified-teacher ratios, as means (and measures) of achieving quality improvements and better
                            learning outcomes.

                            Counterfactual. In the absence of the project's development, implementation, and nationwide scale-up of a
                            well-designed school leadership training program, schools' head teachers and deputy head teachers would
                            not be equipped or supported, as they are now, to carry out regular in-classroom teacher observations, which
                            are crucial for monitoring and improving teacher performance, and teachers would not likely receive
                            systematic guidance and support to learn and improve on-the-job. Moreover, in the absence of that training
                            program, criteria for selecting school head teachers would likely not have emphasized leadership qualities, as
                            they do now. Additionally, in the absence of the project, the gaps in education quality and in learning
                            outcomes between the eight most disadvantaged districts and the other (better-off, better-performing)
                            districts, and between girls and boys, would have persisted, and Malawi's MOE and its partners would likely
                            have been less focused and less advanced on measuring, addressing, and resolving cross-district and

                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



  gender inequities. Finally, without this project's successful demonstration of low-cost, community-based
  classroom construction and its nationwide scale-up, the continued reliance on expensive classroom
  construction would have severely curtailed Malawi's capacity to build classrooms to keep up with
  demand while also ensuring a reasonably reduced pupil-to-classroom ratio.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis. The economic analysis undertaken at appraisal was limited to quantifiable economic
impact and benefits comprising: (a) government savings achieved through improved efficiencies (internal
efficiency gains); and (b) the impact of lower primary education completion probabilities on labor earnings over
the course of a standard working life (external efficiency gains). The net present value (NPV, discounted at 10
percent) was estimated to be $97.2 million for 2016-2065, in 2015 prices, based on total costs of $36.1 million
and total benefits of $133.4 million, with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 17.9 percent, very close to the ICR’s
estimate.

The end-of-project cost-benefit analysis assessed beneficiaries’ potential labor market gains (employment and
wages) achieved as a result of higher levels of retention in primary school, which were assumed to lead to
increased years of schooling. It acknowledged, but excluded from its analysis, the potential for additional labor
market outcomes for beneficiaries due to improved learning outcomes achieved under the project, which were,
in turn, assumed to lead to a higher level of cognitive skills. Based on Malawi EMIS 2015-2020 data and project
data, and taking into account the full project cost of $44.9 million and its total estimated benefits of $203.7
million (in 2021 prices), the NPV of the project was estimated at $158.8 million during 2021-26, with an
estimated IRR of 17 percent. This represents a significant return for the project's investments. Moreover, the
analysis revealed that target schools had caught up with, and even managed to outperform, their neighbors
(schools located within 4 km of project schools) in terms of student retention.

Implementation efficiency was strong overall. Factors contributing to strong efficiency included: (i) clearly
defined implementation arrangements, which laid a strong foundation for efficient project implementation; (ii)
minimal differences between planned and actual spending; (iii) project restructuring and extension, permitting
the almost-full (97 percent) utilization of project funds and the completion of all planned activities; and (iv) a
small portion of undisbursed funds at closing ($1.24 million, or 3 percent). Moreover, the new model of low-cost
community-constructed classrooms provided a considerably lower cost alternative to the more expensive
conventional classroom construction in Malawi, and enabled a more rapid and wider-scale construction of
classrooms. Compared to the standard cost of a two-classroom block of more than $40,000, the low-cost
alternative for a two-classroom block under the project was $15,000, over 60 percent cheaper.

There were also a few shortcomings in implementation efficiency, in particular initial delays in classroom
construction, and in school leadership training for head teachers and deputy head teachers. Packaging of
schools for construction activities grouping 3-5 schools together in the same geographic region made sense in
some cases, but in certain instances grouped schools that were located far apart from one another
caused difficulties and delays for contractors taking these on. The project’s extension is likely to have increased

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



associated operational costs from the government’s side. Nevertheless, the extension did enable fuller use of
funds and the completion of all key activities. Moreover, the extension was further warranted in the context of
disruptions to schooling caused by COVID-19.

Overall, the economic analysis results point to a sound investment and IRR, and implementation efficiency was
strong, albeit with a few shortcomings, justifying a substantial rating.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 17.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high. Achievement of each of the project's three objectives is
rated substantial: Objective 1 (improved quality of primary education in selected districts and schools), 2
(improved equity of primary education in selected districts and schools) and Objective 3 (improved
accountability and functioning at the school level/improved efficiency of primary education in selected districts
and schools). Project efficiency is also rated substantial. These ratings indicate that there were only minor
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement, culminating in an overall Outcome
rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (pp 29-30 and 56-58) notes that the government is fully committed to continuing the project's efforts
and sustaining the achievements made under the project. The project’s focus on institutional capacity
building and institutionalization of school-level funding has contributed significantly to sustainability. The
government’s own education policy and plan prioritize the objectives and approaches supported under this
project: quality improvements, enhanced equity across districts and gender equity, continued capacity

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



building in management and evidence-based decision-making, especially at the school level, and the
provision of direct financing to schools through school grants. The government has reported a number of
positive changes resulting from the project. Among these are increased collaboration between schools and
communities, more transparency within schools, and pledges by community chiefs to continue to discourage
child marriages and promote girls education. Continuous efforts are needed, however, in order to further
consolidate and scale up these gains.

The government faces two particular challenges in sustaining and scaling up gains made under the
project: adequate financing; and the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the education sector. On
the financing front, the World Bank is continuously engaged in the education sector through the vehicles of
three sector operations (P164223, P174329, P172627). These projects will ensure that this
project's outcomes will be maintained in overlapping districts, scaled up to include other districts, and
incorporating the lessons emanating from this project, particularly: targeting schools with the greatest needs;
community-led construction for lower costs and greater efficiency; attending to girls’ learning in lower
primary; a results-based approach; the use of program facilitation teams for effective implementation; careful
selection of an independent verification agency to verify achievements; and continued support and scale-up
of the school leadership program and of common zonal testing and display of report cards.

The COVID-19 pandemic caused Malawian schools to close for a period of five months (March 2020-
October 2020), and the establishment of strict, protective measures when students and teachers returned to
school. Even more concerning than the consequent learning loss from distance learning and catch-up
learning following the reopening of schools are the potential economic and social impacts of the pandemic
itself, which are likely to have exacerbated existing inequalities, particularly across income levels and
gender. The impact on the school feeding programs is also likely to have the deepest impact on
disadvantaged, vulnerable students. The pandemic also had the effect of reducing resources allocated to the
primary education sector to finance emergency mitigation measures. Increased dialogue with development
partners is currently focused on mitigating the pandemic's impact and on seizing the opportunity to build back
a better education system. Dialogue and continued support of development partners hold promise in building
a more resilient system and in exploring more fully the use of technology to improve basic education service
delivery. Government efforts, commitment, and financing, together with the World Bank and other partners’
continued engagement in the sector, are expected to be mutually reinforcing in ensuring growing access to
quality, equitable, and efficient primary education.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team provided technical and coordination support to the government to design a project that
  reflected national sector priorities as well as World Bank strategic priorities for Malawi. The project's
  objectives were clear and appropriate. Project design had a strong focus on the most vulnerable,
  disadvantaged populations, targeting the eight most disadvantaged school districts in the country and,
  within these districts, the lowest-performing schools and most vulnerable students, especially girls. The
  design was evidence-based, drawing on lessons and good practices, both global and particular to
  Malawi. Preparation involved extensive consultations with stakeholders (including dialogue with national
  and local actors), as well as coordination with development partners working in the country to avoid
  overlap and ensure complementarity. The appraisal involved detailed analysis and assessment of

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



  technical, economic, fiduciary, environmental, and social-related issues and risks, all of which informed
  project design and implementation arrangements. Risks were assessed and rated as substantial,
  especially with regard to implementation arrangements, M&E design, fiduciary management, and
  safeguards, with appropriate mitigation measures identified to address them.

  While the design was strong overall, there were some shortcomings in quality at entry. First, there were
  some gaps between the technical design for M&E and the project’s interventions (see Section 9 on
  M&E). Second, while the project was comprehensive in its support of needed supply-side interventions, it
  did not address all the demand-side issues. Community advocacy supported under the project did
  promote the value of education for all and for girls in particular, and addressed an important constraint to
  their access: early childhood marriages. However, there were other constraints to access and retention
  that were not addressed, including high chronic malnutrition and the opportunity cost to families of lost
  labor.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Throughout the project’s four-year implementation period, the supervision and support provided by the
 Bank team was strong, enabling early resolution of bottlenecks and successful implementation of all
 planned activities. Several factors underpinned the quality of supervision. The task team had the
 appropriate skills and experience to support implementation, including specialists in education,
 procurement, FM, and environmental and social safeguards, and economists. The team was further
 strengthened through its increased presence in Malawi, with the hiring of an International Senior Education
 Specialist and the presence of at least one local consultant in the country office, from before effectiveness
 up until the COVID-19 closures, at which point support became remote. This enabled the provision of
 critical and timely implementation support. There were three task team leaders during the project
 implementation period. Thanks to the Bank’s effective management of the team and of handovers, the
 project benefitted from continuity and consistency of support and dialogue. All of this resulted in a depth of
 knowledge provided by the task team that enhanced the quality of supervision. Through its regular
 supervisions, aides-memoire, and internal supervision reporting, the Bank team was proactive and candid
 in identifying and resolving issues, together with the government. Supervision was undertaken through joint
 implementation support missions, involving other development partners supporting schools in the same
 school districts.

 The Bank’s supervision was focused on development impact. The mid-term review, conducted in March
 2019, was an in-depth exercise that identified key implementation challenges and culminated in a
 restructuring exercise that clarified the third objective (improved efficiency) and refined the results
 framework and indicators to improve its measurement. While there were a few issues with the payment of
 hired contractors, linked to their deliverables, these were properly resolved with the Bank’s
 support. Implementation experienced some delays caused by exogenous factors, such as the presidential
 elections in 2019-20, teacher strikes, and the COVID-19 pandemic during which schools were closed for
 six months. Safeguards and procurement issues encountered during the project's early years, due in



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



 significant part to delays in recruiting safeguards, procurement, and FM specialists, were adequately
 identified and corrected by the supervision team.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Both the original and the revised statements of PDOs were clear. Strong features of the M&E design
 included the following: clearly defined and measurable indicators, with some baselines and targets
 established; reliance on a combination of data sources (the independent Longitudinal Survey, the EMIS,
 and project-based M&E system, including information from inspection and FM reporting, among others
 cited in the ICR); three DLIs, also reflected as intermediate results indicators in the results framework,
 contributing to a results culture; an independent third party to monitor elements of the project and validate
 DLI achievements; and impact evaluations to assess PBF grants, the school leadership program, school
 report cards, and community mobilization. Moreover, the M&E design clearly defined roles and
 responsibilities of the various implementing agencies at national and local levels. Project monitoring was
 integrated into the government's existing M&E arrangements for the sector, rather than creating a
 dedicated, standalone system for the project.

 However, there were some shortcomings. The original results framework outlined some inputs/activities,
 outputs, and outcomes, but neither the outputs nor the outcomes in the original results framework (cost-
 effective improvements in learning outcomes, and more conducive learning environment for lower primary
 grade learners, girls, and disabled students) fully aligned with the formal PDO. The restructured results
 framework was more closely aligned with the planned activities as described in the components, and with
 the outcome indicators and the three objectives of the project. However, the choice of indicators, for both
 the original and revised PDOs, fell short of needs. On the quality objective, there were no indicators to track
 the number of teachers recruited, whether through government deployment or through the recruitment of
 auxiliary teachers with school grants, to explain the project's (and others') contributions to improved
 PqTR. Also, the number of classrooms constructed was reflected in the results framework as an outcome
 indicator and not (more appropriately) as an output. On the equity objective, there were no indicators to
 track whether and to what extent gaps in key indicators between the eight most disadvantaged districts
 supported by the project and the 22 better-off/better-performing districts were reduced.



b. M&E Implementation
  There were initial delays in securing a full-time M&E specialist to work on the program facilitation
  team. Given that some of project’s activities were the same as those already carried out by MOE, the
  projected opted to use and further strengthen existing M&E systems. To this end, the project developed

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



  guidelines to capture project activities; clearly identified the methodology for monitoring specific activities;
  agreed on roles and responsibilities of project stakeholders; and agreed on frequency of data collection,
  analysis, reporting, and dissemination. Primary Education Advisors' skills on good records management
  provided regular and sustained support to schools.

  Overall, the project’s planned M&E activities were successfully implemented. However, the project
  encountered unforeseen challenges. Issues with data quality collected in the second-round survey made
  it difficult to calculate PBF grants and caused delays in schools’ reception and timely use of these
  funds. Not all activities occurring on the ground were being sufficiently or systematically documented in
  the results framework to demonstrate progress towards targets. To address these issues,
  MOE established a task force that undertook: support of project monitoring activities, training of zonal
  education MIS officers, and collection of data from 800 schools to accelerate PBF disbursements. The
  government's deployment of a Director of Planning and Deputy Director in charge of M&E further
  strengthened the M&E task force, especially to harmonize data streams and regularly interface with the
  MLSS team. These interventions enabled disbursement of PBF grants to all qualifying schools, the
  updating of the results framework, and more regular reporting by schools and sharing of this information
  up through the system.

  In project years 3 and 4, third party monitoring of DLIs was conducted by an independent verification
  agency, but with some delay owing to complications with identifying an appropriate, qualified agency, as
  well as the COVID-19 pandemic. The independent validation report on the project’s achievement based
  on 2019/20 data recommended acceptance of the government’s claim of completion of 2019/20 DLIs and
  informed the disbursement of the remaining funds for the variable tranche.



c. M&E Utilization
  Updates were provided for almost all supervision missions and stakeholders. Relevant data and
  information conveyed updates to key education stakeholders about progress in achieving
  objectives. Reviews and discussions of these data raised issues and led to a mid-course correction,
  ultimately resulting in more accurate and reliable data and improvements in activities. Issues flagged at
  the mid-term review (mismatch between the interventions on the ground and results tracked in the
  results framework) and proposed recommendations (refining indicators through restructuring) were
  addressed in part, and implementation improved significantly post-mid-term review. Also, the (mostly)
  timely and accurate verification exercises of achievement of the project’s DLIs facilitated the
  government’s receipt of disbursements. The MLSS baseline, midline, and endline data were released
  later than planned, due to COVID-19, but these results nonetheless contributed helpful context to the
  mid-term review. Overall, data and information generated through M&E activities encouraged and
  continue to encourage increased utilization of data and evidence for decision-making in the primary
  education system and inform subsequent operations supported by the World Bank. Use of MOE’s
  existing M&E system and staff bodes well for the sustainability of M&E activities under the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                       Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B, Partial Assessment, since its activities were not expected to have
   any major adverse environmental or social impact. The Environmental Policy (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary
   Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) were triggered due to some civil works interventions, whose locations
   were not known at the design stage, to mitigate any possible social impacts. The PAD (pp. 38-39) noted
   that the government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), initially
   disclosed by MOE in Malawi and at the Bank's InfoShop on February 5, 2016, and disclosed again, after
   revisions during appraisal, in Malawi on April 29, 2016 and at the InfoShop on May 3, 2016. The ESMF
   provided specific guidance on environmental and social screening and disclosure processes of activities to
   guide the preparation of site-specific environmental and social management plans (ESMPs). In addition to
   the Environmental and Social Screening Form, the ESMF also provided a set of environmental and social
   clauses to be embedded in all contractors’ contracts for consideration during implementation of civil works.
   The ESMF recommendations were captured in the Project Implementation Manual and the legal
   documents.

   Early on, land acquisition delays posed substantial risks to the start of construction. There were also
   concerns regarding safeguards screening reports, and schools’ action plans were not guided by the
   ESMF or by the Resettlement Policy Framework developed for the project. This resulted in a failure to
   capture all safeguards issues relevant for the project. To remedy these shortcomings, a Social and
   Environmental Focal Point for the program facilitation team was hired, but with delays, to undertake: (i)
   preparation of a code of conduct for larger-scale school construction; (ii) incorporation of all ESMPs for
   activities in Component 2 into contractor bidding documents; (iii) preparation of safeguards action plans for
   Component 1 construction; (iv) review of ESMPs for subprojects to capture ESMF/Resettlement Policy
   Framework requirements and resubmit to the Bank for review; (v) budget allocation of ESMPs
   implementation; (v) processing and finalization of land acquisition plans for subprojects; (vii) development of
   a safeguards implementation and monitoring plan; and (viii) integration of environmental and social
   safeguards reports to the quarterly report.

   There were no major environmental safeguards issues during most of the implementation period. A four-
   tiered grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was successfully developed at the school, zone, district, and
   national levels. A GRM registry tracked and recorded the status of all cases received and was shared with
   all committee members, who received adequate training on GRM case management. Some complaints
   were received from project-affected persons and were appropriately resolved. Most cases received were
   about non-payment of wages from construction sites, which were also resolved (see Section 10.b on
   fiduciary compliance).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management improved throughout implementation, with consistently satisfactory ratings from
   the project’s mid-point until closing. There were several areas underpinning strong performance. First, FM
   implementation arrangements were aligned with the principles of a common fiduciary oversight
   arrangement, focusing on strengthening of government FM systems. In the wake of serious issues in 2013
   with the Integrated FM information System, Malawi’s education sector development partners proposed that

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



FM and procurement arrangements rest outside of government structures, to the extent possible. Based on
its own assessment of FM capacity and risks, conducted at appraisal, the Bank opted to align fiduciary
arrangements with the ongoing work of the Common Fund Mechanism designed by development
partners in Malawi as a mechanism outside of government systems with a high degree of financial
oversight and control. Second, an FM specialist was recruited for the project, albeit with some
delay. This specialist, together with the additional FM staff assigned by MOE, helped ensure effective
support to project implementation. Third, flow of funds was smooth for the most part, despite initial delays
in establishing the Designated Account by the MoE. Finally, in most instances the interim financial reports
were of good quality and submitted on time, though there were occasional delays. There were also
challenges. Readiness to withdraw grant funds in the early phase of implementation was weak, and there
were significant delays in the procurement of accounting software, due to delayed recruitment of the FM
specialist.

External and internal audits were conducted bi-annually, providing valuable information for project FM. The
main issues identified by external audits included errors in the draft financial statements provided to
auditors, a missing project receipt book at the time of audit, and auditors’ questioning of costs amounting to
over $7,000 due to invalid receipts and the use of incorrect rates. In one instance the audit report was
qualified (year ending June 30, 2018) and reported several control and accountability issues for
management attention (insurance of project assets and refund of questioned costs by external
auditors). These issues were rectified.

Two fiduciary issues emerged during the project. The first was a complaint received by the Anti-Corruption
Bureau (ACB) alleging that, for some construction under Component 2, contractors had been paid for
incomplete or low-quality work. After an investigation by ACB and MOE, and the Bank’s agreement with
the findings, the contractors corrected identified defects. The second was a longstanding grievance of non-
payment of workers by a contractor conducting construction under Component 2 at two sites. This led to
conflicts between the workers and school communities centered on disagreements about construction
quality. These issues were resolved when the contractor confirmed in a letter to the Bank that all overdue
wages had been paid, backed up by proper evidence.

Procurement performance was rated moderately satisfactory during most of the implementation
period. The Procurement and Supplies Unit at MOE was assessed at appraisal for its procurement
capacity. Given the Unit's involvement in implementation of the previous education project, procurement
staff were acknowledged for their knowledge and experience working on Bank-financed operations. Key
procurement issues and risks identified centered on: (a) procurement decision delays; (b) insufficient
human resources given the workload; (c) weak capacity of procurement staff, especially on donor-funded
projects; (d) procurement planning; (e) procurement administration, including contract awards; (f) contract
management; and (g) procurement oversight. Agreed corrective measures included: regular monitoring of
the procurement process; recruitment of a fully dedicated procurement specialist; training; separate
tracking systems for procurement plan implementation and payment processing; disclosure of procurement
plans and contract awards in relevant systems; strengthening of complaint management; and
strengthening of procurement oversight through internal and external procurement and financial
audits (PAD, pp. 36-37).

Initiation of the procurement process was significantly delayed in the early phase of implementation. In
particular, the recruitment of a FM specialist was delayed, along with the recruitment of safeguards and
communication specialists, which meant that the team lacked such expertise for a while. Moreover, there
were significant delays in the processing of other key procurements, including classroom construction in

                                                                                                Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



   target schools, printing of school registers, and acquisition of tablet smartphones for data collection and
   transmission. There was a need to “re-package” classroom construction contracts, due to the geographical
   dispersion of the schools and contractors’ difficulties in traveling between them. There were also delays in
   submissions of evaluation reports for the expressions of interest for consultancy services for the school
   leadership program and software development for school data collection and the SMS platform, an
   indication that the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges Procurement (STEP) Plan was not being
   used. There were also delays in the updating of the procurement plan to reflect changes in procurement
   processing, as well as in obtaining IDA clearance of changes, in compliance with established
   procedures. Other shortcomings included a failure to upload project procurement supporting documents in
   STEP and the expiration of contracts before the processing of extensions. These occurred despite the task
   team’s advise to the client to: (a) update documents so that these would be reflected in STEP as
   “completed,” and (b) follow the Excel contract monitoring sheets to enhance contract monitoring,

   With the task team’s persistent observance and recommendations, and the government’s subsequent
   heeding of that advice, remedial action was initiated. Appropriate action was ultimately taken on every
   identified issue to mitigate negative impact on the project. “Next steps” were agreed by the task team and
   the government, and the task team provided intensive support to ensure their follow-up. Eventually, these
   actions had a positive impact on project implementation. At closing, procurement under the project was
   upgraded to satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None. All of the “Other Outcomes and Impacts” reported in the ICR were intended, as specifically
   designed under the project, and reported in Section 4 on Efficacy: (a) interventions to improve girls’ access
   to and participation in primary education, including the effort to increase the female-to-male teacher ratio;
   and (b) institutional strengthening and capacity building, including M&E capacity building, and
   strengthened school- and community-based management and autonomy.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                Some shortcomings in quality at
                                                                                entry, including gaps between
                                                                                the technical design for M&E
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                and the project’s interventions,
                                                                                and shortcomings in addressing
                                                                                demand-side interventions.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from some of the six lessons presented in the ICR, slightly
reworded by IEG to be more succinct:

      Low-cost construction is an efficient means of improving school infrastructure,
       through alliances between schools and communities, especially in low capacity
       contexts. School- and community-led construction under the project effectively addressed
       the severe shortages of classrooms, achieved at a low cost and with high quality. Training
       received by communities, together with the classroom construction experience gained under
       the project, have equipped those communities to raise their own funds, build their own
       shelters, and pave the way for more community-based construction. Seeing the evidence of
       the capacity of communities to produce high-quality classrooms at low cost, the
       government has now agreed to a significant scale-up of this approach. Malawi's National
       Education Sector Investment Plan (2020-30) adopts community construction as the standard
       approach and targets construction of 44,000 such classrooms by 2030. The ongoing
       Education Reform Program currently being supported by the Bank targets the construction of
       10,900 low-cost classrooms (at a cost of $7,000 each), targeted to schools with pupil-to-
       classroom ratios above 90.
      Communities can be highly effective in supporting changes in attitudes and practices
       that favor school attendance and retention of vulnerable, disadvantaged
       students. With project support: mothers' groups have advocated for girls and disabled
       children to go to school and for the retention of teenage girls in Standards 6 to 8; community
       chiefs have pledged to discourage early marriage, which deters girls from attending school;
       girls haves been encouraged to report any abuse, which triggered an increase in the number
       of incidences reported and in cases actually being addressed by the court, an indication of
       communities’ willingness to take these incidences of abuse seriously and address them.
      The effectiveness and efficiency of results-based financing approaches can be
       significantly enhanced with (i) the utilization of annual (versus one-time) targets; and
       (ii) the upstream consultation of potential independent verification entities and their
       methodologies. The project’s transition from one-time end-of-project DLI targets to annual
       DLI targets improved motivation and progress, demonstrating its potential to effectively
       ensure that all DLIs are achieved. Challenges experienced with the verification of Year 4
       DLIs were the result of weak methodology underpinning the verification exercise, resulting in
       a loss of confidence of the Local Education Group in the validity of the results. This points to
       the need for a more careful selection of the independent verifier moving forward, with the
       close involvement of the LEG in approving the Terms of Reference, selecting the best
       candidate, and reviewing the proposed validation methodology.

IEG’s review offers an additional lesson:

      Equity objectives are most effectively assessed by tracking and comparing the
       progress of disadvantaged districts and disadvantaged students with their better-off,
       better performing counterparts who do not suffer from the same constraints and


                                                                                                   Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



         disadvantages. A number of equity indicators and targets under this project tracked
         improvements in the disadvantaged districts over their baselines, but did not systematically
         measure the extent to which gaps in key performance and outcome indicators between the
         disadvantaged districts/vulnerable populations and their better-off counterparts were reduced
         or closed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR generated a rich set of data through a number of credible sources, including
project data, impact evaluations, the government's EMIS, surveys, and learning assessments, presented in
Annexes 4 and 6, with some of it reported in the Efficacy section (ICR, pp. 9-15).

There were two exceptions. First, The ICR did not report on where the increment of teachers came from to
explain the substantial improvements in PqTR. The task team, during its September 23, 2022 meeting with IEG,
was asked about this and provided insightful information and data, some of it in a follow-up email to IEG dated
September 27, 2022, about the various actions that were taken inside and outside of the project to this end
(detailed in Section 4, Objective 1 of this ICRR). Second, the ICR did not provide sufficient explanation of why
DLI achievements and intermediate results achievements, reporting on the same indicator, were presented
twice, some with different targets and achievements. In its September 23, 2022 meeting with IEG, the task
team explained that the DLIs' end-date was 2020, when the DLI process was completed, while intermediate
results indicator targets and achievements reported actuals at the end of the project's extended year (2021).

Quality of Analysis.

There were strong points on the quality of analysis. The efficacy section made a strong effort to assess the
entire results chain and to use the data to weave a story of how project support culminated in the achievement
of the PDOs. However, the assessment of the equity objective did not fully exploit the data provided in Annexes
4 and 6 to document more fully improvements in equity in the ICR's efficacy discussion. The ICR’s assessment
of equity documented quality and access improvements and outcomes in the disadvantaged districts, but
achievements were documented against baselines only. An assessment of the extent to which these
improvements reduced or closed the gap between these disadvantaged districts (and students), on the one
hand, and the better-off/better-performing districts (or national averages), on the other, would have provided
better confirmation of improved equity. Moreover, the task team, in a follow-up email of September 27, 2022,
provided learning outcome data disaggregated by gender and comparing performance between the eight
disadvantaged districts supported by the project and the 22 non-project districts, which shed more light on
substantial gains in equity. There were data and information in the ICR’s Annexes 4 and 6 that could have
been used more systematically in the efficacy discussion of the ICR to this end. This ICRR reviewed
and factored this data more systematically into its assessment of the equity objective. This issue is grounded in
the inadequacy of the M&E framework (both the original and the revised frameworks), whose indicators were



                                                                                                   Page 24 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Education Sector Improvement Proj (P154185)



not poised to measure trends in performance and outcome gaps between the most disadvantaged districts and
others.

Quality of Lessons. The lessons were of good quality, grounded in the ICR’s evidence, analysis, and
findings. They were also relevant to other countries focusing their efforts on improving quality, equity, and
efficiency of their primary education delivery systems.

Results Orientation. Overall, the ICR had a solid results orientation. Analysis, especially of efficacy, was well
focused on, and organized around, the three project development objectives, and explored the links in the
results chain to each of these three outcomes. As noted above, the quality of equity assessment was
undermined somewhat by the inadequacy of the indicators.

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. The various parts of the ICR were logically linked and
integrated, with findings and results mutually reinforcing, albeit with some above-cited gaps in the results
framework.

Despite the Level II revision of the PDO statement in 2019, the split rating methodology applied by the ICR was
not necessary. The original PDO supported three objectives: improved quality, improved equity, and improved
accountability and functioning at the school level. As explained in the ICR (pp. 5-6), the PDO was revised
during restructuring to make explicit that the project's intention to improve accountability and functioning at the
school level was always about enhancing efficiency, and the PDO was revised to make this more explicit. The
ICR, in its option to undertake a split methodology, did not apply it in line with the Bank's guidelines. According
to these guidelines, the split methodology must: (a) assess achievement at project completion of the original
PDO and associated outcome targets; (b) assess achievement at project completion of the revised PDO and
associated outcome targets; and then (c) weight outcome ratings of original and revised PDOs and targets in
line with disbursement shares made before and after restructuring. Instead, the ICR assessed achievement (a)
during the period prior to restructuring ("Phase 1"); and (b) during the period after restructuring ("Phase 2").

There was some repetition in the ICR's presentation. It could have been consolidated for a more succinct
presentation, without detracting from the quality of its data and analysis.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 25 of 25
