     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022916

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P152932                                     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Zimbabwe                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A1783                                   30-Jun-2019                                             9,920,043.35

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2016                                31-May-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             10,000,000.00                                     10,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               9,920,043.35                                      9,920,043.35

 Actual                                           9,920,043.35                                      9,920,043.35




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Giuseppe Iarossi            Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) is to improve control, transparency and accountability, and
   oversight in the use of public resources in the Recipient's territory.

   The project is expected to improve fiscal discipline and controls, timeliness and comprehensiveness of
   financial reports, enhance the effectiveness of internal audits, and ensure that public officials are held
   accountable for the successful implementation of Government policies.


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



   For purposes of this ICRR, the three objectives of the operation are:

         to improve control in the use of public resources,
         to improve transparency and accountability in the use of public resources, and
         to improve oversight in the use of public resources.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Financial Management and Accounting, including Integrated Financial Management and Information
   System (US$ 6.8m at appraisal, US$ 5.2m at closure): The objectives of this component are to improve
   financial reporting, strengthen fiscal controls, and enhance financial transparency.

   Financial Reporting, Internal Controls, and Internal Audit (US$ 3.2m at appraisal, US$ 1.34m at closure):
   The objective of this component is to strengthen internal oversight and controls by enhancing the
   effectiveness of internal audit to ensure compliance with rules and regulations and contribute to effective
   service delivery outcomes.

   Enhanced Accountability through Strengthening External Audit (US$ 5m at appraisal, US$ 1.6m at closure):
   This component aims to strengthen the OAG to deliver high-quality audit products on its enhanced
   mandate.

   Strengthening the Demand Side of Transparency and Accountability (US$ 3m at appraisal, US$ 0.86m at
   closure): This component aims to strengthen transparency and accountability by enhancing the Parliament's
   role in PFM.

   PFMEP Management. Amount committed US$ 2m, disbursed US$ 1m.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The Bank appraised the project at US$20m, but the Grant agreement was for US$10m. The additional
   US$10m envisaged in the PAD did not materialize; hence the Bank restructured the activities to fit into the
   envelope of US$10m.

   The Zimbabwe Reconstruction Fund, a multi-donor trust fund, funded the grant.

   There was no contribution from the Borrower.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



                                      The Bank approved the project on 24 Mar 2016. The Bank extended the original closing date of 30 Jun
                                      2019 three times, and the actual completion date was 31 May 2021. The Bank reduced the project's scope
                                      during the 2018 restructuring. The outcome indicator/target for the first objective, for example, went from
                                      actual compliance with the budget (original outcome indicator) to timeliness of budget reporting. This review
                                      does not do a split evaluation because in cases where the indicator/targets were changed, neither the
                                      original nor the changed outcome was achieved.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Because of the non-payment of arrears since 2000, the Bank suspended direct lending to Zimbabwe and
               did not approve a CPF. The primary strategy document was and remained the Interim Strategy Note (ISN)
               for FY13-FY15 – Supporting Economic Recovery for Inclusive Growth for Zimbabwe, which continues to be
               the guiding strategy document for the World Bank's engagement in Zimbabwe. The project objectives are
               highly relevant to the Bank strategy and the current government strategy as expressed in the National
               Development Strategy for 2021–2025 - Towards a Prosperous & Empowered Upper Middle-Income Society
               by 2030. In particular, both strategies stress the objective of transparency and accountability in managing
               public resources. A focus of the World Bank's interim strategy was the need to finance measures to improve
               transparency in the use of public resources through the Zimbabwe Mineral Revenue Transparency initiative
               (ISN p. 23). The government strategy stressed the need to strengthen institutions of accountability (Auditor
               General, Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission, National Prosecuting Authority, and Judicial Service
               Commission) as well as the oversight role of Parliament and the Auditor General's Office (National
               Development Strategy p. 217).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: to improve control in the use of public resources
                             The indicator used for measuring the achievement of this objective was the number of months after the end of
                             the financial year needed to prepare and report annual Consolidated Revenue Fund financial statements
                             based on Public Financial Management System (PFMS) data and reporting tools. The baseline was nine
                             months, the target was six, and the actual was twelve. There was good progress initially: eight months after
                             the end of 2017 and three months after the end of 2018 (exceeding the target). Still, COVID movement
                             restrictions led to subsequent delays in completion dates. At appraisal, the indicators adopted were good,

                                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



pragmatic, and helpful but not ideal. The indicator focused on the speed of adoption rather than on the
adoption of high-quality, consolidated statements. Speed is one indicator of quality, but not the only one. The
activities supported by the Bank would lead to achievements measured by the indicators since adopting the
new system would reduce the time to prepare the reports. So attribution is closely linked to the Bank support.

Rationale
The authorities partially completed the business planning & consolidation module, consolidating all budget
data. However, the government couldn't use the module to prepare the 2022 budget because the project
could not complete the training due to COVID-19 restrictions. The business intelligence tool is operational,
and several ministries (Ministry of Health and Child Care, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
(MoFED), Ministry of Youth, and Ministry of Industry and Commerce) are using the reports on donor-funded
projects. The project trained eight ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) on using the WebPortal,
and MoFED issued a guiding circular. However, the MDAs have not yet disclosed information on the
WebPortal. The project conducted the PFMS information technology audit, and the final report was submitted
to the MoFED for review in February 2021. The project extended PFMS Coverage to 13 statutory funds, 22
donor grants, and 32 retention funds. PFMS coverage was also initiated for donor projects. . PFMS was
successfully rolled out to districts via 63 kiosks (above the target of 30) and has strengthened district
reporting. The achievements have contributed to implementing some systems, procedures, and capacity to
improve control in the use of public resources. According to the ICR, the PDO indicator target was exceeded
for 2018 (reaching three months versus a target of 6 months) but slipped by the time of project closure and
even before COVID started (9 months in 2019 and 12 in 2020). Although the project did not fully achieve the
objective by the closing date, updated information provided by the country team shows that the FY 21
financial statements were delivered within 3 months of the year-end, 31 Mar 2022, exceeding the 6 month
target.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: Improved transparency and accountability in the use of public resources
The indicator used for this objective was the 'Coverage of internal audit as a percentage of the completed
annual internal audit work plan for the six largest spending ministries (that use at least 50% of the budget)'.
The baseline was 70%, the target 80%, and the actual was 25%. The indicator was appropriate and aligned
with the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability indicators.

Rationale
On internal audit, 22 out of 28 ministries appointed audit committees, 28 MDAs established internal audit
units, 25 internal auditors received support for accreditation under the Certified Internal Audit examination,
and 55 for the Certified Government Auditing Professional certification. The project prepared an institutional
strategic plan for implementing International Public Sector Accounting Standards) and identified
champions. The project prepared the government's Accounting Policies and Procedures Manual and
completed the Public Financial Management (PFM) Business Process Reengineering Review. It also
provided capacity building in value-for-money audits, forensic auditing, jobs evaluation, SAP, CAAT, plus
study tours in South Africa, Rwanda, Ghana, and Tanzania, and internal auditors attended annual

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



conferences at the Institute of Internal Auditors, African Federation of Institutes of Internal Auditors and East
and Southern African Association of Accountants-General. 25 internal auditors received support for
accreditation under the Certified Internal Audit examination and 55 for the Certified Government Auditing
Professional certification The project developed and implemented a new chart of accounts. Authorities
established the Central Internal Audit Unit with two directorates – Audit Assurance & Advisory Services and
Governance Risk & Compliance. The Central Internal Audit Unit also developed a strategy for 2021–2025
and Audit Charters and Guidelines for the government's internal audit units and audit committees. According
to the ICR, annual reporting deadlines were met, and reports were published on the AG's website.

Additionally, the project prepared an institutional strategy plan, developed an Accounting Procedures Manual,
an Accounting Policies Manual, and a Business Process Reengineering Report. A Central Internal Audit Unit
was established, which developed a strategy for the period 2021–2025. The project purchased computer-
assisted audit technique tools and activated the SAP Audit Module.

On external audit, according to the ICR, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) had evolved into an
influential Supreme Audit Institution, auditing 33 foreign missions and collaborating with private sector audit
firms by outsourcing audits of state enterprises and parastatals, local bodies, and ministries. The project
developed checklists for private sector audit firms, provided public sector audit firms training, developed risk
management processes, and procured computer-assisted audit techniques tools for data
extraction/analysis. The project also facilitated study tours to exchange knowledge and experiences,
conducted advanced Systems Applications and Products (SAP) training for system audits, and established a
job evaluation and career development plan for the OAG. Authorities drew from the job evaluation
to implement recommendations on salary adjustments and, in part, recommendations on career paths.

According to the ICR, all these activities improved PFM internal controls and the OAG's oversight by
strengthening the capacity of government auditors to use information systems and undertaking emergency
audits. Still, most of the activities were inputs, and a significant amount of them did not meet the final
targets. In 2020 the outcome indicator fell to 25 percent, significantly lower than the baseline (70 percent)
and much lower than the target (80 percent). The ICR attributes COVID-19 restrictions as the cause of the
decline, given that in 2019 the target was basically met (79%). Updated information received after COVID
restrictions were lifted shows that the level of internal audits has been rising back towards the pre-COVID
levels. Hence, in line with OPCS guidance regarding the impact of COVID for a project that was on track to
achieve its targets before COVID-19 and is likely to return to normal after COVID-19, the rating is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3: Improved oversight in the use of public resources
Two indicators were used for this objective. One was 'share of Public Accounts Committee recommendations
implemented by the MoFED,' and the second was 'number of months of completion and submission of the
previous FY's annual audit reports to the Parliament.' The baseline for the first indicator was 80%, the target
was 90%, and the actual was 100%. The baseline for the second was 10, the target was 6, and the actual


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



was 11. The indicators were appropriate and aligned with the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
indicators. They were appropriate to establish the contribution of the project.
Outputs:
Strengthening PAC: PAC tabled several reports in Parliament, including:
-    Report of the PAC on the Findings by the Auditor General on the 2014 Appropriation and Funds
Accounts for the Ministry of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs
-    First Report of the PAC on the Examination of the Appropriation and Fund Accounts for the Ministry of
Higher and Tertiary Education, Science and Technology Development. This report contained twelve (12)
recommendations
-    The PAC's Second Value for Money Report on Land Utilization and Management of Estates by ARDA.
The PAC made five (5) recommendations
-    Report of the PAC on the Benchmarking Visit to the Parliament of Zambia
-    Report of the PAC on the Analysis of the 2017 Auditor General's Report on Local Authorities
-    First report on compliance issued for the MoFED with three recommendations
-    First Report of the PAC on Compliance issues for the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe with five (5)
recommendations
-    MoFED submitted seven (7) Treasury Minutes to the PAC
Strengthening PBO:
-    Production of Parliament Budget Office Provision of Technical Support Procedure
-    Production of Parliament Budget Office Information Dissemination Procedure
-    Production of Parliament Budget Office Documents Analysis Procedure
-    Production of Parliamentary Budget Office Clients Charter
Enhancing the Parliament's oversight of budget execution
-Training provided to the Parliament officers, including project management staff in Project Management,
Finance, Procurement, and M&E; and Committee clerks (in Parliamentary skills, Hansard Procedures, and
Infographics).

Rationale
The project conducted pre-budget and post-budget consultation workshops with civil society organizations
across the country. A total of 1,785 citizens participated in the budget consultations conducted by Parliament
(the target was 1,380), with 55 percent of the recommendations from pre-budget consultations incorporated
by the MoFED. According to the ICR, this has improved citizen engagement in the budget process and
oversight in the use of public resources. This resulted in Zimbabwe being ranked as the 3rd most budget
transparent country in Africa in the International Budget Partnership's Open Budget Survey in 2019. In
addition, the Parliamentary Budget Office strengthened its internal capacity by hiring additional analysts with
finance/economic and accountancy backgrounds. The project provided technical support for analysis, data
visualization, and infographics software, allowing the Parliamentary Budget Office to design its
publications. Other achievements included building the capacity of members of Parliament to effectively
access, debate, analyze, influence, and disseminate budget and other financial information to key stakeholder
groups and citizens; training Parliament staff in monitoring and evaluation; developing the Public Accounts
Committee training manual, and conducting training for Members of Parliament. All this has improved,
according to the ICR, Parliament's role in PFM as demonstrated by the fact that for the first time, in 2020,
Parliament approved the budget before the start of the FY. In terms of outcome achievement, one outcome
was achieved (share of Public Accounts Committee recommendations implemented by the MoFED) while the
second was not (number of months of completion and submission of the previous FY's annual audit reports to
the Parliament). The first objective was achieved, with the target of 90% met in 2017, 2018, 2019, and



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



                            2020. In 2021, the target was surpassed at 100 percent. The second objective indicator was not achieved,
                            with a target of 6 months but an actual value of 11 even before the onset of COVID-19.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Activities achieved their goal, and systems and capacities were improved. Although the onset of COVID
                            generated delays not attributable to the project, up-to-date information shows that the project achieved its
                            objectives.

                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD states that the indirect benefits of the project will exceed the costs, even though a detailed account of
   the benefits was not presented (p.25). The ICR asserts that the project objectives of improving public financial
   management, service delivery, and better performance of PFM institutions will, over time, show benefits above
   project costs. According to the ICR, the potential savings, if sustained over time, will be more significant than
   the project cost.

   In addition, there were quantitative examples of benefits from efficient management of this project, such as
   substantial savings in the PFMS expansion contract from the original proposal of around US$1.6 million to
   around US$850,000 after negotiations. Also, the Wide Area Network connectivity contract was signed for
   US$102,000 against a projected budget of US$300,000.

   However, the project had several implementation inefficiencies. The Bank designed the project with an
   insufficient assurance of financing, which led to a reduction in the scope and an unrealistic implementation
   schedule. These factors inevitably have an impact on its efficiency. The government, at one point, used only
   10% of the SAP licenses (para 108) and shut down the SAP portal in August 2018 because of $8 million in
   arrears (para 108). There was a long debate about establishing a PFMS unit (para 107). The project had
   difficulty getting the government's attention throughout (para 105). There were procurement delays,
   suppliers/consultants that didn't work out (paras 104, 116), and delays because of price variations (para
   115). Poor initial costing required multiple reallocations of resources (para 128).


   Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated high because of the close alignment with the Bank's and government's
strategy. Efficacy is rated substantial because the project improved systems and capacity and achieved the
objectives. Efficiency is rated modest because of the significant implementation inefficiencies of the project.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the DO is considered substantial for two main reasons. First, because the renegotiations of
licenses have not taken place yet - the MoFED had signed costly maintenance agreements on nearly 4,000
licenses- notwithstanding repeated requests from the Bank to find a way to reduce the annual cost of these
licenses. This can considerably limit the system usage and hence the project's impact. (At one point during
the implementation of the project, authorities only used 10 percent of the SAP licenses - ICR p. 38). Second,
there is a risk of the loss of trained staff. This problem was not considered in the project design and could
severely limit the ability to continue implementing the reforms.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Three main analytical products (Rapid PFM Assessment, 2009; Country Integrated Fiduciary Assessment
  -CIFA, 2012; and the Country Fiduciary Re-engagement Assessment, 2015) pointed out that budget
  systems in Zimbabwe lacked transparency and comprehensiveness, they were not properly integrated,
  could not produce timely and reliable financial statements to promote fiscal discipline, restricting public

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



  and legislative scrutiny of public resources. Given the changing operating environment, the Bank
  adapted the project to the evolving circumstances, as demonstrated by the restructurings.

  The project design had several shortcomings. First, the Bank did not get sufficient assurance on the
  grant amount, which led to the restructuring of the project (p.102). The scope of activities was extremely
  ambitious (providing support for "any other emerging needs in the internal audit function"– PAD p.32 and
  37) without the necessary budget commitments to be able to provide the necessary unplanned
  assistance. The number of activities supported was excessive, given the country's capacity and political
  context. (ICR page 37). The client did not play a prominent role in the design of reforms. A typical
  example was the reform of payroll that the client did not want but was part of the design (and not
  implemented). The project's appraisal value was double the Grant Agreement's value. This involved a
  significant reduction and realignment of the activities and created tensions among the parties
  involved. The design did not consider that the project implementation unit had not worked with the Bank
  for several years. Hence, it was unfamiliar with Bank procedures, especially on procurement and
  fiduciary aspects. (p. 30) Change management, recognized by the ICR as critical from project inception,
  was undertaken only two years into project implementation (p. 78). Finally, lessons from previous
  projects were incorporated, such as flexibility in implementation due to political economy considerations.

  The Bank did not foresee and mitigate at appraisal two crucial risks. One related to the high cost of
  licenses, given that the Bank was aware of the 3500 licenses already bought by the government (PAD,
  p.53), yet it included the acquisition of additional licenses in its design. (PAD, p39). A second
  unforeseen risk was the loss of qualified staff. The "Assessment of the Zimbabwe Public Finance
  Management system for investment lending projects" report -which represented the analytical
  underpinning of the project - clearly pointed out the insufficient supply of competent public finance
  management staff in the country and the "huge gap" between the approved and existing number of posts
  in the public administration. For example, "internal audit has authorized positions for 450, but only 320
  are at post". (Assessment of the Zimbabwe Public Finance Management system for investment lending
  projects, p. 8).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Although the Task Team Leader (TTL) was never based in the country and notwithstanding frequent TTL
 changes, many missions took place during project supervision. For example, in the early stages of
 implementation, the Zambia-based TTL visited Zimbabwe every month, and in 2018 the Washington, D.C.-
 based TTL visited Harare four times (ICR page 33). Weekly meetings reviewed progress and made course
 corrections. A team of experts was based in the country and received appreciation from the client. The
 transition from TTL to TTL was smooth, with one TTL contributing to the project several months after the
 reassignment to ensure and facilitate handover. According to the ICR, the Bank team was very honest in
 reporting implementation problems, presenting how they were putting the achievement of the PDO at risk
 and bringing them to the attention of management and senior government leadership. Actions were
 agreed upon and implemented between missions. In particular, the mid-term review mission provided



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



 actionable recommendations that ultimately led to the restructuring of the project. Overall, intense
 supervision was appropriate for an FCV context.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the indicators adopted were appropriate. In particular, using Public Expenditure and Financial
 Accountability indicators at baseline and completion was pragmatic and helpful. The compilation of
 indicators occurred systematically through monthly, quarterly, and annual reporting templates and
 benefitted from staff training on data collection and usage. However, the ICR noticed the adopted targets
 might have been ambitious because they did not consider that PFM reforms take time to become
 operational, a finding disputed by the first TTL. Hence rather than measuring the extent to which the
 establishment of systems, procedures and capacity building improved control, transparency, and
 accountability in the use of public resources (objective of the project), they focus on 'timeliness.' When the
 project was restructured, the Bank should have adapted the indicators better to measure progress towards
 establishing such systems.



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicators were measured regularly, supported by the PMU and the Bank. A few delays occurred
  because of coordination issues among ministries. Some inconsistencies in the measure of progress were
  identified (such as a 100% baseline and 90% target) and corrected.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Bank used M&E not only to monitor progress but also to inform project implementation, as
  evidenced by the reorganization. The data collected was used to engage with the client on progress
  achieved and to disseminate information on the project to the public through the Treasury's website.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)




a. Safeguards
   The PAD (page 27) classifies the project as Category "C" for environmental assessment purposes. Hence
   no safeguards policies were triggered. The ICR confirms this on page 36.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project used the Banks' procurement procedures in a consistent matter. The project strengthened local
   capacity through training and by working with the Bank. Some problems occurred with the STEP
   (Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement) system as this was new to both the client and the
   Bank. Similarly, some costing was not always realistic and led to the reallocation of resources among
   components. Also, some personal movements implied delays in the signature of relevant documents. The
   Office of the Auditor General reviewed the project audits and expressed an 'unqualified audit opinion' on
   the financial statements for all the years except 2016.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately                  Significant weaknesses in
Bank Performance
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              project design
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

Lessons identified in the ICR are helpful, such as (i) the need for the Bank to be more realistic in
assessing capacity constraints -recognizing that addressing capacity issues during implementation
may delay project implementation (141) - and to be more realistic in assessing initial ownership to
ensure that reforms are indeed not only feasible but also doable given the particular country
context (144), (ii) In addition to one-off training, it's important to implement a series of actions
(training champions to roll the training over, conducting refresher training, impact assessment at the


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZW-Public Financial Mgt Enhancement Proj (P152932)



end of the year to check if the knowledge acquired was being applied, leveraging peer learning, and
study tours) to ensure the sustainability of reform process. (146); (iii) the need to correctly time PFM
reforms (147); and (iv) obtain assurances of financing from the authorities before proceeding with
the design of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR provides a good account of the project design, implementation, and progress toward achieving its
outcomes. The analysis was mostly impartial, although some ratings appeared a bit 'optimistic.' Some lessons
included multiple lessons in one, were too long and did not highlight the critical insight. The ICR implemented
the split rating incorrectly, assessing the project in "phases" rather than achievement across the project's entire
lifetime against first the original and then the revised outcomes. And it used the four-point rating scale where it
should have been six, and vice versa, in several spots. Unfortunately, IEG could not reach the ICR's author
(and the last TTL of the project) to raise questions on issues not clarified by the ICR.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 12
