     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022927

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P131394                                     Reaching Out of School Children II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51660,IDA-63210,IDA-68010,IDA-          31-Dec-2017                                          148,814,922.81
 D3830

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Oct-2012                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            130,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             159,711,191.70                                                0.00

 Actual                                         151,975,527.33                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the January 10, 2013 Financing Agreement (Schedule 1,p. 4) the project’s development objective
   (PDO) was "to improve equitable access, retention and completion in quality primary education for out-of-
   school children in selected underserved areas of the Recipient's territory.”

   PDO-level indicators were slightly fine-tuned, as a part of the project’s two restructurings in 2017, and then
   added to with the introduction of a new component supporting new activities aimed at a new target group

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



   under the first Additional Financing (AF1), approved in September 2018. A split rating methodology will thus
   be undertaken to assess the project against the original PDO indicators and targets, and then against the
   PDO indicators and targets (a combination of original and new ones) in place at the time of the AF1 approval.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Sep-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Components:



   Component 1: Increasing Equitable Access (original estimate of $113.5 million + $2.5 million under
   AF2, amounting to a revised component estimate of $116.0 million; actual cost: $76.93 million) to
   reduce number of out-of-school children in selected under-served areas.

   (i) Grants and allowances subcomponent aimed to support the establishment, operation, and
   management of Learning Centers (LCs), providing grants to LCs and education allowances for students.
   Activities included enlistment of Partner Organizations, identification and mobilization of communities,
   enlistment of LC teachers, formation of Center Management Committees (CMCs), selection of eligible
   students, and approval of LC applications meeting agreed criteria and procedures. CMCs would manage
   eligible LCs with project-supported grants and financing of student uniforms, stationery, rental and
   maintenance of LC venues, and salaries for teachers and upazila-level training coordinators (TCs).
   Education allowances to incite enrollment and retention of out-of-school children in the primary cycle were
   to be provided to children: (a) from disadvantaged households; (b) between 8 and 14 years of age at time of
   enrollment; (c) with a project ID card; (d) with 80 percent attendance; and (e) passing semester exams.

   (ii) Pilot subcomponent aimed to finance LC interventions in selected urban slums and a voucher program
   for children working as domestic workers, whose education had suffered long-standing neglect. It aimed to
   support 100 LCs in 15 slums in Dhaka during the first two years, and 200 additional LCs based on the
   pilot’s evaluation. The voucher scheme was to finance student education allowances and tuition fees for
   700 child domestics. Technical assistance was to support the pilot’s design, implementation, and
   evaluation.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



Component 2: Enhancing Education Quality (original estimate of $11.3 million + $0.8 million under
AF2, amounting to a revised component estimate of $12.1 million; actual cost: $16.27 million) to
improve retention in, and completion of, the primary education cycle.

(i) Teacher development subcomponent designated Dhaka University’s Institute of Education Research
(IER) as training agency to lead foundation training, refresher training, and subject-based training, focused
on English and Math. A Quality Working Committee was to guide and oversee activities, and a TC was
responsible for coordinating teacher training in upazilas. The National Academy for Primary Education was
expected to provide inputs on LC teacher training modules (but only after a proper assessment of its
capacity), and technical assistance was also envisaged.

(ii) Classroom support subcomponent would mobilize Assistant Upazila Education Officers, head
teachers from nearby public primary schools, and upazila TCs to guide LC teachers on the use of subject
plans, teaching-learning materials, and student assessments. Textbooks were to be provided free by the
government of Bangladesh. Supplementary teaching-learning materials were to be identified and made
available to project LCs.

(iii) Pre-vocational skills training pilot sub-component was to target project students who completed at
least grade 3 and were aged 15 and above. Vouchers (covering education allowances and tuition) would
enable 5,000 eligible students to participate in existing (public and non-public) skills training programs,
including those under International Development Association (IDA)-financed projects. Technical assistance
was to support the pilot’s design, implementation, and evaluation to inform possible program expansion.



Component 3: Improving Project Management and Capacity (original estimate of $7.7 million + $2.0
million under AF2, amounting to a revised component estimate of $9.7 million; actual cost: $22.25
million) to establish an effective implementation structure and capacity.

(i) Project management and capacity building subcomponent envisaged a continuation of the
arrangements under the first project, Reaching Out of School Children I (ROSC I), with the Directorate of
Primary Education (DPE) of the Ministry of Primary and Mass Education (MOPME) serving as implementing
agency, the ROSC Steering Committee overseeing implementation, carrying out joint annual reviews, and
resolving implementation issues, and the project implementation unit (PIU) responsible for day-to-day
implementation. A new quality working committee was to guide and oversee the quality component, and a
project implementation committee, chaired by the Director-General, DPE, and composed of other key
actors, was responsible for facilitating implementation and reporting to the Steering Committee. Technical
assistance was to be provided by specialized consulting firms and by IDA.

The Upazila Education Committee was to continue to support the Upazila Education Officer (UEO) on the
coordination of activities. UEO capacity was to be enhanced through deployment of TCs. Assistant UEOs
and head teachers would be active in classroom support at the field level. Planned capacity building
activities included: (i) in-country training in management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), educational
development, procurement and financial management, and Right to Information compliance; (ii)
international training on best practices in relevant education programs; and (iii) community-level training for
CMCs.

(ii) Social awareness and advocacy sub-component sought to increase social awareness and build
advocacy on key project features, including: (i) development of a communications strategy and

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



  implementation plan; (ii) preparation and dissemination of the project operations manual, brochures,
  posters, and audio-visual materials; (iii) central and upazila-level conferences, workshops, and community-
  level meetings facilitating peer learning; (iv) training of CMC members; and (v) mobilization of the media
  (newspapers, TV, online posts).



  Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation (original estimate of $5.0 million + $1.2 million under AF2,
  amounting to a revised component estimate of $6.2 million; actual cost: $6.43 million) to establish an
  effective M&E system to monitor and evaluate the project’s performance and efficacy.

  (i) Monitoring of inputs, processes, and outputs subcomponent aimed to support: preparation of
  databases; validation of LCs by monitoring officers; preparation of quarterly self-reported LC monitoring
  forms; sample-based monitoring including compliance verification of education criteria and procedures by
  monitoring officers; public expenditure tracking surveys; internal monitoring of LCs; and regular
  management reviews. Use of SMS monitoring and data validation through smart phones was an innovation
  that was to benefit from Bank technical assistance.

  ii) Evaluation sub-component was to support a learning assessment pilot (two rounds of learning
  assessments for grades 3 and 5) and an evaluation of the impact of interventions on schooling
  outcomes. Activities included a baseline and follow-up surveys, and impact evaluations (IEs) of the various
  pilots.



  Revisions to components

  Component 5: Provide Safe and Equitable Learning Opportunities to Children and Adolescents of
  Displaced Rohingya Population (DRP) (estimate at time of AF1: $25.0 million; actual cost: $25.0
  million), added in 2018 to address education needs of 300,000 crisis-affected DRP children and
  adolescents and to strengthen service delivery in Cox’s Bazar. Four subcomponents aimed to: (1) provide
  informal education to DRP children and adolescents; (2) enhance capacity of government and local
  administration; (3) improve DRP LC teacher training facilities; and (4) undertake psycho-social activities and
  awareness building.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The total project cost was originally estimated at $137.5 million. The estimate was revised upward to
  $169.0 million reflecting the cost of a fifth component to address the education needs of the DRP, added in
  2018, and revised cost estimates for completing project activities, assessed in 2020, resulting from
  exchange rate fluctuations.

  Financing. IDA financing was comprised of (1) an original credit of SDR 86.2 million (US$130.0 million
  equivalent); (2) a first Additional Financing (AF1) of SDR 17.9 million (US$25.0 million equivalent), of which
  SDR 14.9 million ($20.84 million equivalent) was a grant and SDR 3 million ($4.16 million equivalent) was a
  credit; and (3) a second Additional Financing (AF2) of SDR 4.7 million ($6.5 million equivalent). A few days
  before project closing (June 21, 2021), the Bank approved the cancellation of 41 percent of the above-cited


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



   SDR 3.0 million grant, in the amount of SDR 1.23 million. A total of SDR 85.69 million was disbursed
   against the original credit amount of SDR 86.2 million, achieving a disbursement rate of 86 percent. Of the
   SDR 14.9 million grant approved under AF1, SDR 1.23 million was cancelled and SDR 12.00 was disbursed
   (81 percent of the original amount and 88 percent of the amended total, net of cancelled funds), while the
   SDR 3.0 million credit, also approved under AF1, was 96 percent disbursed (SDR 2.89 million
   disbursed). Eighty-six percent of the SDR 4.70 million credit approved under AF2 (or SDR 4.04 million) was
   disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution. Under the original project, government counterpart financing in the amount of $7.5
   million (or 5 percent of the original estimated cost) was anticipated, with IDA financing 95 percent. No
   additional government counterpart financing was factored into either of the two Additional
   Financings. Actual data in the ICR show no indication of any government counterpart financing being
   provided. The TTL and ICR Main Contributor, during a September 7, 2022 meeting with IEG, noted that the
   government did, indeed, provide 95 percent of its counterpart commitment (about $7.1 million
   equivalent). These funds (not reflected in ICR cost tables) financed staff salaries, office maintenance, and
   almost half of associated transportation costs.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on October 2, 2012 and became effective on January 30, 2013. Its
   mid-term review was undertaken in October 2015, and it closed on June 30, 2021, 3.5 years after the
   original closing date of December 2017.

   Restructuring and Additional Financing. The project was restructured four times and benefited from two
   Additional Financings. Two restructurings in 2017 (April and December) introduced refinements to the
   results framework and to cost estimates and allocations across components reflecting, among other things,
   the sudden, large influx of the Rohingya population in Bangladesh. The December 2017 restructuring also
   extended the original closing date by one year to December 31, 2018. AF1, approved in September 2018,
   supported a new component to address the education needs of Rohingya children, added new indicators to
   the results framework, and extended the closing date by two additional years to December 31, 2020. AF2
   was approved in December 2020 to cover a funding gap caused by expected currency exchange
   fluctuations and extended the closing date by another six months (to June 30, 2021) to make up for time
   lost during a temporary suspension due to COVID-19. Two other restructurings (approved in September
   2019 and June 24, 2021) reallocated funds, the latter cancelling a part of the IDA grant under AF1.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. While the project made considerable
headway in developing and supporting interventions and services to attract and retain out-of-school children
and to facilitate their completion rates, the ICR notes (pp. 7 and 38-39) that there still remain many more
deprived and marginalized out-of-school children residing in other under-served areas (remote upazilas,
disaster-prone areas, urban slums), who would benefit from similar support.

The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. Bangladesh’s
Education Sector Plan (ESP) for FYs 2020/21 – 2024/25, issued on December 10, 2020, supports three
goals: (1) improved access and equity for all, irrespective of gender, age, religion, ethnicity, and

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



               disadvantaged groups; (2) improved quality and relevance of education; and (3) strengthened governance
               and system management. These goals are fully aligned with the PDO and the project’s four components,
               which support, respectively, improvements in: equitable access; retention; completion rates; quality (and
               relevance to labor market needs); management capacity building; and M&E for an improved evidence
               base. The project’s focus on out-of-school children is fully aligned with the objectives under the primary
               education segment of Bangladesh’s ESP, which emphasizes the need to reach this target group. The
               strong relevance of this focus was further enhanced with the addition in 2018 of a fifth component (under
               AF1) extending coverage to displaced and vulnerable Rohingya children.

               The PDO is also highly relevant to the Bank’s current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               Bangladesh. The current CPF initially covered the period FY16-20. It was extended to FY21 following the
               Program Learning Review, which reaffirmed the continued relevance of its three pillars: growth and
               competitiveness; social inclusion; and climate and environmental management. (A new CPF for FY23-27 is
               currently under preparation, its initial preparation work delayed as a result of the COVID-19 epidemic.)
               Under its social inclusion pillar, the FY16-21 CPF supports the objective of improved equity in access and
               quality of education. The project’s focus on out-of-school children is highly supportive of this objective, as
               these children come from deprived circumstances, suffering from poverty, marginalization, residence in
               deprived areas, and employment as domestics, all of which undercut their access to quality primary
               education and their levels of achievement. The targeting of Rohingya children, under AF1, further increased
               project relevance on this front. In response to the CPF’s assessment of the inadequacy of the quality and
               relevance of education and the consequent mismatch of skills to the demands of the labor market, the
               project also focused on education quality, devoting a full component to teacher development and classroom
               support, and supporting a pre-vocational skills training pilot for targeted students who completed grade 3 (at
               least) and are aged 15 years and above.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve equitable access for out-of-school children in selected under-served areas (original outcome targets)

                             Rationale
                             The PAD did not present a Theory of Change. The one presented in the ICR (Annex 9, p. 68) captures well
                             the thrust of the original project (Components 1-4), and the fifth component introduced under AF1. This
                             rationale underpins all four Objectives, which are interlinked.

                             Component 1 of the project sought to increase equitable access by: (a) providing grants to rural LCs
                             supporting their establishment, operation, and maintenance; and (b) providing education allowances to
                             students enrolled in project LCs who (i) belonged to disadvantaged households; (ii) were between the ages of

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



8 and 14 years at the time of enrollment; (iii) had a project ID; (iv) attended 84 percent of classes; and (v)
passed semester grade exams. A total of 720,000 out-of-school children and 21,700 rural LCs in 148 upazilas
were targeted for this support. Of these, about one third (260,000 students and 8,400 LCs in 48 upazilas) had
received support under the previous project (first ROSC, P086791) and would continue to receive support
under this follow-on project; and the remaining two-thirds (approximately 450,000 out-of-school children
and13,000 rural LCs in 100 new upazilas) would receive first-time support. This component also aimed
to support a pilot in select urban slums. These interventions were expected to incite increases in the supply of
LCs and in the enrollments of disadvantaged children, thus having a direct impact on the project’s objective of
improved access among out-of-school children, especially poor, female, child domestics, and other
disadvantaged children.



Outputs and intermediate results:

Rural LCs:

      A total of 20,209 LCs were supported by the project, almost achieving the original, unchanged
       target of 21,700 (93% achieved). Selection criteria included upazilas where (i) enrollment rates were
       80 percent or less; (ii) the gender gap in net enrollment was at least two percentage points; (iii) the
       primary completion rate was 50 percent or less; and (iv) headcount poverty was about 30 percent. The
       IE confirmed the effectiveness of these criteria, given that the poorest districts had the highest number
       of LCs.
      Student attendance rate increased from a baseline of 75 percent to 85 percent by the project’s end,
       fully achieving the original, unchanged target of 85 percent.

Urban Slum LCs:

      The urban slum pilot (under the leadership of Save the Children as Specialized Agency) developed
       operational manuals and teaching-learning materials to support the establishment and operation of
       113 LCs in 21 compounds in Dhaka city, under a successful, accelerated basic non-formal education
       program.
      Under the scale-up of this program, 1,534 additional LCs in an additional 329 compounds were
       established at the community level in ten city corporation areas.

Pre-vocational training:

      A pre-vocational training pilot to deliver mobile vocational training to the rural poor and low-education
       adolescents in 13 market-driven trades was designed, implemented, and subsequently scaled up,
       based on its success. This activity included:
           o Identification and training of training providers;
           o Identification by training providers and community management committees of eligible
              trainees, who had passed the Primary Education Completion Examination, and their
              enrollment;
           o Provision of skills training vouchers to 25,000 enrolled students, covering covered education
              allowances and tuition; and



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



             o Identification of suitable locations and training centers and the establishment and equipment of
               mobile vocational training centers.



Outcomes:

Rural LCs:

     The number of out-of-school children enrolled in rural LCs rose from the baseline of 260,000 to
        687,556 by the project’s closing, reflecting a substantial (95 percent) achievement of the (original,
        unchanged) target of 720,000.
       Of these out-of-school children enrolled in LCs:
             o 49 percent were female, substantially achieving the target of 50 percent, thus preserving the
                baseline level of 50 percent; and
             o 87 percent were disadvantaged students, slightly exceeding the target of 85 percent.
             o An average of almost 7 percent of students were considered “specially abled children,” and
                about 2.5 percent were from indigenous communities.
       The IE found that:
             o 97 percent of students came from families that were considered extremely poor;
             o the vast majority of their parents’ educational qualifications were below the secondary level;
                and
             o almost 20 percent of fathers and 19 percent of mothers were illiterate.
       The IE reports that before enrolling in LCs, about 75 percent of children were out of school, 11 percent
        had gone to other schools but dropped out, and about 12 percent migrated from other schools.
       The number of student years supported increased from a baseline of 226,991 to 1,678,177,
        exceeding the target of 1,343,000. This indicator encompasses student years supported at rural LCs
        and urban slum LCs, alike. While total student enrollments at rural and urban slum LCs fell slightly
        short of targets (albeit both substantially achieved), the significant surpassing of student years
        targeted was attributable to the underestimation of the initial target. At the project’s outset, it was
        assumed that some students would start in Grade 1, while others (dropouts) would start in other
        Grades (2, 3, 4, or 5) depending on when they left school. However, the actual placement of these
        students had many more starting in Grade 1 (and other lower-than-anticipated grades) because they
        did not have the basic skills and knowledge to start at more advanced grades, thus creating more
        student years supported by the project than originally planned.
       Students’ parents reported that monthly allowances, textbooks, stationery, and uniforms lessened the
        economic burdens of families and incited attendance at project-supported LCs. Additional factors
        included the shorter distance to LCs (presumably in rural areas) and their flexible timing, suited to
        students’ needs. Teachers and communities’ improved perception of quality was also a likely factor.

Urban Slum LCs

     The urban slum pilot served about 3,200 students in Dhaka City.
     Under the scale-up of this program, in ten city corporation areas, where about 55,000 eligible out-of-
      school children aged 8-14 years were identified, 46,318 were enrolled, of which half were female.
     In total (pilot and scale-up combined), about 48,000 students participated in urban slum pilots,
      surpassing the original target of 12,000 and substantially achieving the adjusted target (under

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



       the first restructuring) of 50,000 students. While the first two bullets add up to approximately 49,000
       students, the total of about 48,000 (47,957, to be exact) was confirmed by the TTL and ICR Main
       Contributor, during a September 7, 2022 with IEG, as a more accurate figure, updated at the time of
       ICR finalization.

Pre-vocational training:

      The pilot and its subsequent scale-up phase culminated in 25,376 students from hard-to-reach
       regions, of whom 8,500 were from Cox’s Bazar, receiving 360 hours of skills development training and
       follow-up enterprise development support, by 12 training providers in 13 market-driven trades.
      The IE revealed that the largest proportion of students enrolled in the pre-vocational training program
       (39 percent) came from moderately poor families, followed by 31 percent from extremely poor
       families.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve equitable access for out-of-school children in selected under-served areas (revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
Same rationale as above, with Component 5 extending support to improve equitable access to DRP children.



Outputs and intermediate results:

Rural LCs, Urban Slum LCs, Pre-vocational Education:

      Outputs for rural LCs, urban slum LCs, and pre-vocational education are all the same as those
       reported against the original Objective 1 outcome targets. In addition, this section reports on the
       complement of outputs of the expanded project scope (Component 5, financed under AF1), which
       aimed to provide safe and equitable learning opportunities to children and adolescents of the DRP.
      At the onset of COVID, toward the end of the project, the rural LC activities had largely been
       completed, so there were no significant COVID-specific supports provided. The urban slum students
       had completed their studies at that point and were working from home, preparing for their final
       exams. They benefited from home visits of their teachers, who helped them to prepare for exams and
       ensured that those exams were properly administered. Pre-vocational training centers were allowed
       by the government to re-open very rapidly (on a much more compressed timeframe than other
       schools), thus minimizing the effect of COVID on their studies.

DRP Camp Information LCs:



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




     A total of 1,331 information LCs were supported for the DRP in Cox’s Bazar District, almost
        achieving the target of 1,500 approved in 2018 under AF1 (89 percent achieved).
       A total of 1,196 new teachers were recruited from the Cox’s Bazar local community (of which 86
        percent were female), and 3,000 teachers were trained on the use of teachers’ guides, student
        workbooks, and supplementary subject learning materials.
       Of all teachers receiving training provided by IER under the project, 1313 were assigned to LCs in
        DRP camps.
       A total of 3,000 teachers received special training in Cox's Bazar District, serving DRP children and
        adolescents, exceeding the target of 2,000 set under AF1.
       A total of 7,473 CMC members (42 percent female) received orientation on roles and responsibilities,
        including community sensitization on the importance of education for boys and girls, and support for
        DRP activities.
       A total of 1,331 consultations were held, one in each of the LCs in Cox’s Bazar District receiving
        project support.
       When in-class learning was suspended due to COVID-19, the project provided 93,229 DRP children
        (of whom 50 percent were girls) with packages supporting distance learning with caregiver support,
        and hygiene and sanitation supplies to help protect them from infection. Students continued to access
        education through home-based modalities led by 41,497 child protection focal points and volunteer
        community-based social workers, trained to provide children with psycho-social support.
       The project also helped develop, roll out, and train teachers and master trainers under a new e-
        learning platform.



Outcomes:

Rural LCs, Urban Slum LCs, Pre-vocational Education:

     Outcomes for rural LCs, urban slum LCs, and pre-vocational education are all the same as those
        reported against the original Objective 1 outcome targets. In addition, this section reports on the
        complement of outcomes achieved under Component 5 (financed under AF1).

DRP Information LCs:

     Under AF1, focused on DRP children in Cox's Bazar, 112,000 children were enrolled in 1,331
      LCs, not achieving the targets of 150,000 enrolled students in 1,500 LCs. The 1,331 LCs were
      being monitored and supported by 1,061 local center management committees following a cluster
      approach in the target district.
     Of these enrolled DRP children, half (48 percent) were female, and 0.4 percent were children with
      disabilities.
     At project completion, 234,400 DRP student years were supported, achieving two-thirds of the
      target of 350,000, established in late 2018 under AF1. Student years supported included 1.2 years of
      in-LC class learning for the 112,000 enrolled DRP students, plus one year of caregiver-led home-
      based learning for the 100,000 DRP students, who continued their studies after the onset of COVID.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




      Of the 25,376 students receiving vocational skills development training and follow-up enterprise
       support under the pre-vocational training program, 8,500 were from Cox's Bazar.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve retention rates in the primary cycle of (formerly) out-of-school children in selected under-served
areas

Rationale
Over and above its aim to improve equitable access to education, the provision under Component 1 of
education allowances to out-of-school children in disadvantaged households was expected to improve their
retention rates in primary school. These allowances covered incidental expenses associated with their
education as well as the payment of their tuition, lifting financial barriers to education. Also expected to
contribute to improved retention rates were activities supporting management strengthening under
Component 3, especially the establishment and training of CMCs, which strengthened community
involvement in school management and undertook awareness raising of parents about the importance of
education.



Outputs and intermediate results:

      Outputs and intermediate results shown under Objectives 1 (equitable access) and 4 (quality) also
       supported the achievement of this objective.



Outcomes:

Rural LCs:

      The average grade retention rate increased from a baseline of 60 percent to 83 percent at completion,
       exceeding the target of 75 percent.
      Notwithstanding a still high dropout rate, exacerbated by COVID-19, the IE revealed a significantly
       lower rate in the program area (about 10.5 percent of children dropped out of project-supported LCs),
       compared with other schools (where about 25 percent dropped out).

Urban Slum LCs




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




        The IE also revealed that the 18 percent dropout rate in LCs supported under the Urban Slum
         program was about half of the 35 percent rate for the control group, confirming the significant
         contribution of the project in urban slums.
        Moreover, the IE found that a relatively higher proportion of target children (61 percent) are currently
         studying, compared with 53 percent of children in the same age group from comparison villages and
         communities. The IE notes that this is a statistically significant difference that can be attributed to the
         project.
        To mitigate potential learning losses due to the closure of LCs during the pandemic, the project
         adopted home-based learning with practice sheets and home visits by the LC teachers and organized
         parent supervised tests for 31,000 slum LC students, to facilitate preparation for the primary
         completion exam.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve (primary cycle) completion rates of (formerly) out-of-school children in selected under-served areas

Rationale
Primary completion rates were expected to increase through a combination of financial incentives provided
under the project (student allowances and payment of tuition fees), investments in quality improvements, and
strengthening of community-based management, with increased parental information and involvement.



Outputs and intermediate results:

        Outputs and intermediate results shown under Objective 1 (equitable access) and Objective 4 (quality,
         and improved management and M&E) also supported the achievement of this objective.



Outcomes:

Rural LCs:

        Completion rate for LC students (as measured by successful passing of Grade 5 exams) increased
         from a baseline of 73 percent to 84 percent, exceeding both the original target of 75 percent, and
         the slightly increased target of 78 percent, revised under the first (April 2017) restructuring. Of the
         enrolled students, 16 percent did not complete the exam.
        The project was successful in preparing students to continue their studies at the junior secondary level
         or in pre-vocational training programs: 63.25 percent of project students were continuing their studies,



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



         of which 53 percent were at the junior secondary level, 32 percent were in secondary, and 15 percent
         were at higher secondary and above.
        Of those not continuing their studies (about 37 percent of all enrolled students), the majority (about 20
         percent) completed the Grade 5 exam, and the rest (about 16 percent of all enrolled students) did
         not. Parents reported that the greatest impediment to these students continuing their studies was
         affordability. Still, 40 percent of LC students who did not continue their studies beyond primary level
         were employed outside of the home, about five percent in agriculture, and two percent in
         business. Correlates of schooling outcomes in surveyed communities revealed in the IE included:
              o Girls are more likely to continue their studies (66 percent), compared to boys (51 percent).
              o Children living in poor families are more likely to drop out.
              o The father’s occupation impacts the likelihood that children will continue to be enrolled.
              o Dropout rates are higher for children with illiterate mothers and mothers with less than primary
                education.
        The IE found that the share of project students (sample) enrolled in schools (60 percent) compared
         favorably with those in the control group (52 percent).

Urban Slum LCs:

        Almost 70 percent of urban slum students completed the primary school cycle. Of the 27,017 students
         tracked out of 28,257 students of the urban slum program who participated in the Primary Education
         Completion Exam in 2020, 21,904 were enrolled in secondary education in 10 city corporations. The
         IE found that 65 percent of LC graduates were enrolled in secondary schools, compared with 52
         percent in the control area.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve the quality of primary education in under-served areas

Rationale
Component 2 sought to enhance education quality through teacher development, classroom support, and a
pre-vocational skills training pilot. Outputs would include: teachers having received initial foundation, annual
refresher, and specialized training; mobilized upazila-level technical resource persons providing technical
support and guidance to teachers; textbooks and learning materials; and a pilot providing pre-vocational
skills. Also contributing to improvements in education quality were activities under Components 3 and 4
aimed at strengthening management capacity and the implementation and use of learning assessments and
impact evaluations for continued improvements to education for out-of-school children. Component 3 was
expected to culminate in a working committee to guide and oversee quality and to mobilize agencies and
communities to help implementation; and trained center management committees. Component 4 was
expected to culminate in improved data quality and M&E.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




Outputs and intermediate results:

      Four IE studies were completed by the project’s closing, not achieving the PAD target of three
       baseline and four follow-up IE studies, but fully achieving the revised target of four, established
       under the first (April 2017) restructuring. These studies provided insightful information on the extent
       to which the project’s support and pilots reached the targeted population, achieved the PDOs
       (equitable access, retention, completion, and quality), and impacted the lives of the target populations.
      Teaching and learning materials were provided to project LCs and LC students through grants, in
       addition to government provision of textbooks.
      M&E capacity was strengthened with the implementation of learning assessments, impact evaluations,
       the increased use of information technology for data collection and reporting, and enhanced use of
       data and evidence for decision-making (see M&E section).
      Communities were trained and supported to be more involved in the management of urban and rural
       LCs.

Rural LCs:

      Several activities were implemented to improve education quality, including teacher training, carrying
       out of student learning assessments, and provision of pre-vocational skills-based training responding
       to market demands.
      The IER of the University of Dhaka provided a 15-day foundation training, six-day annual refresher
       training, and six-day subject-based training focused on English and Math for teachers, and a two-day
       foundation training for CMCs.
             o A total of 20,934 teachers were trained against a target of 20,000 (including 1,313 assigned to
               LCs in DRP camps), substantially achieving the original target of 21,700 teachers trained
               under the project, and the revised target under AF2, approved in 2021, of 20,000.
             o . Of the teachers trained:
                       11,743 attended foundation training for LCs; most teachers reported participating in 15-
                        day training programs, but some expressed concern that the duration was too short;
                       25,316 attended refresher training (encompassing teachers who were initially
                        recruited/identified and additional ones recruited to replace some lost through attrition);
                        and
                       247 attended subject-based training.
             o The IER and TCs, together with the head teachers of the closest government primary schools
               (all trained under the project), visited LCs regularly to provide feedback to head teachers for
               improving their skills. IER trained about 900 pool teachers to help supervise the LCs’ academic
               activities.
             o The IER trained the principal, vice-principal and teachers of the 21,000 CMCs established
               under the project on regulation writing, motivation, and classroom monitoring to strengthen
               supervision, support, and oversight of LCs. More than 60 percent of CMC foundational training
               participants were women.

Pre-vocational training:

      Under the pre-vocational training pilot and its subsequent scale-up:

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



               o Twelve training providers were selected and received training provided by Save the Children
                 on soft skills, life skills, and apprenticeship and entrepreneurship development.
                       25,376 students received 360 hours of skills development training by 12 training
                         providers in 13 market-driven trades.
                       Skills training vouchers covering education allowances, as well as tuition fees in
                         training institutes in which children were enrolled, provided to 25,000 enrolled students.
               o These 25,000 youth from hard-to-reach regions (of whom 8,500 were from Cox’s Bazar)
                 received vocational training and enterprise development support, with a special focus on
                 female youth, through mobile training centers.
               o Training providers also provided follow-up support to graduates, including technical guidance,
                 apprenticeship arrangements, entrepreneurship training, and linkages with financial institutes
                 to help graduates start their own businesses.



Outcomes:

Rural and Urban LCs:

      Systematic learning assessments were carried out at Grade 3 and Grade 5 levels. Project students
       participated in the Primary Education Completion Examination – a prerequisite for advancing from
       Grade 5 to the secondary level – in 2014, 2015, 2017, 2018, and 2019. During the last year (2019) the
       pass rate for project students was 87 percent, a notably higher rate for students from disadvantaged
       backgrounds. The Bank team, during a September 7, 2022 meeting with IEG, noted that one learning
       assessment was carried out during the project, at Grade 3 and Grade 5 levels. It was administered to
       students of rural LCs only, as they were at advanced stages of implementation at that time. (Urban
       slum LCs, on the other hand, were just starting implementation.) While the single learning
       assessment cannot provide insights or trends for the quality objective, the Bank team noted that these
       assessments will continue under the country-wide scale-up of the program, which should facilitate the
       documentation and analysis of future trends and use of these results for evaluating program
       performance and informing further improvements.
      Community members interviewed assessed rural and urban LCs’ education quality to be strong, with
       50 percent assessing it to be good and 20 percent to be very good. Seventy percent of focus group
       discussion participants and 80 percent of head teachers expressed satisfaction with LCs’
       infrastructure and learning environment.
      Most teachers reported that rural and urban CMCs met regularly and played a central role in school
       performance, with committee members communicating consistently with teachers and parents to
       ensure attendance, support exams, ensure availability of materials, etc.

Pre-vocational education:

      70 percent of the 1,250 students in the pilot phase were employed after graduation.
      A tracer study of pre-vocational training program graduates, carried out by Save the Children, found
       that:
               o 54 percent had outside employment (of which 61 percent were in the formal sector and 39
                 percent in the informal sector).


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 28
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



                                          o 45 percent were self-employed; and only five graduates were not engaged in income-
                                            generating activities.
                                          o A higher percentage of men held outside employment (68 percent), while the majority of
                                            women (63 percent) were self-employed.
                                          o Almost all of the study’s respondents reported that: (i) they could utilize the skills acquired in
                                          their current profession (98 percent); and (ii) their family situation had improved as a result of
                                          their vocational training.
                                  The project’s IE found that around 72 percent of the project-supported vocational training graduates
                                   had either outside employment or were self-employed, despite the economic downturn due to COVID-
                                   19.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was successful in reaching out-of-school children in different environments (rural, urban, and
                            older children in need of pre-vocational training) and in retaining them in school. Over two-thirds of children
                            enrolled in LCs completed the primary school cycle. Over half of LC graduates are continuing their education
                            at the secondary level. Although implementation was impacted by several exogenous events, especially the
                            influx of Rohingya children and the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the project was flexible and proactive in
                            adjusting and adapting its activities to face emerging needs. The project exceeded expectations with respect
                            to objectives 2 (retention) and 3 (completion), and substantially met expectations for objectives 1 (equitable
                            access)and 4 (quality). The majority of those receiving pre-vocational training were gainfully employed.

                            During a September 7, 2022 meeting with IEG, the Bank team provided the following assessment of the
                            project’s attribution and counterfactual. Attribution of the outcomes to the project (and its predecessor, the
                            first ROSC project (P086791)) is very strong. The Bank designed and developed, with the government, the
                            innovative, community-based model for reaching out-of-school children and supported a learning-by-doing
                            process for ongoing improvements to effectiveness, which has culminated into a government-owned program
                            that is an integral part of its current Education Sector Plan and being scaled-up country-wide. The project
                            worked in partnership with, and drew on the expertise and comparative advantages of, various development
                            partners to ensure a well-coordinated, single, coherent approach and framework. Contributing partners
                            included Save the Children, UNICEF, the United States Agency for International Development, and the
                            Government of Canada.

                            In the absence of this project (and its predecessor), many fewer (if any) out-of-school children (urban
                            and rural) would have been given access to basic and pre-vocational education. There would have been no
                            innovative, effective, community-based model that would have been tested, adapted, evaluated, and
                            refined. As a consequence, the government’s adoption of a sector-wide program for reaching out-of-school
                            children, based on this model, and its financing by the Bank and other development partners, would have


                                                                                                                                  Page 16 of 28
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



         been highly unlikely. The two million children targeted under this program would likely not have been reached,
         nor their lives enriched by the benefits of returning to school.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The rationale for the efficacy rating of the original project also applies here. Under the revised project,
         Component 5’s contributions to Objective 1 (targeting children in underserved areas) were mixed. Activities
         targeted at the DRP fell slightly short of expectations despite important progress, especially in view of the
         exogenous factors that affected implementation in its later stages, primarily COVID-19. Nevertheless, despite
         minor shortfalls in reaching the outcome targets under AF1, the strong performance of the rest of the project
         in achieving Objective 1 remains Substantial, and the efficacy ratings of the three other objectives (not
         supported under AF1) also remain unchanged. Building on the assessment of the project’s attribution and
         counterfactual assessed above under the original design, an additional observation can be made, taking into
         account the new activities introduced under AF1. In the absence of the experience and model provided under
         the project, the emergency provision of education to some 93,000 Rohingya children in refugee camps would
         likely not have been as rapid, efficient, or expansive in its coverage.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. At appraisal, the discounted value of benefits of the original project (Components 1-4)
for the base-case scenario was estimated at $340 million, and the present discounted value of costs was
estimated at $167 million (based on a discount rate of 12 percent for the benefit and cost streams). The net
present value (NPV) of program benefits was estimated at $173 million, with an associated internal rate of return
(IRR) of 22 percent. The discounted value of benefits and costs for the new Component 5, financed under AF1,
was estimated at $28.22 million and $18.99 million, respectively, while its NPV was estimated at $11-16 million
over five years, based on conservative estimates regarding repatriation efforts over two years, with an estimated
IRR of 17.5 percent.

The ex-post analysis for the original project estimated a discounted value of $336.36 million in benefits and $255
million in costs. The ex-post NPV was estimated at $80.58 million (based on a discount rate of 12 percent for the
benefit and cost streams), and the IRR was estimated as 18 percent. The ex-post discounted value of benefits
and costs for the first AF are estimated at $19.35 million and US$16.95 million, respectively, with an estimated
NPV of program benefits of US$2.40 million and an associated IRR of 16.72 percent. Only the “no-repatriation”
scenario was calculated, since no repatriation has taken place. Further, the ex-post analysis assumed that


                                                                                                         Page 17 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



Rohingya youths’ five years of increased earnings would be attributed to the education they received in the LCs
under the project (appraisal assumption), and that they would earn half of that of a local youth. Thus, the benefit
stream calculation is a conservative one and assumes the low-case scenario. No opportunity cost was included
for the Rohingya children, as they had no earning opportunity during the project period inside the DRP camps.
The quality premium is calculated as only half of that of the local children. As expected, a large part of the
benefits accrues from the wage premium for project-supported primary school completers. Actual program costs
do not constitute the largest category as they did at appraisal, in view of the huge increase in income and
associated opportunity cost.

In short, the project’s economic efficiency was Substantial. Although revised estimates generated less than the
ex-ante IRR, this was due mostly to significantly increased opportunity costs according to the Household Income
and Expenditure Survey (HIES) 2017, compared with the HIES 2010 used at appraisal. The updated data
showed a significant rise in earnings and expenditures, and in the opportunity cost of not entering the labor
force. The NPV of total program costs of the program was significantly higher ex-post than at appraisal. The
NPV of benefit streams has also increased due to higher expected income/wages.

Ex-post estimates are conservative lower-bound estimates, and do not account for externality benefits arising
from healthier, more educated workers and a more equitable, inclusive society. Neither did the analysis assign
additional benefits to primary level completers, who would have gone on to complete secondary or higher levels
of education and receive higher wages. Additionally, increased income of the graduates is assumed to continue
for 20 years (only five years for DRP), though typically a primary school completer is likely to remain active much
longer and to receive increases in income beyond the projected 20 years.

If the out-of-pocket cost (original financing) was doubled (20 percent as opposed to 10 percent as originally
assumed), the IRR (original) decreases to 17.01 percent. A similar exercise brings the IRR of the AF1 to 15.97
percent. The IRR remains significantly positive under these scenarios, although below original expectations. For
the AF1, if earnings of a graduate are calculated as equal (as opposed to half, as assumed) to those of a local
graduate, the IRR increases to as high as 44 percent (optimistic).

Implementation efficiency. The project’s implementation efficiency was substantial. While its implementation
period of 9.5 years may seem long, this was due to two factors. First, AF1 expanded the project's scope not only
in terms of the number of beneficiaries, but also through a separate, new component to help address the DRP
crisis in one of the poorest areas supported by the project. The targeted number of children increased from
12,000 to 50,000 for urban slums and by 150,000 for DRP children. At the time of this AF in 2018 (about three
years after effectiveness), the project had already disbursed US$102.24 million, or approximately 79 percent, of
the original credit. More importantly, the project had either nearly achieved or surpassed original end-of-project
PDO targets. The Rohingya crisis resulted first in a one-year closing date extension to process the AF, and then
a two-year closing date extension to implement mostly the newly introduced activities. Subsequently, COVID-19
impacted implementation when schools and LCs were closed, disrupting ongoing activities at a time of
accelerated implementation during the project's final phase. The project, nevertheless, produced important
results at a lower cost than originally estimated. Moreover, the project’s delivery model was effective in providing
education to out-of-school children through an informal, cost-effective mechanism, using established agencies in
coordination with communities and effective partnerships with international partners. Other factors
that contributed to implementation efficiency included the strong division of labor with other donors and
organizations, the use of existing institutional arrangements for implementation, and good adjustments to
changing circumstances during implementation.




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 22.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              18.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the project’s original outcome targets: The relevance of the PDO is rated high; efficacy in achieving
the PDO is rated substantial for the first objective (equitable access) and fourth objective (quality), and high for
Objectives 2 (retention) and 3 (completion); and efficiency is rated substantial. These ratings produce an
Outcome rating under the original outcome targets of Satisfactory.

Under the project’s revised outcome targets: The relevance of the PDO is rated high; achievement of the
first objective (equitable access) remains substantial, taking into account both the PDO indicators and targets
from the original design and the two additional PDO indicators and targets under AF1, and achievement of the
fourth objective (quality) was also substantial, while the ratings for the two remaining Objectives 2 and 3 (and
associated targets) remain high; and efficiency is rated substantial. These ratings also produce an Outcome
rating under the revised outcome targets of Satisfactory.

The project's overall Outcome rating is therefore Satisfactory, reflecting only minor shortcomings in the
project's preparation, implementation, and achievements.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Building on the first ROSC project, this second operation has established a successful system for reaching
vulnerable, out-of-school children. Throughout implementation, the sustainability of this program received
continuous attention and remains a high priority for the government’s goal of universal basic education, as
articulated in its National Education Plan. The government’s Primary Education Development Program 4
is currently co-financed by a US$700 million IDA Credit and by nine other development partners (Quality
Learning for All Program/P162619). This program aims to provide quality education to all children from pre-

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



primary to Grade 5 through an efficient, inclusive, and equitable system. This results-focused operation
includes a focus on the learning needs of out-of-school children, extending the delivery model supported
under this project to the country as a whole. The specific objective of the ongoing Program is to reduce the
number of 8- to 14-year-old children who have either never enrolled in school or have dropped out of school
by offering alternative education modalities up to Grade 5. It envisages the enrollment of up to one million
children in LCs following the formal primary curriculum, supporting their eligibility to take the Completion
Exam, and enabling them to continue their studies in the formal education system. Quality assurance will
involve verification of LCs, monitoring and ensuring student and teacher attendance, and adherence to
service standards. The Bureau for Non-Formal Education under the MOPME is responsible for implementing
these activities.

In short, strong government ownership of this approach (reflected in its prominence in the government’s
Education Plan and Program, and in the fact that a Bureau within MOPME is assigned responsibility for its
continued implementation), combined with the substantial resources devoted to the implementation of the
Program (both domestic and international), are strong indicators of its sustainability. Moreover, the
government has prepared a Position Paper on education support for DRPs and host communities, providing
the basis for preparation of a new project to ensure continuing support to this target group. The positive
feedback from parents and communities on their satisfaction with the project’s support, and the strong
grounding of the approach by and for communities, with support from non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), bode well for continued stakeholder and civil society support.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank’s preparation team helped design the project on the basis of an efficient model developed
  under the first operation, which had produced results both satisfactory and holding greater promise, all
  with a view to help the government respond effectively to one of its top priorities: improving access of out-
  of-school children to a quality education. During the design phase, the team reviewed and incorporated
  lessons from the earlier phase, while also gradually expanding its reach and potential through pilots of
  new initiatives (urban areas, domestic workers, pre-vocational education), which were expected to further
  enhance its impact. Risks were appropriately assessed. Indeed, the two major risks that affected the
  project (the Rohingya crisis and the pandemic) could not have been predicted at appraisal. The project’s
  M&E design was strong, especially its innovative and efficient monitoring arrangements; its
  implementation arrangements through a management information systems (MIS) Cell; a concise and well
  designed results framework; and the impact evaluations of the project and various pilots, designed to
  supplement project reporting. While not articulated in the PDO, the goals of poverty reduction and
  enhancing gender and social development were supported through the targeting of deprived, vulnerable
  populations, and the prospects of improving their success in school and in the workforce, thus potentially
  improving their incomes and potential. Fiduciary aspects were well prepared. The local-level delivery
  arrangements, complementing NGO support with strong community organization, management, and
  oversight of training, were yet another notable feature of project design, which enhanced management
  and contributed to better results.




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s joint country office- and headquarters-based team provided implementation support, which was
 timely, hands-on, and consistent. Reporting in the 16 (internal) Implementation Status and Results Reports
 and mission aides-memoire (translating into an average of one supervision mission every six months) was
 thorough, candid, and well justified. The sound implementation of M&E arrangements, supervised and
 guided by regular supervisions, ensured a strong and continued focus on development impact, with the
 generation of a rich array of relevant data through monitoring activities and impact evaluations on the
 project and its various pilots, all the while building and strengthening local capacity to collect and use
 quantitative and qualitative data to assess performance and outcomes, learn, and improve the
 effectiveness of interventions. Supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects was proactive, supporting
 corrective measures when minor issues arose. The Bank coordinated closely with teams supporting the
 design and implementation of the government’s third and fourth Primary Education Development Plans to
 ensure consistency, complementarity, and sustainability. Sustainability of interventions was addressed
 throughout the project’s implementation, and, as noted in Section 7 (Risk to Development Outcome),
 transition arrangements were well thought out and bode well for sustainability and further institutionalization
 of interventions. The Bank team was quick to respond to the government’s requests for support to address
 the needs of DRP children under a timely and well-designed AF1, and, under AF2, to respond to expected
 exchange rate losses in financing and provide proactive support to the government to provide learning
 continuity in the face of school closures due to COVID-19.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design built on the experience and capacities of the first project and aimed to further strengthen data
 collection, validation, and utilization. A separate project component supported these activities. The results
 framework was well articulated, underpinning a solid theory of change, and the project monitoring system
 was designed to track progress of well-chosen indicators, focused on inputs, processes, outputs and
 intermediate outcomes, and outcomes. Outcome indicators, along with planned impact evaluations, were
 well poised to measure the project’s outcome. The results framework indicators were feasible to collect and
 monitor.



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



 Monitoring activities were to include: (i) preparation of databases and validation of LCs for the first year of
 LC establishment; (iii) the preparation by LCs of quarterly self-reported monitoring forms to upazila-level
 TCs for their certification and submission to the PIU; (iv) quarterly sample-based monitoring of LCs’
 adherence to education criteria and procedures; (v) public expenditure tracking surveys; (vi) monitoring of
 LCs based on classroom visits; and (vii) regular management reviews of all aspects of project performance,
 including the mid-term review. The design envisaged innovative use of information technology for
 monitoring and service delivery, including SMS monitoring of grants and allowances disbursements; SMS
 monitoring of teacher attendance; smart phone use for validation of LC self-reported data; GPS mapping of
 LCs; LC report cards and websites; and post office cash cards for beneficiaries.

 Evaluation activities were to include: baseline surveys for IEs; follow-up surveys to assess impact,
 intermediate outcomes, and outcomes; IEs of pilot interventions; and a pilot of the DPE learning
 assessment system for two rounds of project student assessments for Grades 3 and 5.

 M&E implementation responsibilities were assigned to monitoring officers; a data processing and
 monitoring agency (project MIS Cell at the Local Government Engineering (LGE) Department); an SMS
 monitoring unit at the Project MIS Cell; and an independent evaluation survey firm and learning
 assessment agency.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E activities were carried out in a continuous manner, with proactive resolution of issues that arose
  through the strengthening of institutional arrangements, both in the PIU and in the field. Minor
  adjustments to the results framework for its improved streamlining were introduced in a timely
  manner. The monitoring unit under the MIS Cell provided invaluable service to help collect and monitor
  data covering over 20,000 LCs. The MIS Cell’s performance was comprehensive and timely, providing
  much data on students, teachers, LCs, and other information on a regular basis, and carrying out
  validation and periodic monitoring. The smartphone-based mobile application developed by the MIS Cell
  monitored attendance of field workers, collected monitoring reports, tracked and monitored teachers' daily
  work plans through government primary school coordination, and collated attendance summaries, among
  other aspects. Supervision and classroom observations also provided feedback on performance. Save
  the Children developed a tracer system to track progress of pre-vocational students and job placements.
  The Bank’s proactivity refined the results framework to improve monitoring.

  The pandemic delayed somewhat data collection for the IE, but the IE nevertheless provided useful
  information on the project’s impact. Methods applied included: (i) quasi-experimental, comparing project
  and comparison populations; (ii) a regression-based approach; and (iii) qualitative assessment, including
  focus group discussions, interviews, consultative meetings, and case studies. Households of project and
  comparison groups were interviewed through structured questionnaires. The Bank team conveyed to IEG
  during their September 7, 2022 meeting that M&E functions and processing are being fully sustained, in
  the context of the government’s adoption of a country-wide program based on the project model. Under
  the project, the MIS was established in the LGE Department, which had the technical expertise to carry it
  out. Under the government program, the LGE Department is providing technical support and training to
  hand this function over to Ministry of Education’s Bureau of Non-Formal Education.




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



c. M&E Utilization
  Data and information collected through M&E activities allowed for sound monitoring of the project’s
  progress and informed decisions to adjust the project’s implementation and priorities. Project monitoring
  data were used for results-based planning and implementation and for removing duplicate or other
  inappropriate entries for students from the system. LC monitoring and supervision supported the
  teaching-learning process as a means of tracking and enhancing education quality. LC report cards
  were prepared by the PIU, presented on its website, and disseminated through local education offices to
  LCs, CMCs, and parents to inform their decisions and priorities. The IE team found the data collected by
  the MIS Cell to be extremely helpful.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Bank’s task team confirmed to IEG (during their September 7, 2022 meeting) that the
   government complied with the Bank’s safeguards policies and guidelines. The project triggered OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and was classified as Category B (partial assessment). With no new
   construction/renovation of LCs anticipated, the project was not expected to create any significant long-term
   environmental impact. LCs were instead to be housed in rental rooms, with special attention to ensure safe
   drinking water and acceptable sanitation and drainage facilities. An Environmental Management Framework
   (EMF) was prepared and disclosed by the implementing agency, addressing issues for mitigation and
   monitoring, and also defining the roles of the CMCs, NGOs, and teachers in selecting LCs,
   screening/assessment procedures, and standard mitigation and operational health and safety
   measures. The Indigenous Peoples policy (OP/BP 4.10) was triggered as the project targeted
   disadvantaged groups, including children from minority races and tribal groups. A Social Inclusion and
   Management Framework (SIMF) was thus prepared and disclosed to guide implementation to assess
   presence and characteristics of indigenous peoples and ensure their participation in decisions in a socially
   and culturally appropriate manner. The SIMF included a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for ensuring
   community engagement, transparency, and accountability in implementation.

   AF1 triggered two additional environmental safeguard policies (OP 4.04 Natural Habitat and OP 4.36
   Forests), as activities were to take place within an important forest landscape. It also triggered OP 4.10
   given the presence of small ethnic communities (tribal people) in Cox’s Bazar. Because AF1 was processed
   on an urgent basis, the completion of environmental and social safeguards compliance plans was deferred
   until after AF1 approval. The Safeguards Action Plan, developed during AF1 preparation, required revision
   and disclosure of the EMF and SIMF as a condition of effectiveness.

   LCs under the original design were established in rented spaces, as planned, while those in the Rohingya
   camps were constructed on allocated sites in compliance with the requirements of the EMF and SIMF. The
   environmental and social management performance of the government and project partners (Save the
   Children and UNICEF) was satisfactory.



                                                                                                  Page 23 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



  The GRM, already in place in the DPE, was used for the project. Quarterly discussions at the upazila level,
  and quarterly meetings between technical coordinators and community management committees, facilitated
  exchanges and communication of issues and queries to the PIU. Multiple channels (dedicated phone
  number, Facebook account, project website) were available to receive complaints. Five grievance cases
  were received during implementation, all of which were investigated and resolved. UNICEF’s prevention of
  sexual exploitation and abuse was integrated, including guidelines and training. Two incidents of gender-
  based violence and sexual harassment were recorded in Cox’s Bazar, which triggered the firing of the
  perpetrators and the provision to the victims of psychosocial support and protection against retaliation. No
  third-party assessment was carried out.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project’s Financial Management (FM) arrangements largely followed existing government policy and
  procedures, and benefited from the institutional arrangements established for the project. Given the
  project’s delivery of grants and allowances to a large number of LCs and students, the FM risk was
  assessed as substantial. Mitigation and actions to improve capacity, agreed at appraisal, included:
  appointment of a qualified FM consultant and two account staff, procurement of an off-the-shelf
  computerized accounting system; and training of project finance staff on FM-related aspects. Additional FM
  staff were appointed following AF1 approval.

  FM arrangements were satisfactory, despite minor issues related to documentation and disbursement
  processing. The Bank task team (in its September 7, 2022 meeting with IEG) confirmed that the
  government complied with the Bank’s FM policies and guidelines. A local bank contracted under a
  participation arrangement channeled funds for grants to LCs and stipends to enrolled students. All
  disbursements (grants, allowances, vouchers) were made based on verified data on LCs and institutes in
  urban areas and on individual students, and were remitted through the designated banking
  system. Submission of external audits was timely, and none of the audits was qualified. The last project
  audit had four minor observations that the government acknowledged and was addressing at the time
  of ICR preparation.

  Procurement

  The Procurement Capacity Assessment carried out at appraisal identified several issues, notably a
  shortage of staff with procurement knowledge in the PIU, and issues with internal control, documentation,
  information dissemination, contract administration, payments, and handling of complaints, among other
  things. Consequently, the risk for procurement operation and contract administration was assessed to be
  substantial, and a number of measures were agreed to help mitigate these risks, including identification of
  procurement focal points, deployment of a national procurement consultant, use of a Bid Evaluation
  Committee, establishment of a project webpage with procurement-related information accessible to the
  public, and a system for handling complaints. Additional procurement staff were appointed following the
  approval of AF1.

  The main procurement issue occurred early in the implementation period. The Bank cancelled an amount
  of SDR 20,309 from the credit in March 2015 following the misprocurement of four contracts slated to be

                                                                                                 Page 24 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



  100 percent financed under Category 2. The issue was inappropriate bidding practices by the bidders, not
  identified by the implementing agency. Project staff noted that the mistake was a result of weak capacity in
  the early years of the project. The government agreed to provide three weeks of procurement training to all
  staff working on procurement and was requested to refund the cancelled amount to IDA by June 30, 2015.
  It duly complied. Moreover, a strong procurement team was maintained in the PIU through the end of the
  project. Strengthening of procurement led to the project’s successful implementation and completion, with
  all procurement completed mostly in a timely fashion, including the $14 million procurement of a UN
  agency. The task team confirmed to IEG (in their September 7, 2022 meeting) that the
  government complied with the Bank’s procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  IE findings, based on interviews exploring respondents’ perspectives, revealed that 3 percent of
  respondents thought drug use among children had decreased; 16 percent thought that school brought
  back enthusiasm and joy in learning; and 4 percent thought that project schools had a positive impact on
  the communities’ economic activities. The project also rose to the challenges posed by the COVID-19
  pandemic, unanticipated at the time of design and AF1 approval, adapting to help build communities’
  awareness and protection against the virus. LC teachers visited households to raise awareness on
  hygiene, distribute masks and sanitation materials, and collect donations to distribute food and medicine to
  those in need. Likewise, the pre-vocational training program raised awareness on COVID-related safety
  issues, and hand-washing facilities, thermal scanners, disinfectant materials, and masks were distributed
  to pre-vocational training centers. Save the Children adapted the urban slum program to include health and
  safety information and distributed preventive materials. It also facilitated student families’ access to local
  safety nets, food assistance, and protective equipment, all facilitating completion of children’s education.



d. Other
  Over and above the outcomes for girls in the communities sampled in the IE, the project had an important
  impact on women’s empowerment. First, the overwhelming majority (80 percent) of LC teachers were
  female. These positions increased teachers' social standing in the community, prompting vulnerable
  community women to seek their advice, an increase in marriage proposals for single women, and the
  enrollment of a higher number of female students. Second, children’s mothers were involved in the CMCs'
  and LCs’ management committees. Close to 90 percent of all LC management committee heads, elected by
  their members, were female. This has enhanced women’s capacity to interact with local actors, government,
  and other stakeholders, developed their leadership experience, and raised their status in their
  communities. Third, the IE reports that rates of child marriage fell among young female students. Fourth,
  female participants in the pre-vocational training program used newly acquired skills to enter the work force
  (as paid workers or self employed), boosting their social and economic empowerment. According to the
  Save the Children Completion Report, participation of females in pre-vocational training is increasing due to
  effective community mobilization. Fifth, the IE’s qualitative survey revealed that 9 percent of respondents
  thought that child marriage had decreased, 4 percent believed that sexual harassment had decreased, and
  6 percent believed that social mobility of girls had increased. On the negative side, it was not possible to
  carry out the child domestic worker pilot, in view of the lack of cooperation of those who engaged them in
  this work.



                                                                                                  Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                 High

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are a subset of the seven relevant and insightful lessons presented in the ICR,
slightly recast by IEG:

      Non-formal education, delivered at the community level with support from
       communities and NGOs, offers a useful model for improving access and retention of
       out-of-school children, while also improving quality, even in the face of exogenous
       challenges. This delivery model can be adapted to various settings (deprived rural and
       urban areas and camps for displaced populations) and to different types of education (basic
       and pre-vocational). The project demonstrated the value of informal education as an
       effective, low-cost mechanism for service delivery to groups that would otherwise not have
       access to education, and in a way that is responsive to local context.
      Successful adaptation of the (original) rural model of service delivery to accommodate
       urban slums can be achieved by clustering several (four to eight) LCs in one
       compound, providing a near-complete school environment, as opposed to individual,
       more dispersed LCs in rural settings. The urban slum experience has also shown that an
       accelerated model, facilitating the completion of the five-year primary cycle in three years,
       can be accommodating of the needs and constraints of older (eight- to 14-year old) students
       from poor and vulnerable families. Urban settings also present the challenges of frequent
       family migrations, an important cause of dropouts.
      Mobile vocational training centers provide an effective model for delivering skills
       training in hard-to-reach areas. They help overcome barriers to participation including
       safety, cost, and travel time, especially for marginalized beneficiaries, thus prompting
       increased participation of vulnerable adolescents, especially girls.
      The contracting of a specialized agency for teacher training can be effective and
       efficient, and experience points to the importance of enhanced monitoring of
       training. Experience and feedback also suggest room for further strengthening of teacher
       training, especially supplementing foundation training with two days of teacher observation
       and feedback, and providing more support to trainees (increased budgets for expenses,
       caregivers during their absence, and training materials).




                                                                                                 Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence was strong. First, the collection, review, and analysis of project data tracking outputs,
intermediate outcomes, and outcomes was carried out in a systematic fashion and prepared, reported, and
validated on a regular basis, under the overall coordination and technical oversight of a capable MIS
Cell. Second, impact evaluations on the project and on various pilots were carried out on the basis of sound
methodologies, producing viable results – both qualitative and quantitative – which complemented project data
and provided additional insights and lessons for further improvement. There were a few incidences of
information and data provided in the efficacy section not being cited or not specifying which target group(s) it
applied to (rural LCs/students, urban slum LCs/students, pre-vocational training centers/students, and/or DRP
camps/children). In a context of four restructurings and two AFs, Annex 8 provided a clear, succinct account of
the project’s outcome and intermediate outcome indicators and targets, as they evolved across these changes,
also including baselines and end-of-project achievements.

Quality of Analysis was also strong. The efficacy section was well organized around the various project
objectives and effectively reported on and analyzed the two main sources of data and information (project data,
various impact evaluations) plus others (including Save the Children’s Completion Report on the urban slum
pilot and program) to weave together a narrative of the project’s accomplishments, shortcomings, and
evolutions, which distilled salient messages and provided a strong evidence base for documenting and rating
performance.

Quality of Lessons. The lessons were clearly drawn from the evidence and analysis presented in the ICR and
linked to its narrative and ratings. While specific to this project’s unique experience, these lessons were
articulated in a way that would be relevant and insightful to other countries embarking on similar endeavors to
find creative, effective, community-based approaches to extend basic education services to poor, marginalized,
out-of-school children.

The ICR’s Results Orientation was strong. The evolution of the results framework (and of the project
indicators and targets) was clearly articulated, and the efficacy section was well organized around the PDOs
and effectively drew on the rich array of project data. Each objective was assessed in terms of the entire results
framework (inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes), providing a clear understanding of the links
between the project’s support and its intermediate and ultimate effects. While the PAD did not present a theory
of change, the ICR prepared one, which provided an accurate and helpful synopsis of the project.

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. The various parts of the ICR were internally consistent,
providing a robust narrative of this creative, ambitious, and adaptive project. The ICR was respectful of ICR
guidelines, with a couple of minor exceptions. First, there was no unequivocal confirmation of government
compliance with the relevant fiduciary policies, guidelines, and covenants. This was provided by the Bank team
during a follow-up meeting with IEG, held on September 7, 2022. Second, there were some
inconsistencies/lack of clarity on the project costs and financing. Total project cost at completion is presented in
Text Table 2 (p. 25) and in Annex 3 (p. 55) as $146.88 million equivalent. Annex 3 shows “0s” in the two
columns entitled “Amount at Appraisal” and “Actual as Percentage of Approval.” Text Table 2 seems to show

                                                                                                      Page 27 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)



the original IDA financing and AF1 amounts, but not the AF2 amounts, or cancellations. Text Table 2 shows the
planned government financing at appraisal ($7.5 million equivalent or 5 percent of the total original cost) and
leaves government financing blank in the “Actual at Completion Column,” with no explanation in the table or in
the text of whether or why the government provided (or did not provide) any counterpart financing. The
Bank team did confirm in its September 7, 2022 meeting with IEG that the government provided 95 percent of
its counterpart commitment. The presentation of original and cancelled amounts of each of the IDA credits and
grants supporting the project in terms of SDRs would have helped explain/reconcile the discrepancy in US
dollar amounts of IDA financing and disbursements found within the ICR, some downloaded automatically from
the Bank’s system, some presented in cost tables, likely a result of different exchange rates used. Reporting
use of funds in terms of SDR would also have provided more accurate rates of disbursements of each of these
IDA credits and grants. This was ultimately accessed and assessed by IEG..



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 28 of 28
