                                          Document of
                                       The World Bank
                                     FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


                                                               Report No: ICR00005829




            IMPLEMENTATION COMPLETION AND RESULTS REPORT
                                       Credit No 5766-ET
                                            ON THE
                                            CREDIT


                           IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 23.9 MILLION
                               (US$33 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
                                            TO THE
                       FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA


                                           FOR THE


                         PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PROJECT


                                       November 1, 2022




Governance Global Practice
Eastern and Southern Africa Region
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS



          (Exchange Rate Effective October 31, 2022)


          Currency Unit =        Ethiopian Birr (ETB)
                SDR 1 =          US$1.28
                US$1=            ETB 53.36

                           FISCAL YEAR
                          July 8 – July 7




Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa
      Country Director: Ousmane Dione
     Regional Director: Asad Alam
     Practice Manager: Manuel Antonio Vargas Madrigal
  Task Team Leader(s): Rafika Chaouali, Abiy Demissie Belay
  ICR Main Contributor: Paul Welton
                                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AABE       Accounting and Auditing Board of Ethiopia
AFROSAI    African Branch of the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
BoFED      Regional Bureau of Finance and Economic Development
COA        Chart of Accounts
COPCD      Channel one Program Coordination Directorate
COVID-19   Coronavirus Disease 2019
CPS        Country Partnership Strategy
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
DMFAS      Debt Management and Financial Analysis System
DPs        Development Partners
EFY        Ethiopian Financial Year
e-GP       e-Government Procurement
EMCP       Expenditure Management and Control Program
FCV        Fragile, Conflict and Violence
FEACC      Federal Ethics and Anticorruption Commission
FM         Financial management
FPPPA      Federal Public Procurement and Property Administration Agency
GoE        Government of Ethiopia
GTP        Growth and Transformation Plan
IBEX       Integrated Budget and Expenditure System
IBRD       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR        Implementation Completion and Results Report
IDA        International Development Association
IFMIS      Integrated Financial Management Information System
IFR        Interim Financial Report
IRR        Internal Rate of Return
ISR        Implementation Status and Results Reports
ISSAI      International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions
IT         Information technology
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
MoANR      Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources
MoE        Ministry of Education
MOFEC      Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation
MoH        Ministry of Health
NPV        Net Present Value
OFAG       Office of the Federal Auditor General
PAD        Project Appraisal Document
PAO        Professional Accountancy Organization
PDO        Project Development Objective
PEFA       Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PFM        Public Financial Management
PMO        IFMIS Project Management Office (MOFEC)
REACCs     Regional Ethics and Anticorruption Commissions
STEP       Systematic Tracking of Exchange in Procurement
TTL        Task Team Leader
ToC        Theory of change
ToR        Terms of Reference
                                                          TABLE OF CONTENTS


DATA SHEET .......................................................................................................................... 1
I.    PROJECT CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES ....................................................... 5
      A. CONTEXT AT APPRAISAL .........................................................................................................5
      B. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION (IF APPLICABLE) .......................................7
II.   OUTCOME ...................................................................................................................... 7
      A. RELEVANCE OF PDOs ..............................................................................................................7
      B. ACHIEVEMENT OF PDOs (EFFICACY) ........................................................................................8
      C. EFFICIENCY ........................................................................................................................... 14
      D. JUSTIFICATION OF OVERALL OUTCOME RATING .................................................................... 15
      E. OTHER OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS (IF ANY) ............................................................................ 15
III. KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECTED IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOME ................................ 16
      A. KEY FACTORS DURING PREPARATION ................................................................................... 16
      B. KEY FACTORS DURING IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................. 16
IV. BANK PERFORMANCE, COMPLIANCE ISSUES, AND RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME .. 18
      A. QUALITY OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E) ............................................................ 18
      B. ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE ..................................................... 19
      C. BANK PERFORMANCE ........................................................................................................... 20
      D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME ....................................................................................... 21
V. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................. 22
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS ........................................................... 23
ANNEX 2. BANK LENDING AND IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT/SUPERVISION ......................... 35
ANNEX 3. PROJECT COST BY COMPONENT ........................................................................... 37
ANNEX 4. EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS ........................................................................................... 38
ANNEX 5. BORROWER, CO-FINANCIER AND OTHER PARTNER/STAKEHOLDER COMMENTS ... 40
ANNEX 6. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS ........................................................... 63
ANNEX 7. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS .................................................................................. 72
     The World Bank
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




DATA SHEET


BASIC INFORMATION

Product Information
Project ID                                                 Project Name

P150922                                                   Ethiopia PFM Project

Country                                                    Financing Instrument

Ethiopia                                                   Investment Project Financing

Original EA Category                                       Revised EA Category

Not Required (C)                                           Not Required (C)



Organizations

Borrower                                                   Implementing Agency

Ministry of Finance (MoF)                                  MOF-ETHIOPIA


Project Development Objective (PDO)
Original PDO
<p>The PDO is to improve efficiency, transparency and accountability of public expenditure at the federal and
regional levels.</p>

PDO as stated in the legal agreement
The objective of the Project is to improve the efficiency, transparency and accountability of public expenditures of
the Recipient at the federal and regional levels.




                                                                                                             Page 1 of 72
       The World Bank
       Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



FINANCING

                                        Original Amount (US$)      Revised Amount (US$)       Actual Disbursed (US$)
 World Bank Financing
                                                   33,000,000                33,000,000                  28,857,467
 IDA-57660
 Total                                             33,000,000                33,000,000                  28,857,467
 Non-World Bank Financing
                                                               0                          0                             0




 Borrower/Recipient                                          0                            0                         0
 Total                                                       0                            0                         0
 Total Project Cost                                33,000,000                33,000,000                  28,857,467


KEY DATES

Approval                  Effectiveness            MTR Review            Original Closing       Actual Closing
26-Feb-2016               18-May-2016              13-Jun-2018           07-Apr-2020            07-Mar-2022



RESTRUCTURING AND/OR ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Date(s)                        Amount Disbursed (US$M) Key Revisions
26-Nov-2019                                       27.19 Change in Loan Closing Date(s)
01-Feb-2021                                       28.69 Change in Loan Closing Date(s)



KEY RATINGS

Outcome                                     Bank Performance                     M&E Quality
Moderately Satisfactory                     Satisfactory                         Modest


RATINGS OF PROJECT PERFORMANCE IN ISRs

                                                                                                       Actual
 No.                Date ISR Archived              DO Rating                  IP Rating            Disbursements
                                                                                                      (US$M)
 01                    01-Jun-2016                 Satisfactory              Satisfactory                          0
 02                    09-Dec-2016                 Satisfactory              Satisfactory                        2.63



                                                                                                           Page 2 of 72
     The World Bank
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                                 Moderately
03                       28-Jun-2017                                  Moderately Unsatisfactory       6.35
                                                Unsatisfactory
04                       05-Jan-2018        Moderately Satisfactory    Moderately Satisfactory       10.05
                                                 Moderately
05                       30-Jun-2018                                  Moderately Unsatisfactory      12.74
                                                Unsatisfactory
                                                 Moderately
06                       28-Jan-2019                                  Moderately Unsatisfactory      18.02
                                                Unsatisfactory
                                                 Moderately
07                    20-Aug-2019                                     Moderately Unsatisfactory      18.02
                                                Unsatisfactory
08                    09-Oct-2019           Moderately Satisfactory    Moderately Satisfactory       27.19
09                    20-Apr-2020           Moderately Satisfactory    Moderately Satisfactory       27.19
10                    26-Nov-2020           Moderately Satisfactory    Moderately Satisfactory       28.69
11                    04-May-2021           Moderately Satisfactory    Moderately Satisfactory       28.69


SECTORS AND THEMES

Sectors
Major Sector/Sector                                                                                     (%)


Public Administration                                                                                  100
        Central Government (Central Agencies)                                                           78
        Sub-National Government                                                                         22


Themes
Major Theme/ Theme (Level 2)/ Theme (Level 3)                                                           (%)
Economic Policy                                                                                           7
         Fiscal Policy                                                                                    7
                    Fiscal sustainability                                                                 7

Public Sector Management                                                                                95
         Public Finance Management                                                                      49
                    Public Expenditure Management                                                       42

                    Debt Management                                                                       7

         Public Administration                                                                          46
                    Transparency, Accountability and Good
                                                                                                        46
                    Governance


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 72
       The World Bank
       Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




ADM STAFF
Role                                    At Approval                         At ICR
Regional Vice President:                Makhtar Diop                        Victoria Kwakwa

Country Director:                       Carolyn Turk                        Ousmane Dione

Director:                               Samia Msadek                        Asad Alam
                                                                            Manuel Antonio Vargas
Practice Manager:                       Renaud Seligmann
                                                                            Madrigal
                                                                            Rafika Chaouali, Abiy Demissie
Task Team Leader(s):                    Yoko Kagawa, Parminder P. S. Brar
                                                                            Belay
ICR Contributing Author:                                                    Paul Welton




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



   I. PROJECT CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

A. CONTEXT AT APPRAISAL

   Country Context
   1.      At appraisal, the country's per capita income of US$550 was substantially lower than the regional
   average of US$1,646 in 2014 and among the lowest globally. However, Ethiopia had made substantial
   progress toward attaining the Millennium Development Goals. Ethiopia had pushed for expanding basic
   service delivery and attaining the Millennium Development Goals through a decentralized delivery model.
   2.       The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) had developed a Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) for
   the period 2009/10-2014/15, which aimed for Ethiopia to extricate itself from poverty to reach the level
   of a middle-income economy as of 2020-23. This required a structural transformation to take place, one
   of the key dimensions of this being an improvement in government effectiveness. The Country Partnership
   Strategy (CPS) for the period 2013-2016 was strongly anchored within the GTP.
   Sectoral and Institutional Context
   3.      Given the importance of the aforementioned GTP, a foundational pillar of the CPS was “Good
   Governance and State building”. Based on the key constraints recognized in the GTP a focus was placed
   within this foundation on “Enhancing public financial management (PFM) procurement, transparency and
   accountability”. PFM in Ethiopia had been strengthened in conjunction with the country's efforts to
   improve service delivery over the previous two decades. The focus had been on strengthening basic PFM
   systems with support from the World Bank (for example, Public Sector Capacity Building Support Program)
   and other development partners (DPs). However, the 2014 Public Expenditure and Financial
   Accountability (PEFA) Assessment showed that there remained scope for significant further development
   across the PFM Cycle. There was therefore, at the time of appraisal, evident rationale for further World
   Bank support for PFM reform.
   4.       The GoE initiated the development of a modern Integrated Financial Management Information
   System (IFMIS) in 2010. The IFMIS pilot implementation was initiated in six federal public Ministries in
   February 2014, and five new pilot federal sites were added in May 2015. An Integrated Budget and
   Expenditure System (IBEX) had previously been introduced at regional level. Furthermore, the
   institutionalization of PFM training had commenced. Further support was needed for the rollout of these
   initiatives at the time of project appraisal.
   5.      At the local level, the GoE provides block grants to woredas through regions for service delivery,
   and at the time of appraisal, the amount of this financing was growing exponentially and there was a
   planned increase of service delivery expenditure from US$3.5 billion to US$6.1 billion. At the same time
   there were weaknesses in the PFM systems (including poor infrastructure, weak internal controls and high
   number of unresolved audit recommendations). This resulted in the need to urgently build the fiduciary
   capacity for handling the increased magnitude of fund flows. This included strengthening local
   government capacity for the prevention, control, and reporting of fraud and corruption allegations.
   6.      In terms of oversight, although the PEFA report recognized that there had been a progress with
   external audit, at appraisal, there were still challenges remaining in both the quality of audit and the lack
   of adequate training facilities. Further, a key priority for GoE was the introduction of an e-GP (e-
   Government Procurement) system – to improve efficiency and accountability in the procurement process
   and reduce costs whilst the development of the accountancy profession was recognized as being needed
   to both encourage transparency and accountability in the public sector while positively impacting the
   business climate. All the above were critical elements of the CPS`s Foundation of “Good governance and
   State building” and were incorporated into the project.


                                                                                                           Page 5 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  Project Development Objectives (PDO)
  7.      The objective of the project was to improve the efficiency, transparency, and accountability of
  public expenditures of the Recipient at the federal and regional levels.

  Key Expected Outcomes and Outcome Indicators
  8.      The following key outcome indicators were designed to measure the achievement of the overall
  PDO:
      (a) Reduced cash float at the Federal and Regional Levels.
      (b) Timely disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents.
      (c) Targeted agencies progressively increase the percentage of contracts awarded within an agreed
          benchmark of 180 days for works contracts above US$5,000,000 and Goods above US$500,000.
      (d) Increase in the percentage of audits conforming to International Standards of Supreme Audit
          Institutions (ISSAI).
      (e) Direct Beneficiaries who are recipients of the training provided by the Project.

  Components
  9.      The project had three components which comprised a total of nine subcomponents. These are set
  out in the Table below. Further detail on the content of each component/subcomponent is included in
  Annex 6.1.
  Table 1. Project components
                                                                                             IDA
   Components/Subcomponents
                                                                                         US$, millions
   Component 1 Improving Expenditure Management and Information Systems                      22.5
     1.1 Support for IFMIS rollout and IBEX enhancement                                       7.3
     1.2 Support for the Project Management Office (PMO)                                      2.8
     1.3 PFM Systems Strengthening in coordination with the IFMIS rollout                     3.8
     1.4 IFMIS & PFM Academy                                                                  8.6
   Component 2: Strengthening Accountability Institutions                                     9.4
     2.1 Strengthening Procurement and Property Management                                    3.7
     2.2 Capacity building for Oversight Bodies                                               2.3
     2.3 Development of Accountancy Profession in Ethiopia                                    2.3
     2.4 Support for Strengthening Fraud and Corruption Mitigation activities                 1.0
   Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation                                 1.1
     3.1 Program Management and Institutional Arrangements                                    1.1
   Total Cost                                                                                33.0


  Theory of Change
  10.     A Theory of Change (ToC) was not explicitly included in the original Project Appraisal Document
  (PAD). For the purposes of this report, however, the ToC has been reconstructed by the Implementation
  Completion and Results Report (ICR) team and is included in Annex (Annex 6.2) together with its
  underlying assumptions. This ex-post ToC was used by the ICR team as a touchstone throughout the
  review process including the assessment of monitoring and evaulaton.




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



B. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION (IF APPLICABLE)

   Extension of Projection Closing Date
   11.     The project closing period had been extended by one year and eleven months.
   First project closing date extension

   12.    The World Bank issued a notice of extension on November 26, 2019, in response to a request from
   the Government of Ethiopia. The request letter was issued on October 1, 2019. The project closing date
   was extended by 12 months to April 07, 2021.
   Second project closing date extension

   13.    A further extension of the project closing date was issued on February 1, 2021. The project closing
   date was extended up to March 7, 2022, in response to a request from the GoE (letter dated October 8,
   2020).
   The rationale for closing date extensions
   14.     Delayed procurement operation was the major factor for the overall delay in implementation
   during the initial years of the project. In turn this was caused by high turnover in Ministry of Finance and
   Economic Cooperation (MOFEC) management in the first two years of the project. In October 2019, the
   government was confident that the remaining activities would be completed within the first closing date
   extension period. However, due to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and the state of emergency due
   to the conflict in the North of the country, project activities could not be completed within the anticipated
   time. These unanticipated factors led to the government's request for a second closing date extension of
   the project.


   II. OUTCOME

A. RELEVANCE OF PDOs

Assessment of Relevance of PDOs and Rating

   Relevance of objectives: Rating: High

   15.     The objectives of the project remained highly relevant at closure. They reflect the paramount
   importance of strong governance and accountability. The objectives and the design are consistent with
   both the CPS at approval and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at closure (2018-2022). The latter
   recognizes that "Reforms which lead to better governance, greater accountability and transparency, and
   improved financial management capacity will be critical during the CPF period" and includes a focus on
   "Supporting Institutional Accountability and Fighting Corruption”. In 2018 the new government set out its
   transformation agenda in which it clearly laid out governance, transparency and accountability and
   anticorruption as major imperatives and goals of the administration. These themes are clearly embedded
   in the PDO and project design. The PDO, therefore, continued to be timely and appropriate to the
   country's needs, as indicated by the CPF at the time of project closure.




                                                                                                           Page 7 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



B. ACHIEVEMENT OF PDOs (EFFICACY)

Assessment of Efficacy
   16.     The PDO of the project is to improve the efficiency, transparency and accountability of public
   expenditures of the Recipient at the federal and regional levels. This PDO was clearly defined, and the
   project activities were closely linked with achieving these objectives.
   17.      In arriving at the overall efficacy rating, the PDO was unpacked for the purpose of this review into
   three elements as set out below. Appendix L of ICR Guidance for IPF operations suggests that assessing
   results and performance in FCV situations is more challenging compared to regular environments. In line
   with this guidance the ICR team issued a questionnaire to government at the start of the ICR review in
   order to supplement quantitative with qualitative data to support the Result Framework Indicators. This
   was supplemented by interviews.

       1. Improve the efficiency of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels
   18.      The PFM project successfully achieved the PDO objective of improving the efficiency of public
   expenditures at the federal and regional levels. The improvement is primarily contributed by the IFMIS
   rollout and improvements made with IBEX.
   19.     At project closure, 111 federal headquarters and 62 branches were operating using IFMIS. More
   than 19,000 end users received training. Interviews with the IFMIS team suggest that the quality of
   financial reports improved and data entry errors were reduced significantly. Furthermore, interviews
   suggest that the timeliness and quality of financial statements significantly improved at the regional level
   after upgrading IBEX, data centers, and staff training. Currently, the transaction size has reached more
   than 37 million. This provides an opportunity for data mining and data analysis in areas such as
   expenditure, revenue, sectors, and regions.
   20.     IFMIS is managing 78 percent of the federal budget. The quality and timeliness of financial reports
   improved at the regional and woreda level due to the project support in upgrading IBEX and provision of
   training for 86,484 people. IBEX is operational in over 2,100 places across the country. The project
   implementation office (PMO) has built internal capability and carried out the rollout for 60 entities on its
   own after the vendor supporting the rollout left.
   21.     According to the June 2022 Audit report of the Office of the Federal Auditor General (OFAG), it
   has been indicated that the number of audit reports with unqualified audit opinion increased by 12
   percent (22 more unqualified audit reports) and the number of adverse opinion decreased by 8 percent
   (Table 2).
                                      Table 2. Statistics on audit opinions
                                                           2019                      2021
                                                 No. of audit       %       No. of audit        %
                                                   reports                    reports
             Unqualified audit opinion                      29        19%             51         30%
             Qualified audit opinion                        71        46%             73         43%
             Disclaimer opinion                              5         3%               8         5%
             Adverse Opinion                                48        31%             39         23%
                                                           153      100%             171        100%

   22.     Figure 1 below shows that over the period 2016-2021 the general trend was for the number of
   unqualified audit opinions to increase and the number of adverse opnions decreased. Mobility restrictions
   caused by CoVid-19 were responsible for the performance in 2020.


                                                                                                           Page 8 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                                                                       Figure 1: Audit Opinions

                                                                             External Audit Opinion - Federal MDAs
                                                     100
                                                     90
                                                     80
           No of Audited entities




                                                     70
                                                     60
                                                                                                                          Unqualified audit opinion
                                                     50
                                                                                                                          Qualified audit opinion
                                                     40
                                                                                                                          Disclaimer opinion
                                                     30
                                                                                                                          Adverse Opinion
                                                     20
                                                     10
                                                      0
                                                           2016       2017      2018       2019           2020    2021
                                                                                  Fiscal Year


  23.      The cash float size reduced from 22 percent of the annual budget to 16.75 percent. The project
  contributed to this through systems interventions in the Treasury Single Account and improved capacity
  (institutionalized trainings). Figure 2 shows the trends on the cash float size since 2017. The cash float size
  increased in 2019 and 2020 which government attributes to the overall effect of COVID-19.
  24.     The trend for reduction of the cash float will significantly decrease the government borrowing
  costs. The government will save about US$421 million per annum from interest on government
  borrowing as a result of the decrease in cash float size.
                                                                                         Figure 2 Cash float

                                                                                        Cash Float
                                                     25
           % of Cash from total annual Expenditure




                                                     20


                                                     15


                                                     10


                                                      5


                                                      0
                                                           Baseline            2017                2018            2019         2021
                                                                                                Fiscal Year




  1   (Annual budget for 2013: ETB 476 billion net reduction in float size (5.25 percent), interest rate 8.5 percent.


                                                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  25.     The budget execution rate of targeted sectors (Health, Education, Agriculture, and Water) at the
  regional level increased considerably from 55 percent in 2016 to 92.16 percent in 2021 (Figure 3).
                                                    Figure 3: Budget Execution Rate

                                                        Budget Execution Rate
               100
                 80
                 60
           %




                 40
                 20
                  0
                          Baseline            2017             2018                 2019          2020              2021
                                                                      Fiscal year


  26.      Procurement performance increased progressively until the COVID 19 outbreak and the conflict
  in the North. The contracts of above US$5 million for works and goods increased from in 2020 but fell
  significantly in 2021 (Figure 4). The performance decrease in 2021 is largely due to the significant cut on
  capital expenditures due to the conflict in the northern part of the country.
                                                   Figure 4: Percentage of Contracts Awarded
                           Target agencies progressively increase number of contracts awarded within an
                          agreed benchmark of 180 days for works contracts above US$5 million and Goods
                                                        above US$500,000.
               100

                80

                60

                40

                20

                 0
                                2016                        2017                           2020                   2021




       2. Improve transparency of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels
  27.     Transparency in public finance is expressed when information on PFM is comprehensive,
  consistent, and accessible to users. This is achieved through comprehensive budget classification,
  transparency of all government revenue, expenditure, and debts and ready access to fiscal and budget
  documentation. In this regard, progress is indicated as follows.
  28.     The timeliness of disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents2 has improved significantly from 24
  months to 6 months from the end of the reporting period. The online report submission is expected to
  reduce the in-person travel required of PFM staff of ministries, departments and agencies at regional and
  Federal levels to submit hard copy monthly reports to MOFEC or the regional bureau of finances. Data is

  2 Timely disclosure of key fiscal information,including publication of in-year budget execution reports and summary of the budget
  (citizen budget), are available/accessible to the public. Other reports which are accessible to the public timely are audited annual
  financial statement and other external audit reports.


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  available centrally because of the establishment and enhancement of data centers at the federal and
  regional levels. In about 893 woredas the IBEX system is connected to regional level data centers.
  29.    The website of MOFEC has been upgraded and provides more comprhehensive and timely
  information, including budget execution reports and additional debt reports, Finance Transparency and
  Accountability reports and various audit reports. Bi-annual budget execution and audited financial
  statements are available from the MOFEC website.
  30.     With the support of the project, the Debt Management and Financial Analysis System (DMFAS)
  was upgraded. The Debt Management Directorate can produce timely and quality quarterly and annual
  debt-related reports, including Public debt statistics and Debt portfolio reports. The reports are published
  on MOFEC websites. The Debt management system is also integrated with IFMIS, which enables the
  integrating of debt payments and collection into the accounting and reporting system. Online updates on
  debt collection and repayments also enable the Government Accounting Directorate to access the debt
  information required to be disclosed on the government annual financial statements. In summary, the
  project strengthened the reliability of DFMAS database and enabled the Debt management department
  to publish Public Sector Debt Statistical Bulletins in line with best practices. This was a major
  achievement of the project.

      3. Improve accountability of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels.
  31.     Training was provided to the finance and budget standing committee members of woreda
  councils. The training was suspended due to COVID-19 in 2020. The training will help the local government
  councils to scrutinize proposed budgets submitted by the executives to ensure that they are in line with
  strategic priorities and assumptions and also enable them to evaluate the performance of the executives,
  to enforce it to be accountable to the council. See Figure 5.
                                   Figure 5: Training to Woreda Budget and Finance Committee members

                                % of Woreda Finance & Budget Committee members trained to undertake
                                                            audit review
                           80
                           70
                           60
              Percentage




                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                            0
                                  2016          2017          2018          2019          2020         2021



  32.      The percentage of the woredas posting simplified budget execution reports increased to 95
  percent in 2020; the performance declined to 89 percent in 2021 due to the impact of COVID-19 and the
  conflicts (Figure 6). The performance fall is also consistent with the discontinued capacity building
  activities provided to the Woreda budget and finance committee members after COVID-19. Media are
  reporting at regional level on budgeting and budget executions at the local government level, as they are
  available to the public in the form of public billboards.




                                                                                                              Page 11 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                               Figure 6: Simplified Budget Posting

                                 % of Woredas posting Simplified Budget Execution Report
                    98
                    96
                    94
                    92
                    90
                    88
                    86
                    84
                             2016            2017        2018         2019           2020    2021


  33.      The percentage of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods increased in the
  first three years of the project implementation period. COVID-19 affected the supply chain nationally and
  internationally. The impact of COVID-19 coupled with the conflict in the North, is reflected in the
  procurement performance. Figure 7 shows the trends of changes in performance. The percentage of use
  of the competitive methods varies between key selected agencies. In particular, Ministry of Agriculture
  and Natural Resources (MoANR) at 94 percent, Ethiopia Road authority at 88.38 percent, Ethiopian
  Pharmaceutical Supply Agency at 94 percent, Ministry of Health (MoH) at 67.04 percent and Ministry of
  Education (MoE) at 49.56 percent. The average performance was 76.2 percent.
                                      Figure 7: Use of Competitive Procurement Methods

                     Percent of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods
                                              in targeted agencies
            100
             90
             80
             70
             60
             50
             40
             30
             20
             10
              0
                      2016            2017           2018            2019            2020      2021



  34.      The e-GP procurement system is developed and operational at nine pilot procuring agencies and
  57 insititutions have published their procurement plan on the e-GP platform. A rollout strategy for the
  federal and regional institutions was developed and is ready for validation. More than 1,500 vendors have
  registered online. As the system is integrated with the Ministry of Trade, a significant part of the validation
  on vendor registration is online. When fully functional, the system will allow the public to access public
  procurement needs well in advance, bidding opportunities, bid evaluation results, procurement statistics,
  and decisions made on procurement complaints and other key procurement information.




                                                                                                           Page 12 of 72
  The World Bank
  Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



    35.     The Accounting and Auditing Board of Ethiopia (AABE), with the support of the PFM project,
    implemented a database which was used to register accountants, auditors and reporting entities.
    Consequently, AABE was able to better regulate and support registered accountants and auditors. In 2021,
    AABE authorized 92 accountants and nine auditors to practice as professional accountants and auditors
    respectively. In the same year, AABE renewed the registration of 1,143 authorized accountants and 171
    authorized auditors. In the same year, AABE renewed the registration of 874 accounting firms and 140
    audit firms and authorized 29 accounting firms and two audit firms in addition to 92 individual
    accountants and nine individual auditors. AABE's review capacity was improved after implementing the
    Practice Review Manual, Financial Reporting & Monitoring Review manual, and Audit Quality manuals.
    AABE reviewed three audit firms and 12 financial statements and delivered an International Auditing
    Standard training for 152 audit firms. AABE's project for establishing the Institute of Certified Public
    Accounts of Ethiopia is progressing. AABE submitted the draft law to the Parliament.
    36.      The Federal Ethics and Anticorruption Commission (FEACC) provided training for more than 513
    ethics officers from three regional states on fraud and corruption prevention. FEACC did promotion
    through mainstream media to create awareness about fraud and corruption prevention at regional levels.
    The quality of fraud and corruption recording and reporting improved. The training enhanced the woreda
    level ethics officers' capacity to record and report fraud and corruption cases.
    37.      Some of the activities planned by the OFAG couldn't be achieved, such as a project to improve the
    audit quality, strengthening the training center, and strengthening the Audit Service Corporation. This
    was, in the main, due to weak follow-up by OFAG and a failed procurement contract. However, the OFAG
    improved the audit quality based on the gap assessment report it received from the initial works of a
    terminated contract and an Audit Quality Assurance assessment made by African Branch of the
    International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (AFROSAI). The AFROSAI report is completed,
    and OFAG expects to design a quality improvement plan based on the findings3.
    38.      The legal framework to enhance the mandate of the Internal Audit function has been revised, and
    a risk-based internal audit manual was developed. Woreda Audit committees were strengthened. Total
    400 audit committees were established at selected woredas. The internal audit quality is improved
    following the adoption of risk-based internal audits.

Overall Efficacy: Rating: Substantial
    39.      The PDO of the project is to improve the efficiency, transparency and accountability of public
    expenditures of the Recipient at the federal and regional levels. Through unpacking the PDO it is clear that
    there is evidence that all three elements of the PDO were substantially met.
    40.     At the same time, of the five PDO indicators, three were met, another partially met and one was
    not achieved. However these outcomes are distorted by the the fact that performance in the latter period,
    in some project areas, deteriorated due to COVID-19 and an emerging conflict in the North. Indeed,
    Ethiopia was classified as a Fragile, Conflict and Violence (FCV) country in the final year of the project
    (2021/22). For example, it can be seen from Figure 4 that, with respect to the Procurement PDO (which
    was partially achieved), before COVID-19 hit, the trend was for improvement.
    41.     Furthermore, although Indicator 4 was not met, it should be noted that that the number of audit
    reports with unqualified audit opinion increased by 12 percent (22 more unqualified audit reports) and
    the number of adverse opinion decreased by 8 percent between 2019-202 (Table 2.



    3The AFROSAI-E assessment was conducted in 2017, 2018, 2019 and 2021. According to the 2021 AFROSAI-E assessment report,
    the quality assurance interventions by OFAG in regulatory audits have been generally effective over the past four years and sited
    improvements in the areas of performance audit.


                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



   42.     A significant amount of project expenditure (around US$22.5 million of the US$33 million of
   project costs) relates to Componet 1: Improving expenditure management and information systems. As
   Annex 1C “Key outputs by component” shows, the three key PDO indicators relating to this component
   were achieved. The relative importance of this component was greater than the other components of the
   project both in terms of project costs and the impact it had on the achievement of all elements of the
   PDO. Given this fact, the positive trend before COVID-19/FCV impacted the project, and the fact that the
   unpacked PDO shows that the operation almost fully achieved its objectives. Efficacy is thus rated as
   Substantial.


C. EFFICIENCY

Assessment of Efficiency and Rating

   The overall efficiency is rated as Modest
   43.      The project closing period was extended twice. Project extensions generally demonstrate
   inefficincy. Indeed, low budget utilization, high staff turnover (amongst senior leadership) and
   procurement challenges were consistently mentioned as implementation issues in Implementation Status
   and Results Reports (ISR) particularly during the early years of the project, and contributed to the first
   request for extension of closing date. A second extension was requested due to COVID-19 and the state
   of emergency due to the conflict in the North of the country.
   44.      Despite the inefficiencies in the early years and the impact of COVID-19/internal conflict in the
   latter stages of the project (the country entering into FCV status in the final year) most of the planned
   activities were accomplished including those in the key component relating to IFMIS rollout. Furthermore,
   all completed activities were implemented within budget, and there was no cost overrun. Actual
   disbursement was US$28.8 million, amounting to a disbursement rate of around 87 percent. There were
   good examples of efficiency, for instance the FEACC successfully implemented the activities with less than
   60 percent of the budget.
   45.      The direct attribution of economic and financial benefits of PFM reform is challenging and many
   of the interventions difficult to quantify in monetary terms. Given the success of implementation of the
   IFMIS rollout, and maintenance of the IBEX system, together with the e-GP system it is reasonable that
   the Economic and Financial Analayses set out in the PAD will be achieved. This financial model shows an
   internal rate of return (IRR) of 27 percent over a 20 year period.
   46.      Overall, however, although resources were arguably economically used to achieve results,
   performance in this respect could have been improved. For example, disbursement would have been
   better if not for procurement delays and challenges such as the failure to award the OFAG contract.
   47.      There were three World Bank Task Team Leaders (TTL) at various times during the project
   lifecycle. The efficiency impact of this was mitigated by continious support by local team members
   including one staff member who was involved throughout the project life and was Co-TTL at project
   closure. A greater challenge was the turnover of senior client staff in the early years of the project.
   48.     During COVID-19 (and long periods of remote working,) and the period of internal conflict the
   World Bank and GoE teams remained engaged through the innovative use of technology . Lessons were
   learned from the early stages of the project and were applied. See Section IV and V below.
   49.    Overall, taking into account the difficult country context, it is concluded that resources were used
   adequately and that significant efficiency gains were achieved through the project design (which are
   captured in Annex 4). Given the challenges in the early years however, the efficiency rating is classified as
   Modest.


                                                                                                          Page 14 of 72
  The World Bank
  Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



D. JUSTIFICATION OF OVERALL OUTCOME RATING

    The Overall Outcome rating is assessed to be Moderately Satisfactory
    50.      In summary, Relevance is rated as High, Efficacy as Substantial and Efficiency as Modest. This was
    despite the onset of COVID-19 and the conflict in the north of the country, which meant that Ethiopia was
    classified as FCV in the final year of the project. The outcomes achieved by the project in these
    circumstances suggest that the PDO and the project design were appropriately pitched for the project
    context. The ex-post ToC constructed by the ICR team demonstrates that the project design remained
    robust and valid throughout the project lifetime.
    51.      The establishment of improved institutional resilience and capacity, which are evidenced in this
    report, were mentioned by stakeholders repeatedly in the interviews with the ICR team. Although not
    explicitly mentioned in the PDO statement, this capacity strengthening served the country well through
    increased resilience in the difficult final year of the project.


E. OTHER OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS (IF ANY)

    Gender
    52.       The project was not gender tagged however, there were key project outcomes which were
    relevant to closing gender gaps in the country. For example, around 41 percent of the training participants
    (civil servants) were women. A significant number of women participated in a prebudget discussion at
    woreda level. In the Oromia region, gender responsive budgeting is mainstreamed.

    Institutional Strengthening
    53.      Targeted institutional strengthening was not a focus of this project, apart from the institutional
    strengthening component implemented for all implementers. Nonetheless, in the course of
    implementation, implementing entities' institutional capacity has been strengthened in the form of staff
    capacity and resources. For example, the PMO was able to roll out IFMIS to 60 sites on its own after the
    contract with the vendor supporting the IFMIS rollout was completed. AABE's institutional capacity
    strengthened in terms of staff, operating manuals and information technology (IT) infrastructures and it
    is now in a position to discharge its mandate. The MOFEC's IT unit gained experience and skill in developing
    IT-related bid documentation.
    54.    The capacity of the procurement professionals at the Federal Public Procurement and Property
    Administration Agency (FPPPA) and pilot procuring entities was strengthened. As a result of the project,
    FEACC's staff capacity improved in recording and reporting fraud and corruption cases.
    55.     Though the contract on audit quality improvement was terminated, OFAG internally trained its
    staff based on the gap assessment conducted at the initial phase of the contract. The training helped to
    improve the quality of audit reports.
    56.     In the Somali region, data entry errors were reduced significantly because of the ongoing training
    and capacity development support provided at woreda and regional levels. The quality and timeliness of
    the financial report improved significantly4. Woreda and regional level council members' awareness of
    PFM have increased5. Woreda council members' role in scrutinizing the annual draft budget and reviewing
    and following the auditing findings strengthened.



    4   Somali region
    5   In Somali region, 68% of the woredas received the PFM awareness training for council members. 43% of the training


                                                                                                                            Page 15 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  57.     The PFM project helped the Oromia region to improve the quality of the financial report. The
  project implementation capability of the staff increased. Regional governments developed PFM
  strategies.

  Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity
  58.     Total 60 percent of the federal government budget was allocated to pro-poor sectors. An
  improved PFM system enhances the ability to formulate policy-based budgets which target poverty
  reduction. The adoption of international accounting standards is expected to promote transparency and
  accountability in the private sector and contribute to more revenue generation. The efficiency in public
  procurement through the adoption of e-GP, is expected to achieve value for money and speedy
  procurement more than ever. The capacity building support to fight corruption and promoting ethical
  practice will have a direct impact on poverty reduction.

  Counterfactual
  59.     PFM reform is a public good that the private sector will rarely provide. If the aforementioned
  reforms had not taken actioned by government, funded by a donor such as the World Bank, the
  counterfactual is that key reforms such as the IFMIS rollout and the e-GP either would not have taken
  place or taken a lot longer to implement. In addition, the World Bank was instrumental in helping
  government understand the need for incorporating extensive training and capacity building into project
  design. Without this, the reforms would have been much less impactful.


  III.       KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECTED IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOME

  A. KEY FACTORS DURING PREPARATION

  60.        Key challenges during project preparation included:

         •     Delay in the submission of plans: Implementing agencies were late submitting the expected
               plans.
         •     Lack of expertise: The lack of expertise and absence of an advisor internally affected the pace
               of implementation of some of the interventions including the MOFEC website development and
               IFMIS strategy development.
         •     Lack of a dedicated focal person for some of the implementing entities (for example, OFAG).
         •     Poor infrastructure: In some regions, poor network infrastructure caused delay in
               communicating with the woredas during the project preparation stage (for example, Somali
               region).
         •     Inadequate budget estimates: Inadequate budget estimation and allocation led to frequent
               amendments of activities and a prolonged approval process at OFAG.

  B. KEY FACTORS DURING IMPLEMENTATION

  Factors subject to control of government and other implementing entities
  •      Leadership: Frequent changes in State Minister and turnover of key MOFEC directors led to initial
         slow implementation of activities, consequent low disbursement, and lack of clear and consistent
         ownership. Changes in political leadership and restructuring affected the pace of the project, and
         implementation in some of the regions. The IFMIS Steering Committee met infrequently. Some IFMIS
         issues could potentially been addressed earlier if the Committee had met regularly.


                                                                                                        Page 16 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  •   Staff turnover and retention: For example, there were four different project managers in the first two
      years of the project. This contributed to delays in the Professional Accountancy Organization (PAO)
      establishment, IFMIS rollouts and procurement. The fee perception at MOFEC caused much delay in
      realizing contracts. The salary structure and annual contracts of PMO contract led to a sense of
      uncertainty which spilled over into turnover of PMO staff. The capacity building/training of staff
      helped mitigate the high turnover of staff and keep the project moving. This was essential to sustain
      project development outcomes.
  •   Limited Internal Capacity: Limited project management skills and technical capacity affected the pace
      of implementation of activities, including e-GP, Treasury Single Account and DMFAS interfacing. The
      unavailability of the required level of procurement professionals affected the pace of implementation
      of the e-GP. The absence of technical skills affected the operation of the Oracle Super cluster.
      Insufficient Terms of reference (ToR) and specifications prolonged the procurement process. Low-
      quality ToR and Request for Proposal preparation resulted in several bid cancellations/re-biddings and
      contract administration. Due to an insufficient number of training centers, it was not possible to
      provide multiple training at a time.
  •   Challenges in the initial phase of the project: Limited commitment and misunderstanding on the
      impacts of the interventions by top management affected the pace of the project at the initial phase
      at some of the implementing entities; and project reports were delayed at regional level. The support
      from Public Procuring Entities in providing the necessary data timely to the e-GP implementation was
      not adequate and contributed to the delay in implementation. There were also delays in procurement
      of IBEX hardware and procurement tools and staffing issues with the IFMIS vendor (Detailed in Annex
      5: Borrower Completion report). Early on the MOFEC also struggled to pay IFMIS vendors on a timely
      basis.
  •   Communication/ Change Management: A more focused communication strategy could have helped
      address the initial issues faced by the project. Furthermore, the delayed appointment of a change
      management consultancy meant that all change management activities were not delivered by project
      closing date and will need to be financed from other sources. Timely appointment of this consultancy
      may have led to more positive outcomes for the project.

  Factors under the control of the World Bank
  61.     The World Bank team’s follow-up and support were very instrumental in the success of the
  project. The World Bank was flexible enough to respond to requests for realignments and extensions of
  the project completion period considering the pressing factors.

  Factors outside the control of the government /implementing entities
  •   COVID-19 pandemic: The state of emergency because of COVID-19 and related restrictions slowed
      down the pace of the project implementation. Training-related programs were extended, the number
      of trainings per session was reduced, and staff mobility to support regions was reduced.
  •   Instability in the northern part of the country: Due to the conflict, mobilities were restricted. Some
      capacity-building supports were not conducted, and resources were lost or damaged in Tigray, and
      some parts of Amhara and Afar regions. Ethiopia was designated as an FCV country in the last year of
      the project.
  •   Supplier-related factors: The lack of competent local firms for services contributed to the prolonged
      procurement process. Some contractors were delayed and took more time than anticipated. Some
      suppliers were unable to provide the goods due to foreign currency shortages.



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




   IV. BANK PERFORMANCE, COMPLIANCE ISSUES, AND RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME

A. QUALITY OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E)

   M&E Design

   62.      A ToC/ Results chain could have been more explicitly stated in the PAD. World Bank experience is
   that effective operations in FCV situations are rooted in a good ToC. However, the indicators in the results
   framework were sufficient to monitor progress towards the PDO as demonstrated in the ToC
   reconstructed by the ICR team in Annex 6.2. There were a small number of indicators that were clearly
   linked to the PDO. Project beneficiaries could/ and should have been explicitly stated in the PDO but
   instead were defined in the PAD itself.

   M&E Implementation
   63.     In the early days of project implementation, monitoring of the results framework was inconsistent
   due to the absence of a responsible person. As noted in the Borrower Completion report (Annex 5) there
   were a number of issues, particularly relating to completeness and objectivity, and the steering committee
   and technical committee responsible for them did not meet regularly.
   64.      Later, things improved considerably. A Project Task Force, composed of World Bank and MOFEC
   teams, conducted periodic meetings to evaluate the status of the project. The task force usually met
   weekly or bi-weekly and in every meeting, the following meeting schedule was set. In the meetings there
   was a discussion of previously agreed action plans whereby representatives from the implementing units
   would explain progress and challenges. New action plans were also developed to address prevailing issues.
   Action plans were monitored and evaluated in upcoming meetings. Action items were clearly outlined
   with a responsible unit and a due date. In every review meeting, actions were taken based on the issues
   raised. Periodic task force meetings minutes were prepared and shared with participants.
   65.      Project contractors and implementing entities were required to submit a progress report to the
   task force6. The M&E data was also used to critically review the relevance of some activities. For example,
   the activity planned for the acquisition of Oracle ACS services has been canceled.
   66.      The Channel One Programs Coordination Directorate (COPCD) under the MOFEC was responsible
   for the submission of a quarterly project budget utilization report which includes information about year-
   to-date budget variances by activities and indicates the status of contracts against planned milestones.
   67.    In the Somali region, the Bureau of Finance, in collaboration with the World Bank team, conducted
   monitoring activities. M&E activities included a review of reports, audit reports, and progress reports,
   conducting field visits and participation in missions.
   68.     In the Oromia region, monitoring and evaluation were conducted quarterly, bi-annually and
   annually, based on an M&E evaluation checklist. Joint field missions were conducted with World Bank.
   The deputy head of the finance bureau and the M&E specialist attended the field mission. The field visit
   findings were presented at quarterly, bi-annually and annual review meetings.
   69.      The M&E process helped FEACC to ensure that appropriate training participants are selected, and
   quality training was provided.




   6   ACCA’s report – April 2, 2021


                                                                                                         Page 18 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



   M&E Utilization

   70.      In every M&E meeting, the task force reviewed previous action plans, discussed and identified
   new action items and assigned responsibilities for immediate action. Implementing entities applied M&E
   to rectify challenges and to escalate issues to the executives when deemed necessary. Regions were able
   to periodically review the changes in the quality and timeliness of financial reports received from woreda
   and regional sector bureaus. The M&E helped regions to identify and support poorly performing woredas
   and sector bureaus7.

   Justification of Overall Rating of Quality of M&E

   The Overall rating for M&E is Modest
   71.    Good examples were found of M&E implementation and utilization. However, a ToC to
   supplement the Results framework was lacking at the project design and there were challenges in
   monitoring M&E in the early project period.
   72.     Assessing results and performance in FCV contexts is more challenging than in regular
   environments due to a fast changing and difficult operating environment. Both internal conflict and other
   issues such as COVID-19 provided a complex and difficult backdrop for this project. M&E
   implementation/performance needs to be seen in this context. Despite these challenges M&E held up and
   indeed improved through the project life.


B. ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE

   Environmental and Social Compliance
   73.     Since the project involved capacity building activities that did not adversely affect the
   environment, the Safeguard Category was assessed as Category "C" during preparation. This remained
   the case during the project life. As such, an environmental assessment was not required at any stage.

   Fiduciary Compliance

   74.     In summary, the project largely complied with fiduciary covenants during implementation.
   Internal control arrangements were in place, and an adequate financial management system and records
   were maintained. In addition, procurement guidelines were followed. Periodically, however, there were
   delays in interim financial reports (IFR) submission and uploading procurement information to Systematic
   Tracking of Exchange in Procurement (STEP).
   75.    The financial management (FM) arrangement was designed to follow the government PFM
   budget approval process, a FM manual was in place, and a dedicated accountant was appointed in MOFEC
   COPCD. Country systems were used, firstly, the government's IBEX system was used until IFMIS was
   adopted recently.
   76.     As the project was implemented with some federal-level implementers and the regions, the FM
   risk was assessed as Moderate. The project initially had a satisfactory FM rating which later turned to MS
   and MU due to the low disbursement rates, staff turnover and challenges over unreconciled differences.
   As progress was made in later years, the rating was upgraded to MS. In general, the project met the critical


   7   Somali region


                                                                                                         Page 19 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



   FM covenants of maintaining a good FM system, submitting IFRs within 60 days of the quarter-end and
   submitting audits every year within six months of the year-end.
   77.     However, the project had gone through its share of challenges throughout its implementation.
   Key issues noted during implementation include the following:
        •   In the project's first four years, IFRs were submitted on time. However, since October 2020, delay
            and quality problems were noted mainly due to staff turnover, and poor communication within
            government.
        •   All audits were received on time with unqualified audit opinions. However, the management
            letters revealed internal control weaknesses which were later rectified.
        •   Low budget utilization and low disbursement rate were prominent throughout the life of the
            project. This is mostly related to the pace of project implementation.
        •   Staff turnover was noted, which disrupted the FM function of the project.
        •   There were issues in timeliness of the preparation of annual work plans and budgets in the early
            years which improved.

   78.      The Project Procurement activities were executed in accordance with World Bank procedures
   and Guidelines: (i) "Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and non-Consulting Services Under IBRD
   Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers," dated January 2011; (ii) "Guidelines: Selection
   and Employment of Consultants Under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers,"
   dated January 2011. COPCD is responsible for using the World Bank's STEP system to prepare
   Procurement Plans, upload procurement documents, secure no objections, and handle procurement
   communications with the World Bank. The implementation arrangement was such that COPCD would be
   responsible for all procurements under the project. At the same time, other beneficiary institutions would
   be responsible for technical input and leadership to the respective procurement activities supporting their
   institution.
   79.     Generally, procurement procedures followed by COPCD during the implementation of the project
   were compliant with the agreed procedures. However, COPCD failed to timely upload in STEP
   procurement process documents for Post Review activities at each stage of the process despite a repeated
   request from the World Bank team.


C. BANK PERFORMANCE

   Quality at Entry
   Rating: Satisfactory
   80.      The World Bank's performance during the design of the project was satisfactory. During
   preparation and appraisal, the World Bank considered the adequacy of project design and all major
   relevant technical and institutional factors, including procurement and financial management. In addition,
   major risk factors and lessons learned from earlier projects in the governance sector were considered and
   incorporated into the project design. Project preparation was carried out with an adequate number of
   specialists who provided the technical skills mix necessary to address sector concerns and a good project
   design. The World Bank provided adequate human and financial resources to ensure quality preparation
   and appraisal work (details in Annex 2). The project was consistent with the CPF Framework and
   government priorities in the sector at the time. The World Bank had a consistently good working
   relationship with the borrower during preparation and appraisal. Hence, with some minor shortcomings
   in project design, as mentioned in Section 2.1, World Bank performance at preparation is rated
   Satisfactory.


                                                                                                        Page 20 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



   Quality of Supervision
   Rating: Satisfactory
   81.      The World Bank's performance during the implementation of the project was satisfactory.
   Sufficient budget and staff resources were allocated, and the project was adequately, intensively
   supervised, and closely monitored. The task team prepared aide-memoirs regularly, prepared and alerted
   the government to problems with project execution, and facilitated remedies promptly in conformity with
   World Bank procedures. The ISRs realistically rated the project's performance both in terms of
   achievement of development objectives and project implementation.
   82.     The World Bank's task team played a crucial coordinating and proactive role in suggesting and
   promoting solutions in a partnership model with other DPs. The team focused on relevant and clear
   performance indicators. The task team also monitored safeguard and fiduciary compliances. They
   developed continuous dialogue and communication with project staff and successfully prevented
   potential problems from emerging and gathered information on weaknesses in internal financial controls.
   For example, on the FM side, World Bank staff were proactive in supervision efforts, going beyond
   reviewing FM reports and audit reports. On the procurement side, the World Bank remained responsive
   to the capacity needs of the project and assisted them in building and retaining a procurement support
   structure that best suited the implementation needs. There was stability in Task Team Leadership, with a
   minimum turnover of TTLs despite the extended implementation period. A local co-TTL supported the two
   international TTLs who led the project during this period. This combination of international expertise and
   local knowledge was a significant factor in the World Bank’s satisfactory supervision during
   implementation.

   Justification of Overall Rating of Bank Performance
       Rating: Satisfactory
   83.       With a Satisfactory rating for quality at entry as well as for the quality of supervision, overall Bank
   performance is rated as Satisfactory in accordance with Impact Evaluation Group harmonized rating
   criteria.

D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME
       Technical Risks:
   84.     Further capacity development is required to sustain the achievements in e-GP, IFMIS, program
   budgeting, and website maintenance. High staff turnover risks the sustainment of achievements made
   and the completion of the implementation of ongoing activities at the PMO office, the IT unit, and AABE.

       Financial Risks
   85.      Financial resources are required to subscribe for security and network monitoring tools licenses,
   and to rollout the e-GP beyond the piloted procuring entities. Completing the ongoing activities this
   project initiated requires additional resources to complete the work in progress. At this stage, it is difficult
   to determine if the government can avail of the needed resources to achieve the remaining activities.
   Resources also need to be made available to upscale and maintain the momentum created by the project.

       Political risks:
   86.    The conflict in the country may affect the success achieved so far, especially at the local
   government level. Other pressing political issues may diminish the political commitment of the
   government to sustain the achievements made so far and to implement the ongoing activities.


                                                                                                              Page 21 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



      V. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
      87.     The coordination and follow-up between the World Bank, the Expenditure Management and
      Control Program Directorate (EMCPD), COPCD, and the leads of key activities played vital roles in the
      successes achieved. Lessons have been identified that should inform future projects, especially those
      requiring close collaboration between implementing agencies and a "whole of government approach."
      These are summarized below.
          •   The delays in the initial phase of the project are attributed to the delay in assigning the right focal
              person for the project. Early assignment of focal persons at each implementing entity and
              strengthening of the project support units such as the procurement and EMCPD to drive forward
              activities is critical in achieving momentum and quick wins.
          •   The follow up and challenging of implementing agencies when project progress stalled were
              critical and appropriate to move the project forward. (for example, the limitation in ToR design
              and the weak follow-up at the OFAG partly contributed to the failed contract.) The project got
              better at this during its lifetime. The design of future projects should frontload the design of terms
              of reference, procurement tasks, and strengthening implementing entities' capacity with a view
              to improving project performance, including disbursement, in the early years
          •   Lessons surrounding lack of coordination and planning when a procurement straddles two public
              bodies should be learned. For example, as previously mentioned in the case of the OFAG, there
              was a significant example of failed procurement which arose due to the OFAG being responsible
              for technical aspects of the process and the MOFEC responsible for the procurement itself. Robust
              coordination mechanisms should be introduced in future projects to avoid similar examples of
              failed procurement.
          •   There was significant turnover in Senior Leadership during the project life in both MOFEC and
              other entities. Where there was strong direction and ownership and hence good leadership,
              project activities progressed and vice versa. The lesson here is that stability and commitment at
              senior leadership levels can significantly impact project implementation.
          •   Strong and continuous supervision was evident during the project life. Achievements on e-GP
              implementation, roll-out of IFMIS and implementation of DMFAS, progress made by FEACC and
              AABE are attributed to the strong and continuous supervision. Tracking and using action-oriented
              trackers frequently helped correct the course at critical moments, as did the introduction of
              regular progress reports. The supervision process enabled personnel of the implementing entities
              to apply tracking tools like the STEP. The application of the performance-based disbursement was
              an incentive for implementing entities to accelerate performances.
      88.     In addition, there was some evidence of the project positively contributing to gender positive
      approaches, especially in attending training/capacity building programs. Greater focus was given to
      integrating gender issues. As PFM reforms are deepened, consideration should be given to putting a
      greater emphasis on incorporating innovative activities to address gender disparity into the design of
      future projects.
      89.       Ethiopia has more than 20 years of data from multiple financial systems (IFMIS, IBEX and so on)
      that if cleaned and reconciled could better informed policymaking. Future bespoke systems development
      financed by the World Bank should consider including implementation of Business Intelligence and
      furthermore build data analytics capabilities.

.



                                                                                                               Page 22 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                                  ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS



A. RESULTS INDICATORS

A.1 PDO Indicators


 Objective/Outcome: Improve efficiency, transparency and accountability of public expenditure at fed and regional levels
                                                                                                      Formally Revised          Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                      Unit of Measure Baseline                Original Target
                                                                                                      Target                    Completion

 Reduced cash float for the          Percentage      22.00                   18.70                                              16.75
 Federal and Regional
 Governments (in percent of                          30-Dec-2015             07-Mar-2022                                        07-Mar-2022
 the annual federal budget)


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator One: The data is collected from 2009 EFY, EFY 2010, EFY 2011 and 2012 EFY Financial statements of the federal government.

     • Federal the cash amount on June 30, 2009, was birr 30,624,984,427 and the total adjusted budget approved was birr 229,699,500,000.
       Therefore……30,624,984,427 / 229,699,500,000 X 100 = 13.33 % (2009 EFY)
     • Data of the Federal cash amount on June 30, 2010, shows birr 36,561,338,397.57 and the total adjusted budget approved was birr
       360,338,330,217.20. Therefor 36,561,338,397.57 / 360,338,330,217.20 X 100 = 10.15 % (2010 EFY).
     • Regarding 2011 EFY, Cash amount on June 30,2011 shows birr 63,280,754,534.57 and the total adjusted budget was birr 403,162,030,081.99.
       Hence, 63280754534.57/403,162,030,081.99 X100=15.7%.
     • 2012 EFY, cash amount on June 30,2012 shows birr 70,515,099,759.28 and the total adjusted budget is birr 476,900,009,255.31Therefore
       70,515,099,759.28/476,900,009,255.31*100=14.79




                                                                                                                                        Page 23 of 72
     The World Bank
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


     • 2013 EFY cash amount on June 30,2013 shows birr 88,421,275,998.19 and the total adjusted budget is birr 527,844,550,173.69 Therefore
        88,421,275,998.19/527,844,550,173.69*100=16.75




                                                                                                          Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                    Unit of Measure Baseline                     Original Target
                                                                                                          Target                     Completion

 Timely disclosure of key          Months            24.00                      9.00                                                 6.00
 fiscal/budget documents
                                                     30-Dec-2015                07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator Two: Timely disclosure of key fiscal /budget documents: PEFA PI-10

This indicator was calculated on the disclosure of key fiscal/budget specified on PEFA PI-10 only the audit financial statement disclosure. 2012 EFY report
has been prepared and posted on OFAG or MoF’s website. For 2012 MOF reported on June 3 2022 that the result is 6 months. For 2013 EFY, it was also
reported that the accounts are under audit and will be posted when finalized.




                                                                                                          Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                    Unit of Measure Baseline                     Original Target
                                                                                                          Target                     Completion

 Target agencies                   Percentage        10.00                      50.00                                                33.00
 progressively increase
 number of contracts awarded                         30-Dec-2015                07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022
 within agreed benchmark of
 180 days for works contrcts >
 US$5million & Goods
 >US$500,000




                                                                                                                                             Page 24 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator Three: In 2009 EFY out 39 ERA Projects 29 of them are awarded with less than 180 days, Ministry of Agriculture awarded one of its Projects with
132 days. PPDS awarded out of 19 Projects 11 of them are awarded less than 100 days. In general, out of 51 Projects 38 of them are awarded less than 180
days.

Therefore, it was calculated as 38/51*100= 74.5

The 2010 and 2011 data will be consolidated based on the data received from the agencies.

For 2012 EFY As per FPPPAA response, the system using the excel sheet is unable to deliver the result and not able to trace the data.

For 2013 EFY regarding Goods awarded in percent, PPPDS 12.5, MOA 69.57, ERA 25, MOH 22.89 average performance for Goods is 32.49. Work
performance of ERA 32.26, MOH 35 and average performance is 33.63 total average (Goods and Works) is 33.06. The reduction is due to the pandemic and
conflict related issues.




                                                                                                         Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                   Unit of Measure Baseline                     Original Target
                                                                                                         Target                     Completion

 Increase in the percentage of     Text              NA                        NA                                                   MOFEC /OFAG
 audits conforming to                                                                                                               provided a progress
 International Standards of                                                                                                         update on the audits
 Supreme Audit Institutions                                                                                                         (In 2021 AFROSAI have
                                                                                                                                    conducted the audit
                                                                                                                                    quality assurance but
                                                                                                                                    again no percentage)

                                                     30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022


 Comments (achievements against targets):




                                                                                                                                           Page 25 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


MOF /OFAG provided a progress update on the audits but no percentages of change in the use of international standards has been provided. AFROSAI-E
carried out the audit quality reviews each year but did not present a percentage change in the application of standards to the number of audits produced.
End targets have not been set either. The OFAG selected some indicators and followed up on the progress.




                                                                                                         Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                    Unit of Measure Baseline                    Original Target
                                                                                                         Target                     Completion

 Direct Beneficiaries, who are     Number            47,000.00                 84,000.00                                            86,484.00
 recipients of the training
 provided by the project                             30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022
 (disaggregated by Gender)


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator Five: Direct Beneficiaries, who are recipient of the training provided by the Project (Disaggregated by Gender). In 2009 EFY 5250 were trained with
39.35% female participation bringing total cumulative trained beneficiaries to 52,250 (against the target of 52,000). In 2010 EFY overall 7465 trainees were
trained at federal and regional level with 33.8% of female participation bringing total cumulative trained beneficiaries to 59,715 (against the target of
60,000). For EFY 2011 EFY (9 months) 7,082 were trained with 59.04% female participation bringing total cumulative trained beneficiaries to 66,797 (against
the target of 68,000). In 2012 EFY about 9762 were trained with 48% female participation bringing total cumulative trained beneficiaries to 76,559 (against
the target of 84,000); and for EFY 2013 about 9925 trainees were trained with 39% female participation bringing total cumulative trained beneficiaries to
86,484 (against the target of 84,000). Therefore, the cumulative rolling data shows 86,484 were trained. The following were areas training were delivered:

     •   PFM Institutional Training at Federal and Regional,
     •   Short term training on PFM at regional and Federal Level,
     •   IFMIS and IBEX training,
     •   Professional Training on procurement and Property administration
     •   Woreda council members training
     •   Woreda Ethics officers training
     •   Fraud and corruption complaint handling and resolution, disclosure of asset
     •   Accounting and auditing standards training



                                                                                                                                            Page 26 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




A.2 Intermediate Results Indicators

 Component: Expenditure Management and Information Systems Support
                                                                                                         Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                   Unit of Measure Baseline                     Original Target
                                                                                                         Target                     Completion

 Increase in budget execution     Percentage         55.00                     75.00                                                92.16
 rate in targeted sectors
 (Health, Education,                                 30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022
 Agriculture, and Water) - in
 percent of budgeted
 expenditure in sector at the
 Regional level


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result indicator one: Increase in budget execution rate in targeted sectors (Health, Education, Agriculture, and Water) – in percent of
budgeted expenditure in sector at the regional level.

     • The targeted agencies budget execution rate for 2009 EFY was 90.45 and in 2010 EFY 6 months was 39.96%.
     • For EFY 2009 total adjusted budget the selected sectors were birr 100,497,810,000 and the actual expenditure was birr 90,899,900,000. Therefore,
        the executing rate becomes 90,899.90/100,497.81*100 = 90.45%
     • For EFY 2010 the performance shows 92.91 % which was calculated as actual expenditure of over the year of the sectors against approved budget.
       i.e. (75,153,829,000*100)/ 80,887,905,000= 92.91%.
     • For EFY 2011 performance shows that 87.37% which is calculated actual expenditure against approved budget
       (105,525,700/120,779,100*100=87.37%)
     • For EFY 2012 EFY actual expenditure against approved budget is 125,561.62/134,658.56*100=93.24




                                                                                                                                            Page 27 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


     • EFY 2013 performance shows that 92.16% which is actual 12 months expenditure against approved budget for the year
       (173,536.72/159,928.51*100=92.16)




                                                                                                       Formally Revised          Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                  Unit of Measure Baseline                    Original Target
                                                                                                       Target                    Completion

 Rolling out of the new Chart    Text              Only approved budget      100 federal entities                                201 sites at federal
 of Accounts at the Federal                        disclosed on PBB basis                                                        entities are on IFMIS.
 Level to facilitate
 expenditure reporting by PBB                      30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                         07-Mar-2022


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result Indicator Two:

     • In 2009 EFY Agencies using new COA were 17. As of July 2018, 59(fifty-nine) Federal public bodies and 8 branch offices use the new chart of
       accounts for budget administration, cash management, and account reporting and property administration through the implementation of IFMIS
       system. In 2011 EFY (9 months) including branches 123 sites are using the new COA.
     • In 2011 EFY including branches 124 sites are using the new COA.
     • In 2012 EFY 170 sites are using the new COA.
     • In 2013 EFY 201 sites are using the new IFMIS COA




Component: Strengthening Accountability Institutions
                                                                                                       Formally Revised          Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                  Unit of Measure Baseline                    Original Target
                                                                                                       Target                    Completion

 Percent of contracts awarded    Percentage        50.00                     70.00                                               76.20



                                                                                                                                         Page 28 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


 using competitive                                     30-Dec-2015                 07-Mar-2022                                  07-Mar-2022
 procurement methods in
 targeted agencies.


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result Indicator Three: Percent of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods in targeted agencies:

     • This data was reported by FPPPA and PPDS has use 89%, ERA 98% and MoANR 98%. The average becomes 95%. The two missed agencies will be
         requested to submit their reports and the result may be revised.
     •   The 2010 data will be consolidated based on the data received from the agencies
     •   EFY 2011 only 2 agencies are reporting out of 7 and waiting for others to submit to produce final report.
     •   EFY 2012 the data reported by PPDS has use the competitive method 99.84%, ERA 99.84%, MoANR 51.12, MoE 92.55, Pharmaceutical Supply
         Agency 89.15 the average becomes 61%
     •   EFY 2013 PPDS uses 64.17%, MOA 94%, ERA 88.38, PFSA 94%, MOH 67.04%, MoE 49.56% and the average becomes 76.2%- This is per latest
         information received from MoF on June 3 2022




                                                                                                     Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                     Unit of Measure Baseline                       Original Target
                                                                                                     Target                     Completion

 e-GP developed and                 Percentage         0.00                        6.00                                         9.00
 installed at FPPA and in all E-
 GP target agencies at Federal                         30-Dec-2015                 07-Mar-2022                                  07-Mar-2022
 level


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result Indicator Four:

     • The e-GP manager and communication consultant are hired and started their preliminary duties. Contract agreement is signed with Ministry of
         Innovation and Technology to start up the rolling out activity in pilot institutions.


                                                                                                                                       Page 29 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


     • In 2011 EFY for e-GP implementation, software development started hardware procurement under contract signature.
     • In 2012 EFY the development of the software is about 90% completed.
     • In 2013 EFY the E-GP software development is completed and installed in 9 pilot agencies. Result is therefore achieved. Out of 9 pilot agencies 5 of
        them (MOR, MINT, AASTU, FPPPA, AAU) are posting the tender process. In addition to 9 pilot institutions 57 institutions are registered and
        published their annual procurement plans. Rollout strategy for the federal and regional institutions are finalized




                                                                                                        Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                   Unit of Measure Baseline                    Original Target
                                                                                                        Target                     Completion

 IT and Forensic audits           Number            0.00                      15.00                                                0.00
 completed by OFAG
                                                    30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result Indicator Five:

     • Last year it was reported that OFAG conducts 5 IT and Fraud Audits with the help of other funds. This year the office conducts IT and forensic audits
       by OFAG which will be reported on next reporting time.
     • The result is not reported by OFAG for EFY 2011 and 2012
     • TA contract is terminated



                                                                                                        Formally Revised           Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                   Unit of Measure Baseline                    Original Target
                                                                                                        Target                     Completion

 Issuance of national             Number            0.00                      100.00                                               0.00
 professional accountancy
 qualification certificate at                       30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                          07-Mar-2022



                                                                                                                                           Page 30 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


 least at a Technician level


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result indicator six: Not achieved. Progress include:

      • In 2010 AABE received 171 Applicant who wanted to become authorized Accountant and Auditor. Out of which 167 Applied to become Authorized
          Accountant and the reset for applied to become Authorized Auditor. The board has given firm license to 21 Authorized Accountants and 4
          Authorized Auditors.
      •   In 2018 AABE has renewed the license of 839 Authorized Accountants and 241 Accounting firms. Meanwhile 136 Authorized Auditors and 15
          Auditing firms renewed their license in the same year.
      •   In 2018 AABE renewed 1034 individual competency certificate and 113 firm level certificates of Authorized Accountants
      •   In 2018 AABE renewed 158 individual competencies Certificate and 6 firm level certificates of Authorized Auditors
      •   In EFY 2012 EFY AABE renewed the license of Authorized Accountants for 105 individuals new, for 870 individuals renew, for 189 Firm new, for 966
          Firm renew Accountants. Meanwhile regarding Authorized Auditors for 38 individuals new, for 111 individuals renew, for 4 Firm new and for 154
          firm renewed their license of Authorized Auditors.
      •   EFY 2013 in 12 months regarding authorized accountants for 92 new individuals, for 29 firm and for individual and firm renewed are 1143 and 874
          respectively. Regarding authorized auditors for 9 new individuals, for 2 firm and for individual and firm renewed are 171 and 140 respectively.
      •   The PAO under development and is not legally established (the Law is at the Council of Ministers awaiting approval). Therefore, during the life of
          the project it was not possible to realize the issuance of local accountancy certification.

Once PAO is legally established, it is expected to issue National certifications.




                                                                                                          Formally Revised          Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                     Unit of Measure Baseline                        Original Target
                                                                                                          Target                    Completion

 Woredas whose Finance and          Percentage         10.00                        85.00                                           75.00
 Budget Standing Committee
 members are trained to                                30-Dec-2015                  07-Mar-2022                                     07-Mar-2022
 undertake audit follow-up



                                                                                                                                            Page 31 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



 Comments (achievements against targets):
In 2009 EFY (FY17) 25% of the Woredas Budget and Finance Standing Committees (BFSCs) have been trained and in 2010 the execution is underway to
reach 75 %.

In May 2018 and 2019, 75 % of the Woredas BFSCs have been trained and no current information since then.

No info for EFY 2013 or FY2021- It is our understanding that due to COVID these trainings were affected




                                                                                                          Formally Revised     Actual Achieved at
 Indicator Name                   Unit of Measure Baseline                    Original Target
                                                                                                          Target               Completion

 Woredas posting simplified       Percentage        90.00                     95.00                                            89.00
 budget and execution
 reports to the citizens                            30-Dec-2015               07-Mar-2022                                      07-Mar-2022


 Comments (achievements against targets):
Intermediate Result Indicator Eight:

     • Out of 1023 Woredas 983 of them posted the simplified budget and execution reports for citizens on billboards according to the regional BoFEDs
       report. In 2011 EFY 93.65% woredas are posted simplified budget execution reports to the citizens.
     • In 2011 EFY out of 1041 woredas 986 woredas are posted budget and execution report for citizens.
     • In 2012 EFY out of 1023 Woredas 958 Woredas are posted budget and execution report for citizens.
     • In 2013 EFY from 1119 woredas 996 woredas are posted the budget execution report for citizens. So around 89% of the woredas are posted-
       reduction due to COVID and conflict issues.




                                                                                                                                       Page 32 of 72
     The World Bank
     Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                     Most of the PDOs and Intermediate results Indicators (IRI) are achieved or substantially achieved except for a few indicators
        noted below.
B. KEY OUTPUTS BY COMPONENT


   Objective/Outcome 1               1.    Improve the efficiency of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels

                                           •    (PO 1) Reduced cash float at the Federal and Regional Levels, resulting in a substantial reduction in interest costs to
                                                Government.
                                           •    (PO 3) Targeted agencies progressively increase the percentage of contracts awarded within an agreed benchmark of
    Outcome Indicators
                                                180 days for contracts above US$5,000,000 for works and US$500,000 for goods
                                           •    (PO 5) The number of Direct Beneficiaries who are the recipients of the institutionalized training provided by the
                                                project.

                                           i. Increase in budget execution rate in targeted sectors (Health, Education, Agriculture, and Water) – in percent of
                                              budgeted expenditure in sectors at the regional level
   Intermediate Results Indicators
                                          ii. Percentage of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods in targeted agencies at the start of the project
                                              was 50 percent.

                                            ▪   Cash float reduced from 22 percent to 16.75 percent.
                                            ▪   Budget execution rate in targeted sectors increased from 55 percent to 92.16 percent.
   Key Outputs by Component
                                            ▪   Target agencies progressively increase number of contracts awarded within agreed benchmark of 180 days for works
   (linked to the achievement of
                                                contrcts > US$5million & Goods >US$500,000 increased from 10 percent to 33 percent.
   the Objective/Outcome 1)
                                            ▪   Direct Beneficiaries, who are recipients of the training provided by the project (disaggregated by gender) increasedf
                                                from 47,000 to 86,484

   Objective/Outcome 2               2.    Improve transparency of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels

    Outcome Indicators                     •    (PO 2) Timely disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents.

   Intermediate Results Indicators         i. Woredas posting a simplified budget execution report to the citizens, including citizens' feedback

   Key Outputs by Component                 ▪   Disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents improved from 24 months to 10 months
   (linked to the achievement of            ▪   Website of MOFEC upgraded, budget execution reports are published
   the Objective/Outcome 2)



                                                                                                                                                          Page 33 of 72
 The World Bank
 Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)


Objective/Outcome 3               3.     Improve accountability of public expenditure at the federal and regional levels

                                         •    (PO 4) An increase in the percentage of audits conforming to International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions
Outcome Indicators
                                             (ISSAI) issued by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions.
                                         i. Rolling out of the new Chart of Accounts (COA) at the Federal Level to facilitate expenditure reporting by program-based
                                            budgeting (PBB)
                                        ii. IT and forensic audit to be completed by OFAG
Intermediate Results Indicators
                                       iii. e-GP developed and installed at FPPPA and in targeted agencies at the Federal level
                                       iv. Issuance of national professional qualification certificate at the technical level. Not done
                                        v. Woredas, whose finance and budget committee members trained to undertake audit follow-up

                                         ▪    The new chart of account rolled out at 201 sites at Federal entities, along with IFMIS
                                         ▪    Percent of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods in targeted agencies increased from 50 percent
                                              to 76.2 percent
                                         ▪    e-GP developed and installed at FPPPA and implemented at 9 pilot entities.
Key Outputs by Component                 ▪    Woredas whose Finance and Budget Standing Committee members are trained to undertake audit follow-up increasef
(linked to the achievement of                 from 10 percent to 75 percent
the Objective/Outcome 2)                 ▪    The institutional capacity of AABE strengthened, the draft law for the establishment of Professional accountancy body is
                                              submitted to Parliament
                                         ▪    Debt Management and Financial Analysis System is upgraded and more Debt related monthly and quarterly reports are
                                              published.
                                         ▪    513 Ethics officers trained on frued and corruption preventation at three regional states




                                                                                                                                                       Page 34 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                    ANNEX 2. BANK LENDING AND IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT/SUPERVISION


 A. TASK TEAM MEMBERS

Name                                                     Role
Preparation
Parminder P. S. Brar, Yoko Kagawa                        Task Team Leaders
Binyam Bedelu Mekbib                                     Procurement Specialist
Meron Tadesse Techane                                    Financial Management Specialist
Yemsrach Kinfe Edey                                      Team Member
Asferachew Abate Abebe                                   Environmental Specialist
Selamawit Ayalew                                         Team Member
Abiy Demissie Belay                                      Team Member
Simon B. Chenjerani Chirwa                               Team Member
Berhanu Legesse Ayane                                    Team Member
Cem Dener                                                Team Member
Chukwudi H. Okafor                                       Social Specialist
Mesfin Girma Bezawagaw                                   Team Member
Jose C. Janeiro                                          Team Member
Elsa Araya                                               Team Member
Mei Wang                                                 Team Member
Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                    Social Specialist
Nikolai Soubbotin                                        Counsel
Marie J. Bolou                                           Team Member
Supervision/ICR
Rafika Chaouali, Abiy Demissie Belay                     Task Team Leaders
Binyam Bedelu Mekbib, Shimelis Woldehawariat Badisso     Procurement Specialists
Girma Habte Weyesa                                       Financial Management Specialist
Finot Getachew Wondimagegnehu                            Team Member
Sibani Karki                                             Social Specialist
Yacob Wondimkun Endaylalu                                Environmental Specialist
Yalemzewud Simachew Tiruneh                              Social Specialist
Simon Sottsas                                            Social Specialist
Meron Tadesse Techane                                    Team Member
Yoko Kagawa                                              Team Member
Berhanu Legesse Ayane                                    Team Member


                                                                                    Page 35 of 72
   The World Bank
   Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



Maiada Mahmoud Abdel Fattah Kassem                     Team Member
Cem Dener                                              Team Member
Mei Wang                                               Team Member
Elsa Araya                                             Team Member
Messeret Marcos                                        Procurement Team


B. STAFF TIME AND COST


                                                     Staff Time and Cost
Stage of Project Cycle
                                No. of staff weeks            US$ (including travel and consultant costs)
Preparation
FY15                            22.059                                                       164,589.69
FY16                            28.496                                                       204,261.51
FY17                            4.525                                                          -4,628.96
FY22                            1.337                                                           3,636.39

Total                           56.42                                                        367,858.63
Supervision/ICR
FY15                            0                                                               6,070.29
FY16                            6.892                                                           9,496.89
FY17                            18.304                                                       100,063.54
FY18                            31.341                                                       242,299.55
FY19                            18.878                                                       172,754.39
FY20                            10.134                                                        62,683.31
FY21                            14.897                                                        55,109.16
FY22                            9.971                                                         65,512.57
Total                           110.42                                                       713,989.70




                                                                                     Page 36 of 72
    The World Bank
    Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                     ANNEX 3. PROJECT COST BY COMPONENT




                                        Amount at Approval     Actual at Project   Percentage of Approval
Components
                                                   (US$M)       Closing (US$M)                    (US$M)
Expenditure Management
and Information Systems                               22.5                20.12                         89%
Support
Strengthening
                                                       9.4                 7.67                         82%
Accountability Institutions
Project Management,
                                                       1.1                 1.07                         97%
Monitoring and Evaluation
Total                                                33.00                28.86                         87%




                                                                                        Page 37 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                                  ANNEX 4. EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS

  (a)       Economic and Financial Analysis
            Direct attribution of economic and financial benefits of PFM reform is challenging, since many of
            the interventions are difficult to quantify in monetary terms. For example, in this project it is
            difficult to quantify economic benefits directly arising from supporting the Federal and Regional
            Auditor General in improving the quality of audit reports; and also difficult to quantify benefits from
            interventions planned to help establish the Accounting and Auditing Board to introduce
            international standards in accounting and auditing.
            However, for some of the interventions proposed – namely, the introduction of the Oracle IFMIS,
            the support and maintenance of the IBEX system and the introduction of eGovernment
            Procurement-- a financial assessment was conducted at Appraisal and included in the PAD. This
            financial model suggests an IRR will be achieved over a 20-year period is 27 percent and the project
            will have positive net present value (NPV) at discount rates of 10 percent, 15 percent and 20
            percent. The financial IRR from the GoE perspective was estimated at 41 percent and the financial
            NPV at 10 percent is US$408 million.
            Given the significant accomplishment of results in the above areas, it is likely that the predicted
            economic and financial benefits of the project will emerge.
            Other comments on efficiency gains associated with project design and implementation include:
  (b)       Expenditure Management and IT systems support
            The IFMIS rollout reduced the size of the cash float. The government will save about US$428 million
            per annum from interest on government borrowing as a result of the decrease in cash float size.
            IFMIS is managing 78 percent of the federal budget. The quality and timeliness of financial reports
            improved at the regional and woreda level due to the project support in upgrading IBEX and
            provision of training for 86,484 people. IBEX is operational in over 2,100 places across the country.
            The PMO has built internal capability and carried out the rollout for 60 entities on its own after the
            vendor supporting the rollout left.
            The project strengthened the reliability of DFMAS database and enabled the Debt management
            department to publish Public Sector Debt Statistical Bulletins in line with best practices.
  (c)       Strengthening Accountability institutions
            The e-Government procurement system is developed and operational at nine pilot procuring
            entities. Piloting entities are tending using the e-GP platform and more than 60 entities published
            their procurement plan onto the e-GP.
            The institutional capacity of AABE was strengthened in terms of staff, database and networking
            infrastructure and able to provide improved services to registered accountants and auditors. With
            the support of the project, AABE commenced review of the Audit practitioners and IFRS compliant
            financial statements. The activities for establishing a Professional Accountancy Organization (PAO)
            and provision of local certification is a work in progress.



  8   Annual budget for 2013: ETB 476 billion net reduction in float size (5.25 percent), interest rate 8.5 percent


                                                                                                                      Page 38 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



        The efficiency of this activity is modest in terms of achieving the intended results. The OFAG
        benefited from the partly accomplished activities supported by the project. It improves its audit
        quality based on the recommendation from AFROSAI-E and the terminated contractor.
        The Federal Ethics and Anticorruption Commission successfully implemented the activities with less
        than 60 percent of the budget. The training enhanced the woreda level ethics officers' capacity to
        record and report fraud and corruption cases.
  (d)   Program Management
        The project implementation team at MOFEC was staffed and operational and closely followed the
        implementing entities. The project management team conducted the follow-up and monitoring
        activities virtually when mobility was restricted due to COVID-19 and the conflict.
        There were three World Bank TTLs at various times during the project lifecycle. The efficiency
        impact of this was mitigated by continuous support by local team members including one staff
        member who was involved throughout the project life and was Co-TTL at project closure. A greater
        challenge to efficiency was the turnover of senior client staff in the early years of the project.
  (e)   Disbursement and procurement challenges
        The project closing period was extended twice. Project extensions generally demonstrate
        inefficiency. Indeed, low budget utilization, high staff turnover (amongst senior leadership) and
        procurement challenges were consistently mentioned as implementation issues in ISRs particularly
        during the early years of the project, and contributed to the first request for extension of closing
        date. A second extension was requested due to COVID-19 and the state of emergency due to the
        conflict in the North of the country.
        Despite the inefficiencies in the early years and the impact of COVID-19 and internal conflict in the
        latter stages of the project (the country entering into FCV status in the final year) most of the
        planned activities were accomplished including those in the key component relating to IFMIS
        rollout. Furthermore, all completed activities were implemented within budget, and there was no
        cost overrun. Actual disbursement was US$28.8 million, amounting to a disbursement rate of
        around 87 percent. There were good examples of efficiency, for instance the FEACC successfully
        implemented the activities with less than 60 percent of the budget.
        Procurement challenges remained throughout the project. For example, disbursement would have
        been better if not for procurement delays and challenges such as the failure to award the OFAG
        contract. Furthermore, the delays in other contracting may have led to less impactful results in some
        areas. For instance a delay in appointing change management consultancy meant that that all
        deliverables could not delivered prior to closing date.




                                                                                                Page 39 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




         ANNEX 5. BORROWER, CO-FINANCIER AND OTHER PARTNER/STAKEHOLDER COMMENTS




                                                                           Page 40 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 41 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 42 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 43 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 44 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 45 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 46 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 47 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 48 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 49 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 50 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 51 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 52 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 53 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 54 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 55 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 56 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 57 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 58 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 59 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 60 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 61 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                                 Page 62 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                          ANNEX 6. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS

          Assessment of Achievement of Each Objective/Outcome

  •     Indicator 1: Reduced cash float at the Federal and Regional Levels, resulting in a substantial
        reduction in interest costs to government. It was targeted to reduce the cash float from the base
        22 percent to 18.7 percent by 2020. As of February 2022, the cash float at the Federal and regional
        levels reduced to 16.75 percent, exceeding the original target by about 2 percent.

  •     Indicator 2: Timely disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents.
        Before the start of the project, key fiscal/budget documents were disclosed within 24 months from
        the end of a fiscal year. It was targeted to reduce the time to 9 months by the end of the project
        period. Key fiscal/budget documents representing EFY 2012 (2020) were disclosed within 6 months
        from the end of the fiscal year, surpassing the target by three months.

  •     Indicator 3: Targeted agencies progressively increasing the percentage of contracts awarded
        within an agreed benchmark of 180 days for contracts above US$5,000,000 for works and
        US$500,000 for goods.
        The baseline number of performance of procurement within 180 days for procurement contracts
        above US$5 million was 10 contracts. It had been targeted to achieve 50 percent by 2020. The
        average percentage of contracts by 2021 per target agency was 33 percent, a shortfall of 17
        contracts from the target.

  •     Indicator 4: An increase in the percentage of audits conforming to International Standards of
        Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) issued by the International Organization of Supreme Audit
        Institutions.
        The baseline data was not provided in the PAD and was noted as "to be completed." It was intended
        that the baseline and target values would be established during the need and impact assessment.
        The impact assessment was part of the Support to Improving the Quality of Audit Work
        Subcomponent and that AFROSAI-E would be contracted out to independently assess and report
        on quality conformity with ISSAI on an annual basis. The final report on audit quality assurance was
        submitted. The report doesn’t contain the baseline and the target values and is a very useful
        document that contains findings and recommendations for OFAG to help it to improve the quality
        of external audits. It should be noted however that according to the June 2022 Audit report of the
        Office of the Federal Auditor General (OFAG), it has been indicated that the number of audit reports
        with unqualified audit opinion increased by 12 percent (22 more unqualified audit reports) and the
        number of adverse opinion decreased by 8 percent between 2019-2021 (Table 2).

  •     Indicator 5: The number of Direct Beneficiaries who are the recipients of the institutionalized
        training provided by the project.
        At the start of the project, 47,000 people were trained, and the target was to train 84,000 people
        up to the end of 2020. As of 2021, the total number of people trained reached 86,484, slightly
        higher than the target by the project close.




                                                                                                Page 63 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  Intermediate result Indicators (IRI)
      Component 1: Improved fiscal management
      Component 1 represents 73 percent of the project funding. The IFMIS rollout is completed; rolled out
      to 201 sites which surpasses the target result indicator by 125 sites. 78 percent of the federal budget
      is being managed by Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), with a
      transaction size of about 37 million. The Integrated Budget and Expenditure System (IBEX) is
      upgraded and operational over 2,100 sites across the country.
      • IRI-1: Increase in budget execution rate in targeted sectors (Health, Education, Agriculture, and
        Water) – in percent of budgeted expenditure in sector at the regional level
         The baseline budget execution rate in the targeted sectors was 55 percent, and the target was to
         achieve 75 percent by 2020. The actual performance by 2021 was 92.16 percent, much higher
         than the target.
      • IRI-2: Rolling out of the new Chart of Accounts (COA) at the Federal Level to facilitate
        expenditure reporting by program-based budgeting (PBB)
         At the start of the project, only the approved budget was disclosed on PBB basis. It was targeted
         to use the new chart of accounts in 100 federal entities by 2020. By 2021, the IFMIS, which is based
         on the new COA, was implemented in 201 sites (including 133 federal entities and 68 branches of
         these entities).


      Component 2: Improving accountability
      • IRI-3: Percentage of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods in targeted
        agencies (Ministry of Agriculture, Ethiopian Road Service, Public Procurement Service, Ministry
        of Water, Irrigation and Energy, and Ministry of Health, Ethiopia Pharmaceutical Supply
        Service) at the start of the project was 50 percent.
         Performance is improved. The target was to achieve 70 percent by 2020. The actual performance
         by 2021 was 76.2 percent. The 2018 PEFA report indicated that the open competitive method
         represents 92 percent of the total public expenditure at the Federal level. The performance
         decline is attributed to the impacts of COVID-19 and the instability in the country.

      • IRI-4: e-GP developed and installed at FPPPA and in targeted agencies at the Federal level
         At the start of the project, no electronic-based procurement system(e-GP) was in place. It was
         targeted to install e-GP at the Federal Public Procurement and Property Administration Agency
         and targeted six federal entities. Performance accomplished includes developing the e-GP
         software and installing the E-GP software in nine pilot agencies. Five pilot agencies are posting the
         tender process, including the Ministry of Revenue, Ministry of Innovation and Technology, Addis
         Ababa Science and Technology University, FPPPA, and Addis Ababa University. Total 57
         institutions were registered and published their annual procurement plans through the e-GP
         system. A rollout strategy for the federal and regional institutions is prepared and ready for
         validation.
      • IRI-5: IT and forensic audit to be completed by OFAG



                                                                                                 Page 64 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



         At the start of the project, OFAG was not conducting IT and forensic audits. It was targeted to
         accomplish 15 IT and forensic audits annually by 2020. This subcomponent was not accomplished.
         The contractual agreement with the technical advisor to assist the process was terminated.
      • IRI-6: Issuance of national professional qualification certificate at least at the technical level.
        Not done
         At the project's start, no national institution was in charge of issuing professional accountancy
         qualification certificates. It was targeted that a national accountancy body issue 100 professional
         accountancy qualification corticate at least at a technical level. The draft regulation for
         establishing the Professional Accountancy Organization (PAO) has been submitted to the cabinet
         and is expected to be approved soon. The PAO (Institute of Certified Public Accounts of Ethiopia)
         will be responsible for providing a professional accountancy qualification certificate.
      • IRI-7: Woredas, whose finance and budget committee members trained to undertake audit
        follow-up
         At the start of the project, 10 percent of the finance and budget standing committee members at
         woreda level were trained to undertake audit follow-up. Woreda standing committee members
         have received training since 2012 until it was discontinued due to the COVID 19. It was targeted
         that 85 percent of the committee members be trained by 2020.
      • IRI-8: Woredas posting a simplified budget execution report to the citizens, including citizens'
        feedback
         It was targeted to increase the percentage of the woredas, which post simplified budget execution
         reports from the baseline of 90 percent to 95 percent by 2020. The performance in 2021 has
         deteriorated to 89 percent, 996 out of the 1,119 woredas. In the Somali region, 43 percent of
         Woredas have conducted pre-budget discussions. In the Oromia region, community participation
         in the local development plan increased, and local council members' capacity to exercise their
         oversight role was enhanced.




                                                                                                Page 65 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




  Annex 6.1 Component Summary
  Component 1: Improving Expenditure Management and Information Systems (US$22.5 million)

  The objective of this component was to support the government in implementing the next generation of
  PFM reforms through the government-funded IFMIS rollout plan. It will support the rollout of IFMIS and
  enhancement of IBEX, provide extensive support to the PMO, accompany the PFM reforms (coming with
  the IFMIS rollout), and fund the establishment of a permanent IFMIS and PFM Academy.
  Subcomponent 1.1: Support for IFMIS rollout and IBEX enhancement (US$7.3 million)
  This subcomponent supported the IFMIS rollout, monitoring the IFMIS contract and enhancing the existing
  IBEX system. This subcomponent will complement the MOFEC's IFMIS rollout activities by providing the
  necessary hardware and software.
  Subcomponent 1.2: Support the Project Management Office (PMO) (US$2.8 million)
  This subcomponent supported the PMO in funding staff and training costs, monitoring the IFMIS contract,
  and modernizing the existing system. It financed the salaries of the contractual staff of the IFMIS PMO,
  provided specialized IT Training for PMO and Implementation Support Unit Staff, and funded some of the
  operational costs for the PMO and PFM reforms. It also complemented MOFEC's change management
  activities.
  Subcomponent 1.3: PFM Systems Strengthening in coordination with the IFMIS rollout (US$3.8 million)
  The IFMIS rollout was intended by the GoE to be a strong driver of change and will develop new
  functionalities that were not covered by the IBEX system. Among these, the main ones were Program-
  Based Budgeting, Cash Management Module, and Treasury Management, reform of the Chart of
  Accounts, Debt Management, woreda level Payroll Management, Internal Audit and Communication.
  Subcomponent 1.4: IFMIS & PFM Academy (US$8.6 million)
  This component also focused on improving staff capacity to match the needs of trained staff necessary
  for IFMIS rollout. This was accomplished by assisting in establishing the IFMIS Academy for training,
  developing standardized training materials, and a qualifications framework on PFM that will be linked to
  professional accountancy qualifications.

  Component 2: Strengthening Accountability Institutions (US$9.4 million)
  This component aimed to support accountability institutions in the performance of their tasks. This
  component was especially important considering the repeated assessments that indicate that audit and
  oversight institutions are the weakest link in the PFM chain in Ethiopia.
  Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening Procurement and Property Management (US$3.7 million)
  The objective of this subcomponent was to assist the government in (a) financing a procurement staff
  certification program and capacity building activities in procurement and property management, (b)
  assisting GoE in enhancing the capacity of federal and regional procurement regulatory bodies in market
  research, data collection and performance monitoring of procurement systems; and (c) assisting GoE to
  develop and implement an e-procurement system.



                                                                                             Page 66 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  Subcomponent 2.2: Capacity Building for Oversight Functions (US$2.3 million)
  This subcomponent's objective was to strengthen the OFAG and the Offices of the Regional Auditor
  General to fulfill their oversight roles. This component will (a) provide support to OFAG for improving the
  quality of audits at the OFAG level and also in all the regions; (b) help support OFAG's training center
  regarding curricula design, recruitment of faculty members and other interventions; and (c) support and
  strengthen collaboration between OFAG and other institutions that exercise, or contribute to, the
  oversight functions.
  Subcomponent 2.3: Development of the Accountancy Profession: (US$2.3 million)
  The objective of this subcomponent was to support the development of a vibrant accountancy profession
  in the country, strengthening the institutional capacity of the newly established regulatory public
  oversight body (AABE). This component will also support the AABE's efforts to develop a PAO.
  Subcomponent 2.4: Support for Strengthening Fraud and Corruption Mitigation activities: (US$1.0
  million)
  The objective of this subcomponent was to strengthen the institutional arrangements for the mitigation
  of fraud and corruption, primarily at the woreda level. This task will (a) Provide TA support for FEACC; (b)
  provide cascaded training for REACC (Regional Ethics and Anticorruption Commission) staff and Ethics
  officers; (c) provide training to the concerned woreda council standing committee members; (d) regional
  support institutions (REACCs) on disclosure of cases and complaints- handling procedures to the public
  through media.

  Component 3: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.1 million)
  The objective of this component was to support program management and coordination related tasks,
  ensure project implementation, the effective monitoring and evaluation of results and a consistent and
  effective approach to capacity development. This component will finance the Project Implementation
  Team (PIT) establishment under EMCP in MOFEC. Some staff of the PIT will be assigned specifically for
  OFAG.
  Subcomponent 3.1. Program Management and Coordination (US$0.7 million)
  The purpose of this subcomponent was to ensure well-functioning institutional arrangements and
  mechanisms to ensure the effective coordination and management of the Project. The subcomponent
  objective was to support and enhance the capacity of relevant institutions to deliver the Project.
  Subcomponent 3.2. Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.4 million)
  The project system was designed to assess and document the achievement of outputs as agreed in the
  annual work plans and progress towards objectives outcomes and intermediate results. The system was
  expected to serve to identify implementation gaps and challenges for proactive corrective actions as and
  document and incorporate lessons learned into program implementation. Indicators of the Results
  Framework, additional outcome indicators and various studies/evaluations were the tools to measure
  achievements and progress towards the project results. It was also the objective of this subcomponent to
  finance consultancies and studies required to measure the results indicators.




                                                                                                 Page 67 of 72
  The World Bank
  Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



     Annex 6.2 Theory of change
     Theory of Change: Component 1-Improving Expenditure Management and Information Systems


            Activities                            Outputs                                Outcomes                               Long Term Effects



                                    On Automation
                                        o IFMIS is rolled, New COA rolled out to    PDO-Improve efficiency,
                                            entities                                transparency and accountability of
                                        o IFMIS quality assurance delivered         public expenditures at the federal
Subcomponent 1.1                        o Technical capacity on IFMIS/IBEX is       and regional level
Support for IFMIS rollout and
IBEX enhancement
                                            maintained                               o   Reduced cash float for the
                                        o PMO structure is improved                      federal and regional
Subcomponent 1.2                        o PMO staff/consultants supported                governments
Support the Project                     o   Hardware procurement for IFMIS           o   Timely disclosure of key fiscal/
                                            and IBEX to support the rollout                                                      Improve efficiency,
Management Office (PMO)- for                                                             budget documents
both IFMIS & IBEX                       o   Support operational costs for IBEX                                                   transparency and
                                                                                     o   The number of Direct                    accountability of public
                                        o   Audit tool software to be operational        Beneficiaries for the
Subcomponent 1.3                                                                                                                 expenditures at the
PFM Systems Strengthening in        On the rest of PFM system                            institutionalized training
                                                                                                                                 federal and regional
coordination with the IFMIS roll-       o Technical PFM capacity is built                                                        level
out                                     o FM awareness increased for officials,     Improved fiscal management-
                                        o Payroll modules streamlined               improve the realism of the budget
Subcomponent 1.4:                       o Trainings for Debt Management             and instill fiscal discipline
IFMIS & PFM Academy                          directorate. IFMIS interface with       o   Increase in budget execution rate
                                             DMFAS is done.                              in targeted sectors
                                        o MoF website is revamped, secure            o   Rolling out of the new Chart of
                                             and operational, Transparency               Accounts at the Federal Level to
                                             improved                                    facilitate expenditure reporting
                                        o Internal audit structure is                    by PBB
                                             reorganized and addressed




                                                                                                                             Page 68 of 72
   The World Bank
   Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




Theory of Change: Component 2 - Strengthening Accountability Institutions


                                                         Outputs                                            Outcomes

           Activities
                                   o Federal Public Procurement and Property           Improve efficiency, transparency and accountability
                                      Administration (FPPPA)                           of public expenditures at the federal and regional
                                                                                       level                                                          Long Term Effects
                                      o   E-GP is developed and installed in pilot
                                          entities, Awareness increased on E-GP ,       o Targeted agencies increasing percentage of
                                      o Strategy developed,                                  contracts awarded within 180 days for
                                      o Professional certification training provided         contracts above US$5m for works and
 Subcomponent 2.1:                        ,                                                  US$500K for goods.
  Strengthening Procurement
                                      o KPIs reported                                   o An increase in the percentage of audits
  and Property Management
                                      The Office of Federal Auditor General (OFAG)           conforming to International Standards
                                      o TA provided to improve audit quality
                                                                                        o Improving accountability- to support the
 Subcomponent 2.2:                    o Training center
                                                                                             oversight institutions                                  Improve efficiency,
 Capacity Building for Oversight      o OFAG collaboration with Parliament and
  Functions                               ORAGs improved.                               o Increase Percent of contracts awarded using                transparency and
                                      o Media engagement increased                           competitive procurement methods in targeted             accountability of public
                                      o FROSAI-E assessment                                  agencies                                                expenditures at the
 Subcomponent 2.3:                    The Accounting and Auditing Board of Ethiopia     o Improve e-GP: developed and installed at                   federal and regional level
 Development of the                   o Public awareness, First time IFRS adoption           FPPPA and target agencies
 Accountancy Profession
                                          in public interest entities;                  o IT and forensic audit completed
                                      o AABE reviewing IFRS compliant financial
                                          statements
                                                                                        o Issuance of national professional accountancy
 Support for Strengthening Fraud                                                             qualification certification at least at a
 and Corruption Mitigation            o AABE reviewed audit practices
                                      o PAO legal framework set up                           technician level
 activities
                                      o Certifications issued                           o Finance and Budget Standing Committee
                                      Federal Ethics and Corruption                          members at woreda are trained to undertake
                                      Commission(FEACC):                                     audit follow-up
                                      o Capacity Assessment of regions, cascading       o Woredas posting simplified budget and
                                          capacity building training to local level,         execution reports to the citizens,
                                          woreda council training                            incorporating citizens feedback




                                                                                                                                             Page 69 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)




                         Key Assumptions

                           •     Stability of Government leadership (in fact, there was instability and frequent turnover)

                           •     Status quo as designed (the Pandemic and Internal Security issues were unanticipated events
                                 that impacted eventual outcomes)

                           •     Collaboration (there were collaborations as envisaged and DFID/FCDO supported in parallel
                                 some activities of OFAG

                           •     Funding is available for the cost of implementation of the envisaged interventions (see next
                                 page for costing)

                           •     Close follow up and collaboration with all entities, including the various implementing
                                 entities within the Government and the World Bank.




                                                                                                                      Page 70 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



  Annex 6.3 Achievement of Project Indicators

                                               Indicators                                         Achievements
           PDOs
   • Indicator 1: Reduced cash float at the Federal and Regional Levels, resulting in a           Achieved
      substantial reduction in interest costs to Government.
   • Indicator 2: Timely disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents.                               Achieved
   • Indicator 3: Targeted agencies progressively increase the percentage of contracts            In progress
      awarded within an agreed benchmark of 180 days for contracts above US$5,000,000
      for works and US$500,000 for goods.
   • Indicator 4: An increase in the percentage of audits conforming to International             Not achieved
      Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) issued by the International
      Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions.
   • Indicator 5: The number of Direct Beneficiaries who are the recipients of the                Achieved
      institutionalized training provided by the project.
   Intermediate result Indicators (IRI)
   Component 1: Improved fiscal management
   • IRI-1: Increase in budget execution rate in targeted sectors (Health, Education,             Achieved
      Agriculture, and Water) – in percent of budgeted expenditure in sectors at the
      regional level
   • IRI-2: Rolling out of the new Chart of Accounts (COA) at the Federal Level to facilitate     Achieved
      expenditure reporting by program-based budgeting (PBB)
   Component 2: Improving accountability
   • IRI-3: Percentage of contracts awarded using competitive procurement methods in              Achieved
      targeted agencies (Ministry of Agriculture, Ethiopian Road Service, Public
      Procurement Service, Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Energy, and Ministry of
      Health, Ethiopia Pharmaceutical Supply Service) at the start of the project was 70%.
   • IRI-4: e-GP developed and installed at FPPPA and in targeted agencies at the Federal         Almost
      level                                                                                       achieved
   • IRI-5: IT and forensic audit to be completed by OFAG                                         Not achieved
   • IRI-6: Issuance of national professional qualification certificate at the technical level.   In    progress
      Not done                                                                                    (not
                                                                                                  achieved)
   • IRI-7: Woredas, whose finance and budget committee members trained to                        Partly
     undertake audit follow-up                                                                    achieved
   • IRI-8: Woredas posting a simplified budget execution report to the citizens,                 Achieved
     including citizens' feedback




                                                                                                   Page 71 of 72
The World Bank
Ethiopia PFM Project (P150922)



                                   ANNEX 7. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS

   •    IFMIS for PFM Efficiency, Effectiveness & Transparency! Ministry of Finance Ethiopia, 2021
        https://www.mofed.gov.et/programmes-projects/ifmis/
   •    Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
        (Federal Government) Performance Assessment report, Final report November 13, 2019, World
        Bank Group 2020. https://www.pefa.org/country/ethiopia

   •    Project Appraisal Document, Ethiopia PFM Project P150922 (English), Report No. PAD1126, World
        Bank Group, February 3, 2016. https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/Search/25889901

   •    Ethiopia - Country partnership framework for the period FY18 - FY22 (English). Report No. 119576,
        Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group, September 8, 2017.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/202771504883944180/Ethiopia-
        Country-partnership-framework-for-the-period-FY18-FY22
   •    Ethiopia - Country partnership strategy (FY2013-FY2016) (English). Report No. 71884, Washington,
        D.C.: World Bank Group, September 26, 2012.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/561281468031489534/Ethiopia-
        Country-partnership-strategy-FY2013-FY2016
   •    Official Documents- Financing Agreement for Credit 5766-ET (Closing Package)
        (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group, April 8, 2016.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/118581468249241452/Official-
        Documents-Financing-Agreement-for-Credit-5766-ET-Closing-Package
   •    Disclosable Restructuring Paper - Ethiopia PFM Project - P150922 (English). Report No. RES45441,
        Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group, February 1, 2021.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/783711612173007408/Disclosable-
        Restructuring-Paper-Ethiopia-PFM-Project-P150922
   •    Disclosable Restructuring Paper - Ethiopia PFM Project - P150922 (English). Report No. RES39385
        Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group, November 26, 2019.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/443861574774739239/Disclosable-
        Restructuring-Paper-Ethiopia-PFM-Project-P150922
   •    Disclosable Implementation Status Reports and Procurement Plans for the Project Period.
        https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/document-detail/P150922?type=projects




                                                                                              Page 72 of 72
