     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023035

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P105269                                   KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51810                                 31-Dec-2018                                          108,660,998.51

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Nov-2012                               31-Oct-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          120,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           117,768,527.21                                                0.00

 Actual                                       108,660,998.51                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Alma Pekmezovic            Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objectives were to improve the performance of the judiciary to provide its services
   in the project areas in a more effective and accountable manner (ICR, p. 13). The outcome targets were
   revised at restructurings in 2016 and 2018, both upward and downward. A split evaluation will not be
   undertaken, as over 80 percent of funds were disbursed after the 2016 restructuring, and the 2018 targets
   were exceeded.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-Mar-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project originally contained four components: (1) Court Administration and Case Management; (2);
   Judiciary Training and Staff Development; (3) Court Infrastructure; and (4) Project Management.

   The first project component comprised two subcomponents: 1. Court Administration and 2. Case
   Management. The first subcomponent included an emphasis on strengthening court administration systems.
   Key planned activities under this subcomponent included: an organizational review of the judiciary; the
   development and implementation of the Integrated Performance Management and Accountability System
   (IPMAS); support to Court User Committees (CUCs); and capacity building for the Judiciary’s Directorates.
   The second subcomponent included the design, installation, and commissioning of information and
   communication technology (ICT) hardware; the implementation of a Case Management Information System
   that offers audio/visual recordings of court proceedings and electronic case tracking and management, and
   an Integrated Justice Information Portal.

   At the first restructuring (approved in March 2016), the first project component was substantially revised.
   Several proposed activities were dropped, including activities relating to the Case Management Information
   System and the planned Integrated Justice Information Portal, as well as information technology upgrades
   such as video recording and videoconferencing. With regard to the latter, the Kenyan judiciary indicated it
   was not ready to proceed with these activities. Additionally, capacity building activities for the Judiciary’s
   Directorates were dropped.

   The aim of the second project component originally was to strengthen the capacity of the Judiciary Training
   Institute (JTI); provide structure for defining critical competencies of judicial officers; establish a Legal
   Research Resource Center concerned with developing online training and legal information services for
   judges, magistrates, and judiciary staff; and support capacity-building efforts for the legal personnel at the
   Office of the Attorney General.

   The third project component included the construction of eight High Court buildings, the refurbishment of
   approximately 30 magistrates courts, the construction of two magistrates courts, and the supply of a
   minimum of 20 demountable or temporary courts. As originally planned, the project area consisted of
   approximately 68 courts where service improvements were to be made. Funding under this project
   component was primarily directed to courts that were most likely to produce improvements in services and
   improved access to courts. The project also supported the establishment of a unit responsible for design,
   supervision, maintenance, and management of judicial buildings.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



The fourth project component was to facilitate project implementation. Planned activities included, among
other things, supporting the function of the Project Management Unit; financing an Integrated Fiduciary
Agent (IFA) responsible for the project’s fiduciary management and procurement functions; supporting
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and collection of data to facilitate impact evaluation; implementing
environmental and social safeguard requirements; and developing and implementing the project’s
information, education, and communication strategy.

These project components (with the exception of the fourth component) were subsequently substantially
revised following a 2015 mid-term review (MTR). Implementation of activities based on the initially proposed
structure experienced significant challenges, and it was decided to shift away from focus on institutional
inputs toward more priority on service delivery functions. As a result, the substantive project components
were revised as follows at the 2016 restructuring:

Table 1. Change in Component Names and Costs (US$, Millions)

                                                                                Cost       Cost    Change
 Component Name (Original)              Component Name (Revised)
                                                                              (Original) (Revised)   (%)
 Court Administration and Case   Increase Access to Courts and Legal
                                                                         42.80               50.00      +16.8
         Management                          Information
  Judiciary Training and Staff
                               Improve Timeliness of Judiciary Services 17.00                45.00     +164.7
         Development
                                 Enhance Performance and Quality of
      Court Infrastructure                                               50.00               20.00      –60.0
                                           Decision Making
     Project Management                 Project Management              O10.20               5.00       –49.0
                                Total                                   120.00              120.00       —

The revised project components are discussed below:

1. Increase Access to Courts and Legal Information (Appraised Cost US$ 42.80 million, Actual Cost:
US$ 41.55 million). This component aimed at reducing geographical distance to courts, improving links to
court users, and enhancing access to legal information. To improve access to courts, the project sought to
improve court outreach to communities, with the planned addition of 25 newly constructed courts. The
original target of 10 new courts was increased to 25, as a result of a re-classification of some court buildings
from “upgraded” to “new” to reflect the scale of the work being constructed (new courts were defined as
courts where more than 60% of the final floor space was newly constructed). Secondly, to improve access
to legal information, the project aimed to increase the average number of unique monthly visitors of the
Kenya Law Reports from 350,000 to 900,000, and improve the dissemination and publication of legal
information and court decisions.

2. Improve Timeliness of Judiciary Services (Appraised Cost: US$ 17.00 million, Actual Cost: US $
51.00 million). The project was to support improvements to court infrastructure and management, as well
as the modernization of the registry and filing processes in courts. To this end, the project aimed to
standardize registry processes, and to introduce new records management policies and registry operation
manuals. The project was also to support internet connectivity in all the courts that were constructed. It
aimed at increasing efficiencies through the upgrading of court facilities and the provision of adequate
furniture and equipment. Another aim was to increase the speed of case resolution through
the implementation of court-annexed mediation, the holding of special sessions (justice@last) to clear old



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



  cases over five years, active case management in criminal cases, and provision of adequate ICT
  equipment.

  3. Enhance Performance and Quality of Decision Making (Appraised Cost: US$ 50.00 million. Actual
  Cost: US $14.00 million). To improve the work of the Kenyan judiciary, the project aimed to support the
  introduction of performance and data systems including Performance Management and Measurement
  Understandings (PMMUs). In furtherance of this aim, the project was to support various studies and
  surveys, including: (i) an impact evaluation undertaken by the judiciary (through the support of the WB
  DIME system); (ii) a study to determine the workload of magistrates courts and to assess optimal resource
  allocation as well as allocation of budgetary resources among courts; (iii) court user and court stakeholder
  surveys; (iv) a governance and anti-corruption mapping survey, including the preparation of reports to guide
  the judiciary to combat and prevent corruption; and (v) the financing of a training needs assessment to
  support the JTI in the delivery of its annual programs and review of the judiciary’s training needs.

  4. Project Management (Appraised Cost: US$ 10.20 million, Actual Cost: US $4.00 million). Planned
  activities included improvements in the way the judiciary worked and implemented its oversight role. This
  was to be done through a number of mechanisms, including: (a) the use of project dashboards to monitor
  and report on performance; (b) the introduction of bimonthly meetings with the World Bank task team on
  project implementation; (c) internal judiciary construction sub-committee meetings (tasked with monitoring
  new court constructions); (d) payment diagnostics and tracking systems to detect payment delays and take
  corrective measures; and (e) the introduction of a Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision
  (GEMS) to monitor project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost and financing: Project cost at appraisal was US$ 120 million, to be financed by an IDA
  Credit. Exchange rate depreciation resulted in the reduction of the original credit and inability of the project
  to be fully implemented, as the sums originally envisioned under the project were not fully available towards
  the end of project. Actual costs were US$ 110.55 million (ICR, p. 48).

  Dates: The project was approved on November 15, 2012 and became effective on April 30, 2013. An MTR
  was undertaken in July 2015. The project underwent four restructurings, resulting in various changes to the
  initial design and implementation structure of the project, fewer implementing units and activities, new
  outcome indicators, and revised closing dates.

        The first restructuring (approved on March 31, 2016) shifted focus to judicial services: (a) access to
         courts and legal information, (b) timeliness of services, and (c) performance and quality of decision-
         making. This, in turn, resulted in project adjustments focused on: streamlining and re-organizing of
         project activities; the reallocation of funding between the new components; revisions to the results
         framework; changes in data collection methods; and revisions to outcome indicators. The project
         components were revised to address key issues that the public continued to raise frequently in their
         interactions with the judiciary. Moreover, the restructuring sought to reduce transaction costs
         associated with the initial design of components by input types, such as "training" and
         "infrastructure." The latter involved a large number of implementing units (21 units in total), resulting
         in a situation where annual work planning processes undermined the focus on development
         outcomes; and more importance was given to the needs of the implementing units rather than


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



          problems faced by the court users and public. The restructuring was intended to address these
          issues.
         A second restructuring (approved on December 14, 2018) extended the project’s closing date from
          December 31, 2018 to October 30, 2020. Due to the exchange rate depreciation, the restructuring
          also resulted in the reduction of the original credit from US$120 million to US$110.55 million, and
          further changes in the results framework.
         During a third restructuring (approved on October 21, 2020), the project closing date was extended
          again from October 30, 2020 to July 31, 2021. This was in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
          with the ICR noting that the COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected the schedule of delivery of ten
          courts.
         A fourth restructuring (approved on 19 July 2021) extended the project closing date from July 31,
          2021 to October 31, 2021. The purpose of the extension was to allow for the completion of the
          remaining court constructions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: The project was highly relevant to the needs and priorities of the Kenyan judiciary. The
judiciary is one of the three arms of the state and critical to the maintenance of the rule of law in the
country. The Constitution of Kenya (2010) specifically provides a role for courts to act a counterbalance to
executive power, independent of the executive apparatus, and as a guardian and arbiter of human rights. It
also establishes a basis for the institutional and financial independence of the judiciary (ICR, p. 10),
promoting decentralized budgeting.

Kenya’s judiciary suffered from a range of structural and capacity problems, many of which are historic and
political in nature (ICR, p. 10). There was general mistrust and dissatisfaction with the court system among
the public (ICR, p. 10). The court system suffered in a significant way from a lack of funding, poor physical
infrastructure, and persistent capacity and integrity problems (including the judiciary's failure to deliver
timely justice, poor conditions of service for its officers, and ineffective case management systems), all of
which have been well documented over the last four decades in various commissioned reviews of the
judiciary, including reviews commissioned by the judiciary itself (ICR, p. 10). The lack of physical facilities
hampered performance and efficiency significantly, with court users in some areas having to travel over 200
km to access the nearest court (ICR, p. 55) and the judiciary struggling to reach poor and marginalized
segments of the Kenyan population that live in remote areas. Indeed, the Kenyan judiciary was
fundamentally “characterized by inaccessibility and undue delays” (ICR, p. 52). Despite past reform efforts ,
including government-wide and internal judiciary-driven attempts to improve judicial performance, justice
administration suffered from severe weaknesses. At the time of project design, “access to justice was a
major problem for the vulnerable and the marginalized” (ICR, p. 24), and especially for women “as they had
to cover excessive distances to courts” (ICR, p. 24).

In addition, there was significant risk, that if left unaddressed, weaknesses in judicial administration and
court structure would destabilize democratic governance and electoral processes in the country, potentially
leading to a breakdown of rule of law and order. Thus, both the Independent Review Commission ( Kriegler
Commission) and the Commission of Inquiry on Post-Election Violence (Waki Commission), both

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



               established in February 2008, linked the poor state of the judicial arm of government with electoral
               irregularities and electoral violence in 2007-2008, making a strong case for judicial reform in the country
               (ICR, p. 6).

               Alignment with Kenyan Government Strategy: The underlying objective of the project – improving the
               effectiveness and accountability of the Kenyan judiciary – was well aligned with several high-level policies
               and strategies. The project was fully aligned with the government's overall objective of improving the
               judiciary’s performance in a more effective and accountable manner (ICR, p 15). It was also aligned with
               the government’s long-term development strategy, Vision 2030, which lays out a plan for “adherence to the
               rule of law applicable to a modern, market-based economy in a human rights-respecting state.”

               The project components collectively reflected and reinforced the country's Judiciary Transformation
               Framework (2012-2016) pillars and subsequent blueprint on Sustaining Judiciary Transformation (2017-
               2021). The project also considered the strategic plans of other justice sector actors including the National
               Council for Law Reporting, the Judicial Service Commission, and the National Council for the Administration
               of Justice.

               Alignment with World Bank Strategy: The project was aligned with the most recent 2014-2018 Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF). The CPF identified good governance as a cross-cutting platform facilitating
               achievement of results across three dimensions: (i) competitiveness and sustainability; (ii) protection and
               potential; and (iii) consistency and equity. (The CPF was extended to 2020 and again to 2021, and a new
               CPF is currently under preparation.) The 2020 Kenya Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) highlighted the
               importance of the judiciary in magnifying citizen voice, counterbalancing executive power, and upholding
               the constitutionally enshrined Bill of Rights in the country (SCD, p. 23). Objectives were aligned with the
               2021 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment, which highlighted the significance of a fully independent
               Judiciary with direct financial accountability lines to the Parliament.

               Overall, the relevance of the project's objectives is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the performance of the Judiciary to provide its services in the Project Areas in a more effective
                             manner.

                             Rationale
                             The causal chain by which the project was to achieve its objectives was not explicit at design; the Project
                             Appraisal Document (PAD) did not have an explicit Theory of Change (TOC). The ICR constructed a TOC for

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



the at the time of project approval in 2013 (ICR, p. 12). A revised TOC was developed following the
restructurings to the project and is reproduced in the ICR's Annex 7 (p. 75). The ICR traces the
ineffectiveness and inefficiency of the Kenyan Judiciary primarily back to inadequate physical infrastructure,
poor court management, and more broadly, a lack of independence of the Judiciary, noting that prior to 2017,
the Judiciary “was totally dependent on the Ministry of Public Works for designing, managing, and maintaining
all capital investments” (ICR, p. 24).

The TOC held that the construction and rehabilitation of courts (including the establishing of mobile courts),
investments in ICT, court registries, and new court data systems, and improved court processes would help
improve court functioning and make the judiciary more effective and accountable. Against this background,
the TOC identified clear outputs specifically focused on improving the efficiency and operations of Kenya’s
national court system and boosting the capacity of local courts (including through court outreach in remote
regions) to absorb cases and reduce long delays in court proceedings (through alternative dispute resolution
techniques, information kiosks, better case management, and improved filing mechanisms and digitization,
among other things).

Overall, the TOC was aligned with and contributed to the two thematic objectives of the PDO focused on
“effectiveness” and “accountability.” (Accountability was primarily to be addressed through improved
performance evaluation frameworks and training to improve the quality of judicial decision making, see
below). However, there was some lack of clarity in the articulation of outputs and intended outcomes
specifically for each of the two thematic areas. Although “effectiveness” and “accountability” frequently
overlap, the TOC could have drawn out more explicit linkages between the project interventions, the
proposed outputs and intended outcomes, and each objective. This could have also been applied in the
results framework more effectively.

The key outputs and outcomes relating to “effectiveness” are evaluated below.

Reduction of case backlog. As stated, one of the greatest weaknesses and most immediate issues in the
Kenyan Judiciary was the large number of delayed and backlogged cases, which in turn, profoundly impacted
public trust and confidence in courts. Therefore, a key component of the project was to reduce the backlog
and increase the speed of case resolution. To this end, multiple delay reduction strategies were employed.
The project supported the holding of special sessions – referred to as justice@last – in the judiciary’s High
Court civil division. Special sessions/benches were held initially in a one-week event where 15,000 cases
over five years were resolved. This led to the strategy being adopted by the Magistrates Courts and Court of
Appeal, triggering a series of events commonly referred to as “service weeks.” Additionally, the project
supported the establishment of an alternative and less costly case resolution mechanism, CAMP (ICR, p. 61).

Outcomes:

      Cumulatively, 217,018 backlogged cases (including those that matured over time to 5 years) were
       resolved (ICR, p. 19). This represented a 124 percent achievement of the target (175,000 cases)
       (ICR, p. 22).
      Since the launch of CAMP in 2018-19, over 6,900 cases were resolved using mediation, “releasing
       over KSh 50 billion ($US 44 million) in restricted resources back into the Kenyan economy” (ICR, p.
       23).
      CAMP also resulted in a significant reduction of the time taken to finalize cases, i.e., 2 months
       compared to around 11 months if cases that went through litigation.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



Average time to dispose of cases in courts. The project supported the modernization of court registries
and filing infrastructure. Specific challenges included lost files, misfiling, damaged files, delays in registering
cases, and difficulties in locating records and filing documentation. To address these and related challenges,
registry processes were to be streamlined through the creation of modern registries in courts. Files were
standardized for maintenance of file integrity and easy identification and retrieval. In total, 1.5 million color-
coded file folders were procured and distributed to all court stations. The project also supported the
development of registry operational manuals and court procedures for all court cadres. Information kiosks and
queue management systems were commissioned at Milimani Law Courts. In response to filing and record-
keeping challenges, the Judiciary developed a Draft Records Management Policy in 2017.

The project also supported increased efficiency through improvements to ICT equipment and infrastructure,
and internet connectivity in all the courts constructed. Installation and commissioning of Local Area Networks
was completed in 25 courts. 1,300 computers were procured and distributed across 128 court stations.

In order to ascertain the total volume of backlogs in the judiciary as well as the causes of delay in case
resolutions, Case Audits and Institutional Surveys were done in 2014 and in 2016 (the judiciary case audit
and institutional capacity survey conducted in August 2014; and the judiciary case census and institutional
capacity survey in 2016). In addition, a case diagnostic study (to assess the cause of delays in case
processing) was done in 2015. An impact evaluation study was conducted to determine the main reasons for
adjournments in sample courts. This entailed conducting a randomized controlled trial study across 124 court
stations in Kenya. As part of the study, courts were randomly divided into groups, with certain courts as well
as CUCs being asked to report on adjournments using a one-page feedback form.

Additionally, all the constructed and refurbished courts were fully equipped with furniture. This eliminated the
problem of staff working in turns, thereby increasing efficiency and productivity. The Directorate of Building
Services (DBS) was fully established with staff to help manage and supervise court construction and
renovation programs. Additionally, to enhance efficient operations for eight court stations (Ngong, Kikuyu,
Webuye, Wanguru, Kisii, Homabay, Eldoret, and Meru law courts), the project procured fabricated containers
serving as registry, courtrooms, and/or archives. Through these initiatives, courts were able to expand
existing space available by about 300 square feet for provision of services.

Outcomes:

      The average time to dispose of cases was reduced from 15 months to 10 months. The original target
       was 8 months, which was revised to 11 months in 2016, and then to 10 months in 2018. The project
       achieved the 2018 revised target of 10 months. This represents a 100 percent achievement of the
       2018 revised target (ICR, p. 20).
      74% of court users reported timely services. However, as no baselines were reported, it is not
       possible to estimate how much progress was achieved.
      At project completion, 64% of cases were completed in less than one year of filing. No baseline was
       provided, thus it is not possible to estimate improvement.
      Costs involved in case processes were reduced through electronic filing; however, the ICR does not
       indicate the extent of the cost reductions and what cost unit was used to measure costs.

Average distance to courts as a result of constructing new courts. This was a significant achievement of
the project. A total of 21 new courts were constructed. Nine mobile courts were introduced to serve the most
remote parts of Kenya (ICR, p. 17). Although the project mentions an increase in the number of cases filed


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



per day after a court construction (ICR, p. 19), it did not measure usage of courts, such as, for example
measuring how extensively certain courts were used and by which types of project beneficiaries.

Outcomes:

      The project aimed at reducing the average distance to courts from 394 km originally to 186 km (the
       original target). This target was revised in 2016 to 110 km, and then revised in 2018 to 140km. At
       project conclusion, the average distance was 152 km, representing progress toward but not meeting
       the revised target (ICR, p. 20).

Users’ satisfaction with the delivery of court services in project courts. The project supported carrying
out surveys including court user surveys (2015), employee surveys (2017), and environmental satisfaction
surveys (2019), which collectively measured satisfaction in terms of accessibility, fairness, accuracy,
timeliness, knowledge, and courtesy. As part of the surveys, a satisfaction index was developed and used to
establish the level of improvement. (ICR, p. 60). A legal needs and satisfaction survey was conducted in
2017

Outcomes:

      The surveys showed an improvement in the delivery of court services from a satisfaction index of 56
       percent in 2015 to 67 percent in 2019, exceeding the original target of 60 percent and the 2016/2018
       revised targets of 65 percent (ICR, p. 20).
      The ICR notes that the new courts with improved customer service facilities improved court efficiency.
       In particular, out of 11 parameters of satisfaction, the users expressed relatively greater satisfaction
       with the services at the customer care desk, where staff were courteous and provided more useful
       guidance to clients, including compliance with the service charter on time.
      The ICR links the construction of new courts with improved overall access to the justice system, noting
       that “the number of cases filed per day after a court construction is completed increased by
       approximately 30 percent on average” (ICR, p. 19)

Gender Impact. There was positive gender impact. The project promoted gender equity in accessing judicial
services through new court buildings, which were designed to provide a conducive and dignified space for
women (for example, separate cells for women and children). In addition, the project facilitated waiting areas,
service bays, and lactating rooms for nursing mothers. The project also supported CAMP and facilitated
mediation on family and succession issues that most commonly adversely affect women. Training on
alternative forms of dispute resolution helped with handling sexual offense cases in court. Further, the project
supported capacity building of female judges and magistrates.

Outcomes:

      The project targeted at least 30 percent of the project beneficiaries to be women. Project beneficiaries
       are defined as both the number of court users and the number of judicial personnel trained. At project
       closing, at least 45% of project beneficiaries were women, exceeding expectations.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



Despite the difficulties experienced in implementation, the project substantially contributed to the
modernization of the court system in Kenya and greater judicial capacity. All revised output targets were
substantially achieved, including a marked increase in access to and satisfaction with courts.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the performance of the Judiciary to provide its services in the Project Areas in a more
accountable manner.

Rationale
At project design, there was a lack of performance reporting in place and insufficient information about
performance measures and standards. The project identified deficiencies in the accountability framework of
the Kenyan Judiciary and the need to enhance the accountability of judicial officers and staff, in general. The
TOC, as it related to accountability, was premised on the notion that introducing mechanisms and tools for
improving judicial performance would lead to greater judicial accountability.

However, the originally planned IPMAS, which was to be used as a tool for evaluating staff performance, was
dropped, and with it the related outcome indicator.

Additional activities specifically relevant to the thematic area of accountability are discussed below. Some
outputs are the same as under Objective 1, as the reforms that contributed to improved court functioning and
court processes also enhanced judicial accountability. For example, the publication of regular court user
survey results is a crucial transparency and accountability tool.

Number of PMMUs signed. The project supported entrenchment of PMMUs/performance contracts in the
Judiciary. Performance contracts were gradually introduced, with 284 performance contracts having been
signed at project closing (ICR, p. 23). Performance contracting has been fully adopted, with the ICR noting
that this contributed to more efficient and overall improved service delivery by the Judiciary, as described
under the first objective.

Improved consistency and clarity of judicial decision-making, and increased access to legal
information. The project financed a training needs assessment to support the JTI in its annual programs
through a review of the Judiciary's training needs. The assessment identified specific knowledge and skills
that employees need to be trained on to be more productive, efficient, and innovative in their jobs. To
increase legal knowledge and improve practices, the project supported the dissemination of legal materials to
the Judiciary for use by judicial officers (over 620 Grey Books were disseminated to the Judiciary) and
members of the public (4,500 copies of the Kenya Law Reports and 100,000 pocket-sized copies of the
Constitution were provided to the public to “enhance understanding of the law and bridge the knowledge
gap”). A total of 6,000 volumes of Commonwealth Law Reports and East Africa Law Reports, among a host of
other titles, were bought and distributed to 28 court stations for legal research by judicial officers/legal



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



                            practitioners. Additionally, the National Council for Law Reporting website (kenyalaw.org) was revamped to
                            enhance access to legal information, leading to a 93 percent increase in average monthly unique users.

                            Strengthened integrity of decision-making. A governance and anti-corruption mapping survey was
                            undertaken, as well as preparation of a report to guide the Judiciary in addressing and preventing corruption.
                            The complaints management system of the office of the Judiciary Ombudsman was reviewed, strengthened,
                            and upgraded. The system was upgraded with the following features: (1) auto response – allowing clients to
                            lodge complaints via emails upon which they receive an automatic response to the effect that a ticket has
                            been created; (2) search options – the search parameters were broadened to enhance the search function;
                            (3) contact editing – to allow enhanced feedback whenever a clients contact changes; (4) merging tool –
                            enabling users to efficiently handle more than one ticket relating to the same customer simultaneously and;
                            (5) complaints trends – this enables knowing frequency of each category of complaints. (ICR, p. 61).
                            Additionally, the project funded the installation of audio recording equipment in 26 courts for quick and easy
                            access to the recordings of any proceeding.

                            Impact Evaluations to Improve Judicial Performance. With the support of the World Bank’s DIME
                            program, the Judiciary undertook an impact evaluation to determine how to improve judicial performance.
                            Toward case weighting and optimal resource allocation, the project facilitated a study for magistrates courts,
                            which assessed: (a) the workload of judicial cases in the magistrates courts and established optimal
                            resources, (b) the appropriate number of judicial officers necessary for effective case resolution, (c) the
                            duration of a case from registration to resolution, (d) the distribution of cases among magistrates, and (e)
                            allocation of budgetary resources among courts.

                            Although achievement of the objective is rated Substantial based on these activities, a more outcomes-based
                            analysis of accountability would have improved the ICR's argument in this area.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project significantly reduced case backlogs, modernized court registries and related processes, and
                            improved access to courts and legal information, leading to substantial practical achievements under the first
                            objective of improving the effectiveness of the Kenyan court system. Several project activities supported
                            improvements in judicial accountability. Overall efficacy is therefore rated Substantial.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR does not include a formal economic analysis, and economic benefits are not discussed.

The absence of technical staff within the Judiciary to properly cost and design courts led to severe
underestimation of the costs of court construction. While this issue was later rectified and reflected in the MTR
(the project supported experts to strengthen capacities of the Building Services Unit), even with more accurate
cost estimates (because costs were estimated as of 2015), by the time most of these courts were completed
(2020-2022) prices of construction materials had significantly risen.

Implementation was hampered by a range of procurement issues, including irregular tender committee
meetings, repeated errors in procurement processes, infrequent scheduling of evaluation committees, delays in
writing up committee reports, and the need to seek legal opinions on the implementation of World Bank
procurement protocols in the context of domestic legislation (ICR, p. 51).

Contract management and monitoring was inadequate. The ICR comments on the poor performance of the IFA,
noting that “due to the inability of the IFA to conduct due diligence, some of the engaged contractors lacked
financial capacity to independently continue with the construction” (ICR, p. 26). The project also experienced
implementation delays in processing payments to contractors (ICR, p. 26). Timely contractual remedial
measures were not adequately pursued for non-performing contracts. As a result, deliveries/completions of
many court building contracts were delayed compared to contracted completion dates. This problem
was compounded by challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.

While the Project Management Unit attempted to monitor the situation, remedies were not always proactive. The
World Bank team fielded a number of missions, including virtual follow-ups, to improve the situation; however,
many of the challenges persisted.

Overall, efficiency is rated Modest. Implementation of the project required significantly more time than was
originally allotted, and it suffered from various operational inefficiencies, thus delaying benefits to intended
beneficiaries.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to the Kenya 2030 Vision, country conditions, and Bank strategy.
Achievement of both objectives is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated modest due to project under-costing,
delays in implementation, and the absence of economic analysis. Overall, these ratings are indicative of
moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results, producing an Outcome rating
of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following two factors are likely to lower risks to development outcomes: (1) the passage and
operationalization of the Judicial Fund Act 2016; and (2) the willingness of members of the Kenyan Judiciary
(including judiciary leadership) to continue with the reform process, including important cultural reforms.

The Judicial Fund Act was enacted on 12 June 2016 and finally operationalized in 2022. This is expected to
ensure that the Judiciary has adequate resources to carry out maintenance and improvements of court
houses, vehicles, and ICT infrastructure. Also, according to Bank staff, the Judiciary is invested in many of
the reforms. The current Chief Justice is seeking to ensure that “institutional and cultural aspects are being
maintained” (ICR, p. 27). However, the length of the Chief Justice's appointment term is uncertain.

Training and staffing issues: The absence of continuing training on ICT infrastructure maintenance is
considered a significant risk to the longevity of the reforms. The ICR highlights limited technical knowledge of
staff as an issue, stating, that after project closing, as consultants left the project, staff remaining in the
finance and accounting functions were in need of additional training and had limited or no technical
knowledge of the project (ICR, p.27). Recruitment issues are also a risk to the project’s maintenance. To fill
the gap in the DBS created by the departure of the 20 short-term consultants leaving the project, additional
recruitment by the judiciary as well as training of staff in technical departments is needed. Delays in the
recruitment process may create challenges for the maintenance of project outcomes. These issues could be
resolved by ensuring that staff tasked with continuing the reforms implemented by the project have additional
and continuous technical training, and that proper recruitment is implemented.

Resource issues: Financing is likely to pose a major risk to the continuity of the project. While the Judiciary
agreed to finance unfinished courts from its own resources, there is a realistic risk that this will not be
achieved in a political climate where austerity measures were – at the project’s closing – being implemented
to curb public spending. A lack of adequate financing in the medium-term expenditure framework could result
in the Judiciary not being regularly ab8. Assessment of Bank Performancele to maintain and improve IT
infrastructure and building facilities, resulting in a deterioration of both. There is also risk that increased

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



tensions between the executive and Judiciary result in less funding being allocated to the Judiciary. This
problem is compounded by inadequate life cycle costing of court buildings and ICT infrastructure, which, in
turn, could result in improper maintenance and run-down buildings and systems.

Lack of Improvements to Accountability Framework: The success of the reforms will depend on further
improvements to accountability, as the quality of the justice system will depend on citizens having access to
courts (and other dispute resolution systems) that are trusted and accountable.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared with sound background analysis, based on the government's reform objectives
  and priorities as well as prior judiciary reform initiatives in Kenya (ICR, p. 25). Thus, the initial M&E
  design suffered from various shortcomings, including the large number of implementing units, as well as
  a large number of small internally focused activities (266 in total were designed in FY2013/14 alone,
  many of which were not completed).

  The ICR also points to issues surrounding the weak capacity of the IFA, which do not appear to have
  been adequately considered at point of entry. The IFA was ineffectively staffed and non-responsive to
  PMU and Judiciary needs, adding little in terms of capacity development or quality. These weaknesses
  became apparent in 2013 (when the IFA was contracted) and were also highlighted during the MTR in
  2015, which, among other things, decided that the IFA would be phased out and its procurement and
  financial management functions directly transferred to the PMU.

  On the upside, the project preparation team took into account country-specific implementation and
  procurement challenges and considered the work of other World Bank-financed activities in support of
  judicial reforms, as well as the work of other donors (such as the German Agency for International
  Cooperation’s support for CUCs, the United States Agency for International Development-financed Case
  Management Project in Eldoret, and code of conduct work facilitated by the United Nations Office on
  Drugs and Crime) in an attempt to build on prior efforts and avoid duplication.

  Lessons learned from previous initiatives in Kenya and similar operations throughout the region were
  incorporated. Thus, the project management component (Component 4) was built on lessons learned
  from the judiciary’s 2008 forensic audit and the recommendations made in the institutional risk-based
  policy framework (funded through the World Bank FLSTAP – the Financial and Legal Sector Technical
  Assistance Project) to address fiduciary capacity constraints in the judiciary (ICR, p. 26). The project
  preparation team also took into account the procurement challenges experienced in automating the
  recording of court proceedings (under the Norwegian grant for the Kenya Public Sector Management
  Project, TF052274, FY02) and in the piloting of a case tracking system for the High Court Family Court
  Division by the NCLR (Gender Responsive Legal Reforms Project, TF053703).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented in a “context of weak public sector governance and government
 accountability” (ICR, p. 25). The task team, through supervision missions, regularly highlighted issues for
 World Bank management’s attention. Quarterly and annual progress reports and monthly fiscal reports
 were used to monitor project outcomes and results indicators. Throughout the lifecycle of the project,
 several rounds of adjustments were made, including four project restructurings and extensions of project
 completion dates. During the MTR, shortcomings were identified (such as those relating to the large
 number of implementing units and related high transaction costs, as well as cumbersome annual planning
 processes), and the project was restructured away from focus on institutional inputs, as originally designed
 at entry, towards service delivery outcomes. However, as the ICR notes, it took over two years for the team
 to take the remedial action of replacing the IFA. This factor contributed to delays and slow disbursements.
 After the team’s decision to restructure the project, significant improvements were noted in achievement of
 outputs and outcomes. The direct involvement of the PMU (and the hiring of procurement and financial
 management consultants who reported directly to the Project Coordinator) improved efficacy and
 efficiency, increasing responsiveness and reducing costs.

 The World Bank intensified its supervision efforts during the final year of project implementation. The Bank
 held more frequent technical and management meetings with the client and provided day-to-day support in
 the final months, to help accelerate implementation and completion of the project. During the COVID-19
 pandemic, the task team was effective, successfully switching to virtual meetings and missions. It deployed
 ICT innovatively to minimize disruptions to service delivery and to supervise court constructions remotely
 (using the GEMS tracking tool, for example).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Primary responsibility for M&E was with the PMU, which was tasked with tracking the project’s performance
 indicators as defined in the results framework. That framework (developed as part of a consultative process
 with the Judiciary and other stakeholders) included five PDO-level indicators and six intermediate
 indicators, linked to the project's objectives. In carrying out its monitoring function, the PMU worked closely
 with the directorates of the Judiciary. The project provided M&E training, mentoring, and technical
 assistance for the Judiciary and recruited a full-time M&E officer as part of the PMU team, in addition to




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



 engaging independent third-party monitoring (through community service organizations, court users, and
 affected communities). An M&E plan was developed to operationalize the results framework.

 Moreover, the cumbersome structure consisting of many implementing units and small internally focused
 activities adopted as part of M&E made it difficult to prioritize activities for clear assessment of project
 achievements and monitoring of redefined components and outcome indicators. Corrective actions were
 taken to improve M&E design after the first restructuring. Additionally, some of the outcome indicators were
 flawed, as there was no baseline to measure progress.

 The TOC is reflected in the results framework, which measures practical progress using both efficiency and
 quality indicators. The latter measured the delivery of quality court services (data gathered using client and
 court stakeholder surveys), whereas the former relied on numerical targets and indicators (geographic
 distance to courts, reduction of case backlog, timeliness and speed of case resolution, and the number of
 PPMU contracts adopted across courts). Overall, however, M&E did not include enough indicators to
 understand how progress toward the achievement of the accountability objective would be measured.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of M&E improved over time. However, the ICR notes that data in some cases were
  collected with delays due to coordination issues with government departments. In particular, the ICR
  notes that “data collection had gaps in the early years” which were addressed later, with M8E
  implementation being conducted more rigorously in the final years of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project supported the development of a Daily Court Returns Template (DCRT), a data collection and
  administrative system to collect data from each court system. The DCRT was folded into the electronic
  case management system and is used for various purposes, including hiring and promotion of judges,
  decision-making to deploy infrastructure, allocation of court budgets, performance monitoring through
  the performance dashboard implemented by the PMU, and the GEMS e-supervision tracking tool.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards

   The project was in compliance with environmental and social safeguards (ICR, p. 26). It was rated Category
   B for environmental purposes. The project entailed construction and rehabilitation of courts and therefore
   triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12
   on Involuntary Resettlement. The majority of court buildings rehabilitated were small magistrates court

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



   facilities, and environmental impacts were expected to be moderate. To ensure the minimization of
   environmental impacts on court facilities, the Kenyan Government prepared a number of policies to guide
   the process: (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (which included guidance on dealing
   with physical cultural resources that could be affected by the court rehabilitation and construction facilities;
   (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework; (iii) Environmental and Management Plans (ESMPs) for the first two
   courts to be rehabilitated (Kangema and Kitui Magistrates Courts); and (iv) a Resettlement Action Plan that
   was developed in the event that there were land acquisitions that would impact assets or cause loss in
   economic activity.

   Social Safeguards

   As part of the project, adverse social impacts were minimized through implementation of a resettlement
   audit and payment of compensation to 14 project-affected persons. Further, to strengthen oversight, a
   safeguards focal point was appointed at the PMU; CUCs were established in each court to function as a
   complaints mechanism where issues between court users and the Judiciary could be raised and settled;
   and any new contractors or subcontractors brought onto site were briefed on the ESMP and were required
   to develop and implement a contractor ESMP, as well as follow up on the ESMP during site meetings.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR (p. 26) comments on the shortcomings of the IFA, which performed below expectations during
   2014-15, failing to put in place adequate processes to conduct quarterly audits and create appropriate filing
   and document management systems. Moreover, as the ICR notes, the IFA made repeated mistakes in
   procurement processing and invested only marginally toward enhancing the capacity of the seconded
   Judiciary staff. Due to the inability of the IFA to conduct due diligence, some of the engaged contractors
   lacked financial capacity to independently continue with construction, causing delays to project
   implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   n/a



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Significant operational and
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  implementation inefficiencies


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Shortcomings in M&E design
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest                     and implementation, delays in
                                                                                 data collection
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

IEG concurs with the lessons set out in the ICR. The project offers some lessons specific to Kenya
and others that may be applicable more generally. Below, the most pertinent lessons are extracted:

The Value in Leveraging Partnerships with World Bank Units. The project team sought
assistance from DIME in the design of data systems, especially for the data collection system, which
helped the Judiciary in transforming its data collection mechanisms for performance contracts,
budgeting, training, and infrastructure.

The broader justice community plays a crucial role in the local reform process. The rich
experiences from the justice community, as well as other task teams in other judiciary projects, can
help inform a project’s implementation, including providing guidance on best-fit options that a project
can pursue to address emerging challenges.

Institutionalizing change management champions within the judiciary can help drive the
reform process forward. Change management champions are essential to ensure that reform
activities continue being implemented, despite changes in the leadership body of the judiciary. For
example, key reforms implemented as part of this project – such as the development of a
governance and anti-corruption strategy, and conducting an organization review assessment and a
court-annexed mediation pilot – continued despite changes in the judiciary’s leadership body.

IEG adds the following:

The quality of judicial performance cannot be determined solely by numbers of cases
resolved. Numerical case resolution targets must be coupled with other qualitative factors to
determine judicial performance and avoid potential adverse effects associated with the application of
numerical case resolution targets alone (such as judgments being processed too quickly, or
summarily being dismissed). In this context, quality surveys are essential, and establishing a
continuous process for court user surveys and reporting on court performance is essential to ensure
that quality standards are maintained. Court reports on performance ought to be conducted on a
regular basis (for example, on an annual basis) to enable cross-comparisons on a year-to-year
basis. In the interests of transparency and improving public trust and confidence in courts, the
reports should be made available publicly.

In the justice sector, outcome indicators chosen ought to measure improved quality in usage
of courts. While reducing the distance to courthouses is essential, outcome indicators ideally should
also capture how extensively courthouses are used, where and by which intended project



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Judicial Performance Improv SIL (FY13 (P105269)



beneficiaries. Rigorous monitoring and evaluation systems are required to determine improvements
in usage, and thus correct continuing deficits.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR substantiated its conclusions with a thorough assessment of the project’s design, restructurings, and
achievements. The report is especially useful in setting out risks to the project’s reforms and outcomes, as well
as lessons learned and recommendations for similar or future projects. The information in the report was
generally accessible, with conclusions presented in a clear and structured way. However, it was challenging to
glean a clear list of identifiable initiatives that were taken under the project, and in this regard the information
may have benefitted from being set out in a more thematic manner, especially in so far as the information
relates to the project's two objectives. It was especially difficult to determine how much practical progress was
made toward achieving improved accountability, and what gaps remain. In addition, there could have been less
overlap between the substance of the report and Annex 4. The ICR strayed from guidelines by assessing
achievement of components, rather than achievement of objectives. Moreover, its efficiency discussion
assessed sectoral/judicial system efficiency, not project efficiency.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 19
