     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023097

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P174059                                  Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B3336                                 31-Dec-2021                                        10,799,997.49

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jul-2020                              31-Dec-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         10,800,000.00                                   10,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          10,800,000.00                                   10,800,000.00

 Actual                                      10,799,997.49                                   10,799,997.49




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz       Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                        Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 12) and the Grant Agreement (page 5), the project
   objectives were as follows:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



         To enhance access to online and distance learning for all students in primary and secondary
          schools and facilitate a smooth transition in the return to school for targeted vulnerable
          students.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Expanding existing remote learning opportunities for learning continuity for all students in
   basic education (Appraisal: US$ 6.25 million; Actual: US$ 6.25 million): This component aimed to develop
   solutions that maximized Kenya's existing remote learning resources. Activities included: development of
   interactive online learning mechanisms and programming for radio, television, digital cloud, and mobile
   phone platforms (including adaptation for learners with special needs); expansion of radio coverage in all
   regions of the country; acquisition of supplementary online materials for the Kenya Education Cloud;
   capacity building for teachers in online and distance learning methodologies; dissemination of simple tips for
   parents to support home learning; and a monitoring and evaluation system.

   Component 2: Facilitate smooth transition back to school for vulnerable students and girls (Appraisal: US$
   3.0 million; Actual: US$ 3.0 million): This component aimed to support the eventual transition back to
   school, following the temporary school closing. Activities included: a top-up grant for the National School
   Meals Program particularly in informal settlements and arid/semi-arid lands (ASAL); and provision of online
   psycho-social support services.

   Component 3: Project Coordination, Communication, and Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$ 1.55
   million; Actual: US$ 1.55 million): This component aimed to support project implementation and monitoring
   activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal and the actual project cost at completion was US$ 10.8 million.

   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant of US$ 10.8
          million, which disbursed in its entirety. The grant was allocated from the GPE COVID-19 accelerated
          funding window designated to support governments in their efforts to mitigate the impact of COVID-
          19 on their education systems and to help recovery.

   Borrower contribution


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



                            There was no planned Borrower contribution.

                       Dates

                            December 2021: The project closed as planned.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
In March 2020, in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, the government of Kenya announced the
closure of the country's 30,000 primary and secondary schools. Approximately 14 million learners had their
studies interrupted, and 310,000 teachers needed to adjust their instructional methods. Thus, online and
remote learning options were necessary to counter the effects of the school closings, including learning
loss, increased dropouts, and higher inequality. The economic impact from the closures was also likely to
depress education demand and supply, thereby incurring long-run costs on human capital. Although
Kenya's education results at that time were relatively high in terms of Human Capital Index measurements
(i.e. expected years of schooling), learning outcomes were overall low, with regional inequalities. The
Ministry of Education (MOE) and Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) had been making
efforts to develop the existing remote learning system (online and distance learning) to ensure that students
remained engaged during the extended school closure. These included educational programming
disseminated through radio, Education Television channel, Education Television YouTube channel, and the
Kenya Education Cloud. Aside from adequate content, additional challenges include limited capacity of
teachers regarding remote learning methodologies, limited access of learners and families in rural areas
and informal settlements to technology, high dependency on "traditional" classroom teaching and learning
methods, inequities between the private and public school systems regarding remote learning systems, and
inadequate monitoring and evaluation arrangements.

The project objectives were highly relevant to the MOE's COVID-19 response and recovery plan, which
included objectives to provide access to quality, equitable, and inclusive education; facilitate production of
learning materials; train teachers; target vulnerable populations; and provide psychosocial support. They
were also aligned with the previous 2018-2022 National Education Sector Strategy Plan, which had been
developed to guide the government’s investment policies on access and equity, particularly related to
regional disparities in access, and the current 2022-2026 plan, which also aims to enhance access and
equity in education, training, and research. The Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY 14-18
(extended to FY20), in place at the time of project appraisal, identified human resource development as a
primary domain of engagement, although there were no specific outcomes for education in the results
framework. The new CPF for FY22-27 was being prepared at the time of ICR Review preparation and will
include reduced disparities in learning outcomes as part of the second CPF outcome of "inclusion and
equality institutionalized" (as reported by the project team). As noted in the PAD (page 12), the project was
not conceived as only an emergency short-term response; instead, in line with MOE’s COVID-19 plan, it
also included a medium-term set of interventions to protect the education system and to build additional
resilience for future crises.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                           Page 3 of 13
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To enhance access to online and distance learning for all students in primary and secondary schools

                Rationale
                The theory of change was clear. As articulated in the ICR (page 8), the aim of this objective was to support
                continuity of learning by expanding the existing remote learning system for all students, building capacity of
                teachers in remote learning methodologies, and developing a monitoring and evaluation system for the
                remote learning system. This would be achieved through outputs including working with existing media
                channels to increase coverage of online and distance learning, acquire and develop online learning content
                (particularly in core subject areas), develop a digital media facility, and provide training for teachers in remote
                learning methodologies.



                Outputs

                        4,900 interactive online lessons were made available for use by students in grades 1-12 (target:
                           3,665). Production of the interactive online lessons was financed by both the project and the
                           government. In addition, the KICD partnered with Kenya's main internet provider, Safaricom,
                           to provide free bundles to some learners who could not afford to pay. The digital content included
                           lessons for visually and hearing impaired learners in grade 1 and 2 in the areas of hygiene and
                           nutrition, creative studies, and environmental activities.
                          Six broadcast hours per day were provided by media partners for core subject areas (original target: 8;
                           revised target: 6). According to the ICR (page 12), the target was revised downward when schools re-
                           opened in January 2021 and broadcast hours were adjusted accordingly. The broadcast hours did
                           reach eight hours on the Kenya Broadcasting Corporation during the school closures period. Radio
                           broadcasts were used to reach refugee children and disadvantaged learners.
                          53 new online supplementary materials were acquired from external partners (target: 20). 56.6
                           percent of the materials were adapted to learners with special needs in grades 1 and 2.
                          Teachers received training and instructional manuals on remote learning methodologies. 163,938
                           teachers were trained in using remote learning methodologies, surpassing the target of 150,000
                           teachers. Of these, 95,266 teachers were female. In addition, 650 curriculum support officers and 230
                           senior education officers based at the county and sub-county levels also received training to facilitate
                           school-based teacher support in the integration of online resources into classroom instruction.
                          An integrated M&E system was developed to monitor remote learning interventions, which included
                           five areas: (i) a readiness and decision support tool for remote learning interventions; (ii) upgrading of
                           e-cloud to monitor the level of access to online resources; (iii) a user satisfaction survey conducted in

                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



       February and August/September 2021; (iv) tips to support parents and caregivers in remote learning
       approaches; and (v) establishment of a multiagency technical working team composed of officers from
       relevant government agencies mandated to promote child protection and enforcement of intellectual
       property rights.



Outcomes

      The percentage of students supported with remote learning interventions increased from 47 percent in
       April 2020 to 54 percent in December 2021, falling short of the target of 60 percent. IEG noted that
       this indicator measured the number of users who accessed online content at any point during the
       project period, but not other aspects of usage such as frequency or duration, and also that the
       percentage of female students supported did not change from the baseline of 23 percent (target: 30
       percent). According to the ICR (page 14), the shortfall was due to schools reopening for face-to-face
       learning in January 2021. However, the target was not formally revised due to the uncertainty of the
       COVID situation, including whether schools would need to be closed again or, if/when reopened, how
       service delivery would actually be achieved. The ICR also noted that outputs were still being utilized
       by MOE and teachers to augment face-to-face lessons, particularly for learners who have experienced
       learning loss and need to catch up, and to support schools that are under-staffed so that learners can
       have access to the needed lesson material, especially in the ASAL and rural schools.



Achievement is rated Substantial due to the increased availability of online and remote learning, although the
target was missed due to the reopening of schools partway through the project period.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To facilitate a smooth transition in the return to school for targeted vulnerable students

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. As articulated in the ICR (page 8), the aim of this objective
was to prepare for and facilitate the transition of the most vulnerable students and girls back to school. In
order to achieve this outcome, project outputs included financial support for the school meals program, an
online psycho-social support service, a learning assessment to inform actions for lagging students, and
monitoring of school attendance.



Outputs


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)




      School meals were provided to 3,475 schools from ASAL counties, urban slums, and special needs
       education schools.
      Operational manuals and training regarding psycho-social support were developed for
       parents/guardians, teachers, field-based education officials, and head teachers. A consortium of
       counselling institutions worked closely with MOE and the teachers' commission to assess different
       levels of trauma among teachers and learners from the COVID-19 pandemic to establish a baseline
       for the psychosocial interventions, which informed development of the counselling manuals and
       provision of psychosocial support services through a hybrid approach, online and face-to face. 2,990
       guidance and counseling teachers received training at the school level.
      The National Assessment Centre conducted "re-entry" learning assessments for learners in primary
       school who re-enrolled in grades 1 to 8. Schools received school-specific analysis reports on the re-
       entry assessments to inform remedial learning.



Outcomes

      1,841,555 students were provided access to school meals for at least 151 learning days in a
       year. This surpassed the target of 1,750,000 students. Of these, 947,216 students were female. The
       end of project evaluation reported that 76.4 percent of head teachers said the program enabled
       learners to return to school and helped improve attendance, reduce pupils’ absenteeism, and reduce
       the number of children dropping out of school.
      13,842,811 previously enrolled students (at preschool, primary, and secondary levels) returned once
       the school system reopened, representing 98.9 percent of the student population. This nearly
       achieved the target of 14,000,000 students, or 100 percent. Of these, 49 percent were female. The
       MOE subsequently organized a multi-agency team to visit the lagging counties to determine the
       underlying causes for low enrollments, targeting about fifteen counties where the number of out-of-
       school children was reported to be highest.
      157,656 students were provided with access to psycho-social support services. This surpassed
       the target of 100,000 students. Of these, 78,467 students were female.
      8,233,334 students were assessed to evaluate learning loss during school closure. This fell short of
       the target of 8,930,000 students. According to the ICR (page 17), the shortfall was due to the fact that
       the re-entry assessment had to be conducted immediately when schools re-opened to get a
       "true" baseline, but some students returned to school after the school reopening dates and were not
       assessed.



Also of note, MOE determined from school-level visits that many girls were not returning to school because of
teen pregnancy. Therefore, the follow-up Bank operation, Primary Education Equity in Learning project
(P176867), will include a strong focus on girls and require the inclusion of gender targets in the national
school improvement plans and remedial actions to prevent dropouts. Analytical work on gender concerns and
priorities in Kenya, including girls' education, will also be supported as part of upcoming gender diagnostic
analytical work.




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



                            Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of access to transition services for
                            vulnerable students.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, as both the first objective to enhance access to online learning and the
                            second objective to facilitate a smooth transition back to school were achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The efficiency analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 3) compared the costs and benefits of the project with similar
   scenarios from other countries' experience with the Ebola outbreak, specifically the ways that increased
   preparedness and mitigation measures can reduce expected education losses. Benefits were calculated
   according to private returns to education, where one additional year of education represents on average a 12.4
   percent increase in expected income. The expected positive outcomes are higher retention rates due to the
   project interventions. Costs are the total cost of the project. The analysis assumed that, in the absence of the
   project, a share of students currently enrolled in either primary or secondary education would drop out. The
   costs and benefits were compared to the case where project activities resulted in no additional dropouts,
   without changes in the current completion and transition rates. The PAD estimated the project’s impact as the
   absence of dropouts in primary and secondary schools due to the COVID-19 school closures, compared to three
   counterfactuals where the pandemic would have caused the permanent dropping out of respectively 10, 20, and
   30 percent of children from the two lowest income quintiles. In its middle-case scenario of avoiding a 20
   percent dropout rate from the 40 percent lowest-income schools in the country, the estimated net present value
   (NPV) was US$ 212 million with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 7.7 percent.

   The efficiency analysis in the ICR (Annex 4) updated the cost benefit calculation using the actual number of
   project beneficiaries, though using a slightly different methodology. The analysis calculated that access to
   remote learning opportunities was provided to 804,988 children in public primary and secondary education. In
   turn, this is assumed to have increased their expected years of schooling by one year. Therefore, the activities
   for Component 1 were calculated to result in an NPV of US$169 million, with an IRR of 17.2 percent.

   Other indications of the efficient use of project resources include: quick preparation given the pandemic context,
   targeting of areas of highest need (greatest potential impact), and leveraging of existing platforms and materials

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



to a significant degree. Project activities were completed as planned (with 100 percent of funds disbursed) within
the original project period. Some activities were delayed, such as the establishment of new partnerships with
privately owned, community, and faith-based radio and television broadcasters, adaptation of the online-based
lessons for learners with special needs, and creation of new content, due to capacity constraints. These initial
challenges were resolved with the support of the Bank’s EdTech Unit, and project activities were completed as
planned.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 7.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     58.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.20
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well
as education sector and Bank strategies. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as both the first objective to enhance
access to online learning and the second objective to facilitate a smooth transition back to school were
achieved. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to a favorable cost-benefit ratio and indications of efficient use of
project resources. These rating indicate that there were only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, producing an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project was mainstreamed into the institutional structure of MOE, with a view to building resilience in the
education system for potential future shocks. The overarching risk of COVID-19 continues to exist, but
the online learning infrastructure and capacity to develop online content and utilize the system has been
strengthened.



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives were well aligned with education strategy and COVID response plans. The project
  design drew upon good practices identified by education professionals and policy makers in the midst of
  the COVID-19 pandemic, with regards to effective remote learning. These good practices
  included leveraging existing assets and infrastructure to minimize costs and mobilize quickly, exploring
  which mediums can be most quickly, cheaply, and effectively harnessed, ensuring teachers play a role in
  supporting learning, and supporting parents to implement home-based learning. The project design
  therefore built upon existing structures and systems within the country (such as the Digital Literacy
  Program, government-run EDU TV channel, radio broadcasts, and the digital cloud), while addressing the
  need to train teachers and ensure access to education technologies and internet connectivity that were
  varied across the country. As noted in the ICR (pages 21-22), the project was not viewed only as an
  emergency short-term response to the COVID-19 pandemic, but also as a set of interventions to protect
  the education system and to build resilience for future shocks.

  The results framework and M&E arrangements were sound, with clear measurement indicators for all
  aspects of the project objectives. Key risks included macroeconomic uncertainty, the technical and
  operating requirements for the outputs, and low implementation and fiduciary capacity. Mitigation
  measures centered on the provision of technical support.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Virtual supervision missions were frequent and appropriately staffed with fiduciary and technical
 specialists. Early in implementation, the project coordinating unit experienced challenges developing the
 remote learning program, particularly strengthening of the online remote learning platforms and delivery
 mechanisms. The Bank provided technical assistance through its EdTechHub team, which dedicated three
 experts to support the remote learning activities. Fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project were
 regularly monitored.

 The ICR (page 12) reported that at the time of the May 2021 mid-term review, there was a wave of COVID-
 19 infections within the country, and therefore there was no formal restructuring of key outcome targets
 (namely the percentage of students with access to remote learning) because of the uncertainty and fluidity
 of the situation. Instead, the Bank team made minor adjustments to the targets for the intermediate
 indicators in the operations portal instead of processing a project restructuring.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was clear and straightforward. Indicators were measurable and relevant, with baseline
 and target figures identified, although the key outcome indicator of the percentage of students "supported
 with" remote learning interventions was somewhat vague. The project team clarified that this indicator
 measured the number of students who accessed online, television, or radio content at any point in time
 during the project period, but did not measure other aspects of usage such as frequency or duration of the
 usage, which would have strengthened attribution to mitigating learning losses. In addition, the target (60
 percent) was not set higher because only about 50 percent of learners from poor households had access to
 electricity and affordable internet, and only about 70 percent of all households had access to a radio. The
 project design included the key activity of developing a monitoring system for remote learning opportunities,
 as this did not exist previously. The design also included beneficiary surveys to assess the extent to which
 the project was meeting the needs of children.

 As noted previously, at the time of the May 2021 mid-term review, there was a wave of COVID-19
 infections within the country. Although schools had reopened in January 2021, thereby affecting the
 likelihood of achieving the key outcome target (percentage of students with access to remote learning), the
 target was not formally revised because of the uncertainty and fluidity of the situation. Instead, the Bank
 team made minor adjustments to the targets for the intermediate indicators in the operations portal. These
 included: number of daily broadcast hours for interactive online lessons for core subjects, reduced from 8
 hours per day to 6 hours per day (when schools re-opened in January 2021 for all grades, the government
 adjusted the broadcast hours for online lessons from 8 hours to 6 hours), and number of students provided
 access to psycho-social support services (data disaggregated by gender, grades, and sub-county)
 (number). The original definition of the latter measured the number of students accessing online-based
 psychosocial support services/guidance and counselling services from the service provider. Given that
 schools had reopened in January 2021, and that some regions still had poor access to internet and
 electricity, the definition for the indicator was expanded to include students accessing online and face-to-
 face psycho-social support services/guidance and counselling services.



b. M&E Implementation
  The performance indicators were tracked and reported regularly. The evaluative activities to monitor level
  of access to online resources, to assess user satisfaction through a survey (February and
  August/September 2021), and to assess learning loss were all implemented as planned.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 24), data were made available regularly to update the results framework and
  inform supervision. The results of the beneficiary survey were used to improve the interactive online
  resources, and the learning assessments were used to develop remedial programs for students to catch
  up on learning.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project's environmental and social risk rating was Moderate. It was rated Environmental Assessment
   category "B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) because of the purchase of
   information technology equipment (tablets and smartphones) and related issues with e-waste disposal, and
   OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) because of coverage of ASAL areas where vulnerable and marginalized
   communities exist. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan and Stakeholder Engagement Plan
   were prepared during appraisal, with remaining safeguards documents and processes prepared before the
   launch of project activities. No physical or civil works were planned except for possible small-scale interior
   works, and therefore overall environmental impacts were expected to be limited. Social impacts were mostly
   positive due to the expansion of learning opportunities for girls and vulnerable groups.

   According to the ICR (page 25), safeguards were monitored consistently during project implementation, with
   safeguards performance rated in the satisfactory range throughout the project period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Due to the short implementation period, the National Treasury granted Authority to
   Incur Expenditures for the entire grant to be used in one financial year, because a lack of budget could
   have jeopardized implementation. According to the ICR (page 25), financial management performance was
   rated in the satisfactory range throughout the project period, with unaudited interim financial reports
   submitted of acceptable quality. Audit reports were unqualified. The Bank's fiduciary staff provided capacity
   development workshops for the project coordination unit on record keeping and reporting.

   Procurement: The Bank team conducted regular procurement performance assessment missions, with
   ratings in the satisfactory range throughout the project period. Bank fiduciary staff provided training to the
   project coordination unit to ensure compliance with the procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 27-28), adapted by IEG:

         Crisis situations may reverse previous education gains, but the inclusion of "re-
          entry" measures in the emergency response can facilitate the return to "normal"
          conditions. In the case of this project, these interventions included re-entry assessments for
          students immediately upon returning to school (so that teachers could determine needed
          remedial activities for their students), outreach initiatives to mobilize communities and
          parents to re-enroll out-of-school children, and provision of school meals programs in
          targeted poor communities (to provide incentive to return to school).
         A strong M&E system can provide the necessary real-time feedback on efficacy of
          interventions and allow for quick adjustments during implementation, which can be
          crucial in unpredictable crisis situations. In the case of this project, the establishment of a
          robust M&E system, including developing a new system to monitor remote learning, provided
          timely information on levels of access to remote learning, the mediums that were being
          utilized, and user satisfaction with online content.

Also,

         Even in an emergency situation, the response to the crisis embedded in the broader
          system can provide both emergency and longer-term solutions. In the case of this
          project, the MOE was able to lay a strong foundation for remote/distance learning that
          addressed immediate needs (by drawing upon existing content and platforms), continued to
          be utilized for remedial purposes once schools opened, and will remain functional for
          potential future crises.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya GPE COVID 19 LCBEP (P174059)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the evidence was strong, relying on the M&E system that was developed as a key part of project
activities. The ICR was internally consistent and concise. The discussion of achievement of the key outcome
indicator (students supported by remote online learning) could have been more candid in noting the magnitude
of the shortcoming (baseline: 47%, target: 60%; actual: 54%); furthermore, while an adequate explanation for
the shortcoming is provided, it could have been even more informative if any demand-side challenges were
identified (i.e. explanation for why female students' access to remote learning did not change over the project
period). Lessons were informative, particularly for embedding an emergency response in the broader system to
ensure sustainability and usefulness beyond the emergency situation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
