     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022918

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P144454                                  GPE-BEP

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-19124,TF-B0772                       30-Apr-2020                                         44,175,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2015                             31-Aug-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         44,175,000.00                                   44,175,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          44,175,000.00                                   44,175,000.00

 Actual                                      44,175,000.00                                   44,175,000.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz       Judyth L. Twigg             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                       Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 15), the project
   objectives were as follows:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)



          To increase school enrollment and retention in project supported schools, with a special focus
          on girls’ participation; and to develop mechanisms for information collection and use for the
          improved management of education.

   The project objectives remained the same throughout the project period; however, one key outcome indicator
   target was revised downwards, and therefore a split rating is assessed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Jul-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Access and Equity (Appraisal: US$ 23.2 million; Additional Financing: US$ 6.5
   million; Actual: US$ 24.5 million): This component aimed to improve access to and equity of girls and boys
   in schooling. Activities included: construction of 2000 primary schools (with the site selection process
   based on (i) confirmed need and demand in communities that lacked a school facility; (ii) third-party
   validation to ensure availability of teachers and children; and (iii) community partnerships for school
   management); and upgrading of 50 primary girls’ schools to middle schools and 10 middle girls’ schools to
   high school (with the site selection based on teacher availability, especially for science and mathematics).

   Component 2: Quality and Increased Accountability (Appraisal: US$ 6.03 million; Additional Financing: US$
   0; Actual: US$ 8.7 million): This component aimed to improve quality of teaching. Activities included:
   development of an early childhood education (ECE) policy and curriculum; development of teacher
   management and planning tools; strengthening of data collection tools and quality; and a learning
   assessment.

   Component 3: Technical Assistance for Improved Capacity for Management and Monitoring (Appraisal: US$
   4.76 million; Additional Financing: US$ 4.0 million; Actual: US$ 9.4 million): This component aimed to
   support the establishment of systems and procedures for effective planning and implementation of the
   project, including monitoring systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)



         The appraised project cost was US$ 34.0 million. With the approval of additional financing, the total
            project cost increased to US$ 44.175 million, which disbursed in its entirety.

   Financing

         The project was financed by a grant from the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) in the amount
            of US$ 34.0 million.
         Additional Financing in the form of a US$ 10.5 million grant from the European Commission was
            approved in July 2019.

   Borrower Contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         November 2018: The project closing date was extended from December 2018 to March 2019 due to
            implementation delays.
           March 2019: The project closing date was extended from March 2019 to June 2019 due to
            implementation delays.
           June 2019: The project closing date was extended from June 2019 to September 2019 to allow for
            completion of activities and to finalize the proposal for Additional Financing.
           July 2019: The project was restructured to provide additional financing of US$ 10.175 million, to
            revise the project design (focusing on rehabilitating existing schools rather than constructing new
            ones, increasing support to upgrading of girls secondary schools and teacher salaries, and providing
            transportation activities), and to revise the results framework including upward revision of the targets
            for girls' enrollment and student retention, and downward revision of the target for boys'
            enrollment. The project closing date was extended from September 2019 to April 2020.
           April 2020: The project closing date was extended from April 2020 to June 2021 due to COVID-
            related delays.
           May 2021: The project closing date was extended from June 2021 to August 2021 due to COVID-
            related delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Balochistan is Pakistan’s largest province in terms of land mass but the smallest in population, with less
than 4% of the country’s population. It is characterized by low economic growth, low social indicators (low
net enrollment rate, low immunization rate, and high infant mortality rate), and fragility, including weak
governance, low human resource capacity, and internal security conflicts. In the education sector, public
sector education is free but participation rates are very low (56% net enrollment in primary school, 40% for
girls) due to low quality and weak accountability mechanisms. As reported in the PAD (page 12), poor
education outcomes are evidenced by low access (fewer than 2 in 5 children aged 5-9 are enrolled in
primary schools), low efficiency (late enrollments, low survival rates, and repetition), and high inequities

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GPE-BEP (P144454)



               (females are 4.5 times more likely than males to be out of school - according to the PAD (pages 16 and 17),
               the lack of middle and high schools for girls is cited as one of the main reasons for dropping out of school
               after grade 5, as well as inadequate attention to children in early grades). At the time of project appraisal,
               out of the approximately 22,000 settlements in the province, 40% did not have access to a school. For
               those that did have existing schools, the facilities were generally in poor physical condition, with
               approximately 7% of schools lacking a building, thereby functioning in temporary shelters or without
               shelter. An estimated one million children were out of school in the province (PAD, page 13).

               In response to these challenges, the government of Pakistan sought participation in the GPE, which aims
               to support education in fragile and conflict-affected states, promote girls’ education, increase basic
               numeracy and literacy skills in primary school, and improve teacher effectiveness. As a requirement to
               receive a GPE grant, the province of Balochistan prepared an Education Sector Plan (2012-17) that stated
               its objectives as follows: to establish schools, to remove bottlenecks to school availability at the middle and
               secondary levels, to institutionalize ECE, to strengthen capacity of teachers, to increase use of data in
               decision making and planning, to increase community involvement in education management, and to
               improve the teaching and learning process. The project's objectives were highly relevant to these country
               education sector strategies.

               In addition, the most recently available Bank Country Partnership Strategy (FY15-19) identified "inclusion"
               and "service delivery" as key results areas, highlighting the particular vulnerability of women and girls and
               those living in conflict-affected areas. An increase in girls' gross primary education enrollment rate was
               included as a key outcome indicator.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase school enrollment in project-supported schools, with a special focus on girls’ participation
                             (ORIGINAL outcome targets)


                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear. The activity to build or improve school facilities would create additional
                             places for children to enroll in school. Teacher professional development and school management committee
                             training would likely contribute to improved quality of education, alongside ECE offerings that would increase
                             readiness for primary school and likelihood of primary school enrollment. The focus on girls’ participation was
                             initially reflected in the project elements of hiring female teachers and establishing upper grade school

                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE-BEP (P144454)



facilities for girls; with additional financing from the European Union, the focus was further sharpened through
revisions to school design including separate latrines, boundary walls, and separate classrooms, as well as
the provision of transportation. A critical assumption of the theory of change was that there would be a
demand for schooling, which would be verified by the community-based site selection process.



Outputs

      Construction of 708 new primary schools (original target: 2000; revised target: 725). These schools
         were selected according to a transparent school site selection process that emphasized verified
         demand in communities without an existing school facility, third-party validation to ensure availability
         of teachers and children, and community partnerships to manage the school. The shortfall in achieving
         the original target was due to COVID-19 shutdowns, regional security concerns that created
         challenges in accessing some school sites, and, most significantly, a change in school
         design. According to the ICR (page 11), the original design of the simple school structures needed to
         be revised to take into account necessary climate (insulation from hot and cold weather) and gender
         (separate classrooms and water/sanitation facilities) considerations; the modified design required
         additional financing and time to implement.
        Improvements to 1,186 classrooms through physical enhancements (target: 1,000) in both new and
         existing schools.
        Provision of furniture to 1,099 schools (original target: 2000; revised target: 1,145) and teaching and
         learning materials to 1,113 schools (original target: 2000; revised target: 1,145). According to the
         project team, these were provided to the newly established primary schools, the upgraded schools,
         and also "feeder" and "next level" schools (primary schools that would feed enrollment to the newly
         upgraded middle schools, and high schools that would eventually receive enrollment from the
         upgraded middle schools).
        Development of ECE policy, curriculum, and teaching and learning materials.
        Delivery of ECE programs in 828 schools (original target: 2000; revised target: 845).
        Development of teaching and planning tools, including monitoring teachers' use of tools.
        Provision of training to 2,632 teachers (original target: 4,000; revised target: 2,488) on using the
         teaching materials and management tools, including 374 teachers who went on to teach in the new
         middle and high schools for girls. According to the project team, over 90% of the teachers trained
         were female, meeting the qualifications outlined in the PAD.
        Provision of training to 5,927 school management committee members on school management
         (original target: 10,000; revised target: 6,365). According to the project team, the committees played a
         vital role in various functions such as enrollment campaigns, maintenance and supervision of stocks,
         ensuring teacher attendance by supporting their accommodation or other affordable support garnered
         from the community, and providing an important additional supervision layer for ensuring quality and
         timeliness of civil works.

However, the activity to provide transportation for girls and female teachers, which was added during the
project restructuring, was only partially completed. While a planned study on the viability of a transport facility
to address the issue of dropouts and difficulties faced by female students and teachers due to large distances
of schools from their homes was carried out, the pilot activity to provide transportation was cancelled due to
COVID-19 restrictions. However, the project team noted that the government has endorsed the study and is


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE-BEP (P144454)



planning to seek solutions based on the study's findings, and future Bank engagements will also build upon
the findings.



Outcomes

      30,931 boys and 99,558 girls (grades 1-5) were enrolled in project-supported schools. This fell short of
       the original target for boys (48,000) but surpassed the original target for girls (48,000). These
       enrollment figures represented students in both newly established schools and in existing
       schools. According to additional data provided by the project team, the number of newly enrolled boys
       was 8,310 and the number of newly enrolled girls was 25,632. These latter figures hence represent
       the increase in school enrollment resulting from project support.
      76% of the total beneficiaries were girls, surpassing the target of 70%. The gender enrollment gap
       (ratio of girls to boys) in project-supported schools improved from 2.10 (i.e. 1 girl per every 50 boys) in
       early 2019 to 3.2 percent at completion (i.e. 1 girl per every 31 boys), thus achieving the 3 percent
       target (i.e. 1 girl per every 33 boys).



Achievement is rated Modest as, with respect to project supported schools, the project met its target with
respect to girls’ enrollment but fell short from its target for boys. In addition, the additional figures provided by
the project team indicate that the majority of enrolled students were not newly enrolled but already in school.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase school enrollment in project-supported schools, with a special focus on girls’ participation
(REVISED outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
Outcomes

      30,931 boys and 99,558 girls (grades 1-5) were enrolled in project schools. This surpassed the
       revised targets for boys (19,942) and for girls (48,366). According to additional data provided by the
       project team, the number of newly enrolled boys was 8,310 and the number of newly enrolled girls
       was 25,632.




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE-BEP (P144454)



Achievement is rated Substantial. While the project surpassed its (downward) revised target for boys’
enrollment and the (upward) revised target for girls’ enrollment, the additional figures provided by the project
team indicated that the majority of enrolled students were not newly enrolled but already in school.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase school retention in project-supported schools, with a special focus on girls’ participation
(ORIGINAL outcome targets)

Rationale
The theory of change for the second objective to increase retention, which has some overlap with the theory
of change for the first objective to increase access, included construction/ upgrading of middle and high
schools for girls, as lack of these facilities was cited as one of the main reasons for drop out after grade 5,
and professional development of teachers for these schools. In addition, provision of early childhood
education (including development of curriculum and materials) was expected to improve quality of education
and hence increase likelihood of staying in schools.

Outputs

In addition to the outputs reported above:

      Upgrading of 195 primary schools into middle schools (target: 50) and 25 middle schools into upper
       secondary schools (target: 10).
      Provision of COVID-19 sanitization supplies to 1,286 schools.
      Equipping of 85 schools with science lab equipment.



Outcomes

      The retention rate at the newly-constructed project schools was 81.7% at project closing, achieving
       the original target of 80%. According to the project team, the baseline was 0%, as it measured rates
       at newly constructed schools where there were no students previously. Additional data provided by
       the project team (enrollment by grade and gender, for 2017, 2018, 2020, and 2021) indicated that
       retention rates from one year to the next (2017 to 2018, and 2020 to 2021) for girls ranged from 75%
       to 96%. In particular, the retention rate for girls from 5th grade to 6th grade (when girls make the
       transition from primary to middle school) was 77% in 2017-2018 and 76% in 2020-21.
      39,014 girls were enrolled in grades 6-10 in project-supported schools, far surpassing the original
       target of 2,000. According to additional data provided by the project team, 4,693 girls were newly
       enrolled while 34,321 were already enrolled (and continuing in middle and high school).



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GPE-BEP (P144454)




Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of continued enrollment of girls from one school year to the
next.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase school retention in project supported schools, with a special focus on girls’ participation
(REVISED outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
Outcomes

      The school retention rate was 81.7%, achieving the revised target of 81%. See above for additional
       data provided by the project team.
      39,014 girls were enrolled in grades 6-10, far surpassing the revised target of 9,127. According to
       additional data provided by the project team, 4,693 girls were newly enrolled while 34,321 were
       already enrolled (and continuing in middle and high school).



Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of continued enrollment of girls from one school year to the
next.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To develop mechanisms for information collection and use for the improved management of education

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. Activities to strengthen data collection methods, strengthen the quality of
data collected (including through use of technology), and conduct learning assessments were likely
to contribute to the production of timely and reliable data to inform decision making and management of the
education sector.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GPE-BEP (P144454)



                            Outputs

                                  Strengthening of data collection tools, including through the use of geographic information
                                   systems, school census instruments, and a real-time school monitoring system, which featured
                                   an Android application that sent data directly from the field to the customized Balochistan Education
                                   Management Information System (BEMIS) dashboard.
                                  Provision of training to 2,632 teaching staff and 5,927 members of parent-teacher school management
                                   committees on data collection.



                            Outcomes

                                  Data collected through the BEMIS was used to generate regular progress reports on selected
                                    indicators, which were made public on the government website.
                                  The ICR (pages 14-15) reported the following uses of education data collected: improvements in the
                                    teacher recruitment process through externally administered tests, supervision of highly
                                    geographically dispersed schools, publication of school performance indicators, review of education
                                    sector plan progress by donors, monitoring of teacher attendance, functioning of District Education
                                    Groups, and decision-making at the provincial level.



                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of improved management of education using data
                            collection systems.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy under the original outcome targets is rated Substantial due to Modest achievement of the first
                            objective to increase enrollment, Substantial achievement of the second objective to increase retention, and
                            Substantial achievement of the third objective to develop mechanisms for information collection and use for
                            the improved management of education.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 17
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             GPE-BEP (P144454)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Efficacy under the revised outcome targets is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first
         objective to increase enrollment, Substantial achievement of the second objective to increase retention, and
         Substantial achievement of the third objective to develop mechanisms for information collection and use for
         the improved management of education.

         The Additional Financing in the amount of US$ 10.5 million, provided by the European Union, contributed
         significantly to the achievement of targets and objectives.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
An economic analysis was not prepared either at appraisal or during preparation of the Additional
Financing. However, the ex-post analysis in the ICR calculated economic returns using appraisal figures
(estimated project costs and target values for PDO indicators). Benefits were calculated as the increased lifetime
labor earnings of the beneficiary students, i.e. increased number of girls and boys graduating from primary
schools (grade 5) in newly established schools and in upgraded schools, and increased number of girls
graduating from secondary schools (grade 10), assuming an 80% completion rate. Costs included project costs
and additional four years of teacher salaries. The result was a net present value (NPV) of US$75.5 million and
an internal rate of return (IRR) of 15%. The analysis using actual figures at completion resulted in an NPV of
US$93.2 million and IRR of 18%, both of which compare favorably to the appraisal estimates. Also, considering
the government’s annual school budget spending of about PKR 50 billion per one million children, the project’s
yearly budget of PKR 1 billion per 170,000 children compares favorably and thus indicates that the spending per
student for this project was lower than the government's.

However, with regards to implementation efficiency, the cost of school construction per unit was higher than
originally estimated due to significant school design modifications that led to a reduced number of schools
constructed within the same overall financing envelope (although the reduced targets for increased enrollment
and retention for girls were still achieved). Although experience from prior operations in the education sector in
the country had already noted the importance of gender and climate considerations in school design, these were
not incorporated in the original design and thus necessitated significant revisions to the project components four
years into the project period. In addition, there were delays in the project restructuring due to ongoing
discussions regarding potential additional financing, as well as multiple project closing date extensions (16
months total). These factors led to significantly diminished implementation efficiency. Therefore, overall
Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest

                                                                                                         Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GPE-BEP (P144454)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                               18.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Project under original targets – Moderately Satisfactory

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions and Bank/country strategic
priorities. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to modest achievement of the first objective to increase enrollment
(with achievement of targets for girls but not for boys), substantial achievement of the second objective to
increase retention and substantial achievement of the objective to develop mechanisms for information
collection and use for the improved management of education. Efficiency is rated Modest due to significant
implementation inefficiencies, namely the modifications to the key project activity of school construction four
years into the project period.

Project under revised targets – Moderately Satisfactory

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions and Bank/country strategic
priorities. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to substantial achievement of the first objective to increase
enrollment, substantial achievement of the second objective to increase retention and substantial achievement
of the objective to develop mechanisms for information collection and use for the improved management of
education. Efficiency is rated Modest due to significant implementation inefficiencies, namely the modifications
to the key project activity of school construction four years into the project period.

Overall outcome – Moderately Satisfactory

According to harmonized IEG/OPCS guidelines, the overall outcome of a restructured project is determined by
weighting the amount of the Grant that disbursed at the time of restructuring. As the outcome rating for the
project before and after the restructuring is Moderately Satisfactory for both, the combined rating is also the
same.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GPE-BEP (P144454)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project objectives continue to be highly relevant to the government's current education sector plan, and
therefore they are likely to remain priorities for the government. All schools established through project
support were "mainstreamed" into the education sector; for example, teacher salaries have been paid by the
government since July 2018 (this was in response to the lesson learned from the prior project, in which there
were delays in government recognition of the new community-established schools thus preventing grade 5
graduates from enrolling at government middle schools in a timely manner). In addition, the
government adopted the real-time school monitoring mechanism developed under the project. Continued
capacity building support is being provided through the ongoing Balochistan Human Capital Investment
Project, approved in June 2020, as well as activities to increase access to and quality of education, including
for girls. The project team also clarified that as the project-supported schools were fully integrated into the
public administrative system including receiving a government school identification code, thereby are
receiving annual funding for operations and maintenance. Lastly, the new school designs that are more
responsive to disaster-risk, climate/weather, and gender considerations are still being implemented to this
date in new government school constructions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was strongly aligned to country and GPE objectives, while taking into account some
  implementation challenges such as security concerns, low capacity, and a widely dispersed
  population. The project design aimed to support implementation of the Balochistan Education Sector
  Plan, which had been developed following a comprehensive needs assessment in consultation with local
  stakeholders and donors. It drew upon lessons and experience from two prior, highly relevant Bank
  projects, the Balochistan Education Support Project and the Promoting Girls’ Education in Balochistan
  (PGEB), including the importance of involving communities in the selection, construction and monitoring
  of new schools and using third parties to validate availability of school children and teachers, and
  also utilizing the same project management unit, although less so for school design considerations.

  While the government of Balochistan had considered the education sector to be in an emergency state
  and therefore requested Bank support to rapidly increase the number of schools by building simple,
  transitional structures, it became evident that the design was neither climate considerate nor conducive to
  achieving the project's objectives particularly as they pertained to girls (i.e. boundary walls, separate
  latrines, transportation needs). As a result, school designs had to be modified. The adjustments
  (minimum of two classrooms for cultural gender privacy, separate sanitation facilities, and climate
  resilience) were critical and necessary changes but led to delays, inefficiencies, and a financial gap that
  was then addressed through the additional financing.

  The risk assessment was appropriately rated High due to low implementation capacity, delivery risk, and
  governance risks; effective mitigation measures were identified including community monitoring, third-
  party validation, and use of technology. The M&E arrangements took into account the challenges of data
  collection with the widely dispersed school population, however there were shortcomings in the selection

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)



  of indicators, including not adequately capturing the actual increase in enrollment and a lack of clarity on
  “increased retention”




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Given the fragile and challenging context, the Bank team was able to provide effective supervision by
 relying on remote monitoring mechanisms and third party validation. A comprehensive project review
 following closure of the GPE part of the project (November 2019) generated critical findings that were
 incorporated into the design and implementation of the additional financing portion of the project, thereby
 sharpening focus on achieving the project objectives. The project components were adjusted accordingly,
 including most notably the revisions to the school design that better supported the objective to increase
 enrollment of girls (and are still being implemented in new government school constructions), although
 COVID impacts led to further challenges (including dropping the transportation pilot). Although targets
 were revised to account for the changes, other shortcomings in the indicators were not adequately
 addressed.

 Fiduciary and safeguards performance was satisfactory with no major problems reported.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E collection arrangements were adequate, particularly given the challenges in monitoring and data
 collection. A key project intervention was to develop a more robust and reliable education management
 information system, including using a real-time school monitoring mechanism (an Android application from
 the field, inputted by local school management committee members) to monitor implementation progress
 remotely. Institutional arrangements for monitoring included third-party validation for site selection of
 schools and school management committee monitoring of school construction, teacher attendance, and
 use of teaching and learning materials in classrooms. However, shortcomings in the choice of indicators
 included the lack of a clear measure of increased enrollment; the results framework's key project indicator
 only measured enrollment in project schools, which included both newly enrolled and already enrolled


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)



 students. In addition, the key project indicator on increased retention was unclear both in its definition and
 the outcome data reported in the ICR.




b. M&E Implementation
  The project activity of upgrading the education management information system was effectively
  implemented, leading to the collection of key data to inform education sector decisions. School
  management committees were trained in their monitoring functions, and data was reported to district
  offices.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project data was reviewed at the mid-term review and at the time of project restructuring to sharpen the
  focus of additional financing activities. Also, as reported in the ICR (page 17), education data was used
  by the government to identify an important need to rationalize the use of teachers across schools to
  cater to the number of students enrolled in existing schools, and to support and strengthen existing
  schools where possible. However, the shortcomings in the results framework prevented a more
  thorough analysis of outcomes achieved.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to construction activities, triggering
   the safeguard on Environmental Assessment (BP/ OP 4.01). The Environmental and Social Institutional
   Assessment that had been prepared for the prior PGEB project was adapted for this project with an
   addendum, given the similar nature of the activities and the same supervisory institutional arrangements.
   An Environmental and Social Management Plan was prepared in response to the assessment, including
   criteria for construction of new schools, required documentation regarding land ownership/donations, and
   strategies for social inclusion (for the poor, girls, women, youth, and the disabled). Staffing arrangements to
   monitor safeguards included a dedicated Safeguards Officer in the project management unit (PMU) and
   district focal points to monitor compliance in the field.

   The ICR (page 23) reported that safeguards management was satisfactory, and no major problems were
   noted.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The fiduciary institutional arrangements built upon the prior PGEB project's PMU, supplemented with
   additional staff and procedures.

   Financial management: In addition to the financial management arrangements already in place in the
   PMU, systems were developed to manage the payroll for 4,000 teachers and to support financial
   management capacity training for parent-teacher school management committees. Financial management
   reports were submitted in a timely manner, and audit reports were unqualified. As stated in the ICR (page
   23), there were no major financial management problems reported during the project period.

   Procurement: The PMU was staffed with an experienced procurement specialist, aided by additional
   infrastructure and design specialists. UNICEF carried out the third-party validation of physical
   infrastructure as part of the selection process for upgrading schools. An external fiduciary review was
   carried out in early 2021; as noted in the ICR (page 24), the review identified only a few minor issues, in
   particular administrative issues related to timely payments processing and contract management.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 There were shortcomings in
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    Efficiency due to significant
                                                                                 revisions to school design.
                                                                                 There were shortcomings in
                                                                                 Quality at Entry in the project
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    design (school design) and in
                                                                                 the M&E framework (clarity of
                                                                                 indicators).
                                                                                 There were shortcomings in the
Quality of M&E                  High                  Modest                     selection and formulation of key
                                                                                 outcome indicators.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GPE-BEP (P144454)




Lessons drawn from the ICR:

        Real-time monitoring systems, based on simple and accessible technologies, can be
         instrumental in difficult, geographically dispersed environments that cannot be accessed due
         to security reasons. In the case of this project, using a real-time school monitoring
         mechanism (an Android application from the field to a customized management information
         system dashboard, inputted by local school management committee members) to monitor
         implementation progress remotely helped identify and address implementation bottlenecks in
         inaccessible areas.
        Rehabilitation/upgrading of existing schools can be a more effective approach than
         constructing new schools in areas where access is low, the state of existing infrastructure is
         poor, and student-teacher ratios are high. In the case of this project, the shift in focus at the
         time of project restructuring to rehabilitating existing schools led to achievement of project
         objectives (and meeting enrollment targets) when the cost of new construction increased
         significantly. Additionally, decisions on new construction especially in previously underserved
         areas can bring new issues (e.g., distance, transportation, safety) that may impact the
         achievement of objectives.

In addition,

        Precision in the selection of key project indicators can capture project achievements more
         clearly and convincingly. In the case of this project, there was overlap in reporting on project
         "beneficiaries" (those who benefitted from any project intervention) and newly
         enrolled/retained students, and also in reporting on girls vs. boys (increased retention). More
         clearly disaggregated data would have given more clarity to the level of achievement
         of objectives.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The overall quality of the ICR was Modest. It was concise and consistent with guidelines (with the exception of
the application of the split rating methodology, in which the ICR based the rating on the extent of
outputs/outcomes reached at the time of restructuring, rather than achievement across the project’s entire
lifetime and then weighted according to the proportion of the Grants that disbursed before/after
restructuring). The discussion of the theory of change clearly identified its underlying assumptions. The
discussion of achievements and implementation experience was results-oriented, focusing on the project
design elements that needed to be revisited in order to ensure progress towards project objectives. Lessons
were informative, particularly for future operations in fragile and highly geographically dispersed settings.
However, as noted above in various sections of the ICR Review, the analysis of the results chain could have

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GPE-BEP (P144454)



been strengthened with more precise indicators, and the quality of evidence reported in the ICR for the
objective to increase retention was inadequate to fully assess achievements (thereby necessitating further
information from the project team).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
