     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022943

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P148499                                   Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0457                                  01-Mar-2021                                            5,473,764.72

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Sep-2015                               25-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               5,500,000.00                                  5,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                5,473,764.72                                  5,473,764.72

 Actual                                            5,473,764.72                                  5,473,764.72




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               Ebru Karamete                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the project is "to support indigenous peoples in Selected
   Communities in the Peruvian Amazon in their efforts to improve their sustainable forest management
   practices" (Grant Agreement dated September 24, 2015, Schedule 1, page 5). The formulation of the
   objective is identical to that in the PAD (page iii). The PDO remained unchanged during implementation (ICR,
   para 19).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Mar-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Native land titling in the Amazon (Estimate: US$2.61 million, Actual: US$1.95 million,
   75 percent of the estimate) intended to register titles of lands owned by the indigenous peoples and native
   communities (IPNCs) under the national legal framework.

   Subcomponent 1.1: Recognition and registration intended to support the IPNCs to be recognized as formal
   legal entities by the National Registry of Native Communities, by providing technical and legal assistance
   and implementing subprojects related to recognition of native communities. During implementation,
   subgrants related to recognition of native communities were cancelled from the third call of proposals, due
   to the mobility restrictions associated with health emergency under the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, para 40).

   Subcomponent 1.2: Demarcation and titling intended to establish the geographic locations and physical
   boundaries for native communities’ lands and formally register their titles, by providing technical and legal
   assistance to the IPNCs, implementing subprojects on land titling, and providing financial assistance to the
   Regional Agricultural Office to conduct land titling activities.

   Component 2: Indigenous forest management (Estimate: US$1.60 million, Actual: US$1.57 million,
   98 percent of the estimate) implemented community-based subprojects to enhance sustainable forest
   management and improve food security and income generation in eight regions (Loreto, Ucayali, San
   Martin, Junín, Pasco, Ayacucho, Huánuco, and Cusco) (PAD, para 18). Component 2 started with
   implementing subprojects related to food security and agroforestry, then expanded its coverage to pilot
   subprojects on sustainable timber production.

   Component 3: Governance and sustainability (Estimate: US$1.29 million, Actual: US$1.94 million,
   150 percent of the estimate) provided the project intermediaries with support for technical and fiduciary
   management of the project, as well as the establishment and operation of a grievance redress mechanism
   and a communication strategy to inform native communities about the project. During implementation, new
   activities were added to component 3 in response of the COVID-19 pandemic to incorporate health and
   safety measures into implementation procedure of subprojects under component 2.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$5.50 million (PAD, para 21). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$5.47 million (ICR, page 47).

   Financing: As envisioned at appraisal (PAD, para 21), the project was fully financed by a grant from the
   Strategic Climate Fund (ICR, page 2).

   Dates: The project was approved on September 11, 2015 and became effective on November 26, 2015.
   The Mid-Term Review was completed on September 24, 2018. The project was closed on June 25, 2021,
   which was about four months after the original closing date of March 1, 2021.

   There were four restructurings: the first (March 24, 2020), the second (August 27, 2020), the third (February
   4, 2021), and the fourth (May 7, 2021). The first and second restructurings revised the results framework,
   modified components and cost, and reallocated funds between disbursement categories. The targets of
   PDO indicators 1, 2, and 4 related to native land titling were decreased because subgrants for recognition
   of native communities under subcomponent 1.1 were canceled (ICR, para 40) (see section 9 for details).
   The target of PDO indicator 5 on food security and income generating subprojects was increased because
   these subprojects responded to demands of native communities with lower implementation costs (ICR, para
   20). The first restructuring reallocated US$17,000 from component 2 to component 3 to cover additional
   consultancy fees and travel expenses to engage native communities and regional governments in project
   activities. The second restructuring reallocated US$ 680,000 from the cancelled activities under
   subcomponent 1.1 to component 3 to finance new activities to comply with biosafety protocols, including
   procuring and distributing equipment and materials for personal hygiene and communication and
   establishing sanitary protocols for subproject implementation under the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, para
   23).

   IEG concurs with the ICR (para 63) that a split rating is required. The targets of PDO indicators 1, 2, and 4
   were scaled down at the restructurings in March and August 2020 due to the cancellation of subgrants for
   legal recognition of native communities caused by the insufficient technical and human capacity of the
   Regional Agrarian Offices and the mobility restrictions under the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, paras 20 and
   27). The scaling down resulted in reducing the scope of the project; because the recognition of native
   communities was a prerequisite for obtaining land tenure, which was essential for gaining access to capital,
   credit, permits, and existing forest management initiatives (ICR, para 9 and 15).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: The Peruvian Amazon covers 73 million hectares (nearly 61 percent) of the
whole country; however, only approximately 15 million hectares (or 20 percent) are either owned or
managed by native communities (ICR, para 1). About 2,250 indigenous communities resides in the Amazon
region (ICR, para 1). High deforestation rates, which are associated with migration to untitled lands,
agricultural expansion, and unregulated logging, have threatened biodiversity and livelihoods of local
communities in Peru (ICR, para 2). On average, over 134,000 hectares of forest cover were lost annually
between 2005 and 2015 (ICR, para 2). Moreover, 45 percent of this deforestation has taken place on lands
with no legal status from 2001 to 2014, while territorial reserves including titled indigenous lands and
natural protected areas accounted for 16.5 percent and 3.5 percent of deforestation, respectively (ICR, para

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



2). Peru has a relatively strong legal framework regarding the rights of indigenous people that completed
titling of 6,453 native and campesino communities between 1921 and 2015 (ICR, para 3). Prior to the
project, the lack of political will and low capacity including limited resources had been slowing down the
titling process of the remaining native communities (1,166 at appraisal) (ICR, para 3). Some titled
communities still faced challenges including being confined to areas that were too small to support their
traditional farming methods and limited access to technical and financing support to develop their own
sustainable productive activities (ICR, para 4). Facing these challenges, some native communities decided
to lease part of their lands to non-indigenous farmers and loggers, contributing to an acceleration of
deforestation (ICR, para 4). To address the complex issues around the land tenure and deforestation, the
project took an innovative approach to combine critical interventions to support indigenous communities to
improve sustainable forest management practices, namely, legal recognition of indigenous communities,
titling of native land, and support to sustainable productive activities (ICR, para 8).

Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Peru’s Forest Investment Plan
(FIP) that was endorsed in 2013 with an aim to catalyze policies and mobilize funds to address
deforestation and forest degradation, with a view to promoting more sustainable forest management, thus
leading to reduced emissions and enhanced conservation of forest carbon stocks and contributing to
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) goals (ICR, para 5). Under the
FIP, the global Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) serves as a special window to support initiatives by
indigenous peoples and local communities in FIP pilot countries (ICR, para 6). In addition, the project was
in line with the Bicentenary Plan: Peru towards 2021, which was published in 2010, to present a strategic
line on natural resources and environment, including priority actions on sustainable forest management,
climate change mitigation, and special attention to indigenous peoples and local communities (ICR, para
32). At project closing, the PDO was relevant to the National Strategy for Forests and Climate Change
published in 2016, which aimed to (i) promote community-based forest management, aligned with the
development vision stated in each community’s life plan and (ii) complete the pending land titling of native
communities (ICR, para 32).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the PDO was aligned with the Country Partnership
Strategy FY12-16, which focused on addressing climate change by strengthening institutional and technical
capacity at different decision-making levels and promoting more inclusive growth (PAD, para 10). The
project was expected to support climate change mitigation by investing in legal protection and recognition,
land tenure security, and the capacity building necessary to empower the communities living in and caring
for the forests in the Peruvian Amazon (PAD, para 11). At project closing, the PDO was aligned with the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY17-21. The project was directly associated with a CPF objective
indicator on the coverage of native community lands titled in high threat areas for Objective 8 (Strengthen
the management of natural resources) under Pillar 3 (Natural Resource and Climate Change Risk
Management) (CPF, page 44). The CPF reiterated the higher poverty rate among indigenous peoples and
native communities compared to the national average and alerted that increasing threats to the forests and
food security due to climate change might widen the gap and reduce the likelihood of inclusive growth (ICR,
para 33).

Prior Sector Experience: The project design team benefited from reviews of several previous World Bank
operations in Peru and Brazil, including lessons from the Indigenous and Afro-Peruvian Peoples
Development Project (P060499), the Brazil Indigenous Lands Project (P006567), and the Special Program
for Land Titling and Rural Cadaster (PETT I and II Projects) (PAD, paras 22-23). In prior investment
operations, the World Bank provided technical assistance to both the National Steering Committee led by



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



               indigenous peoples and native communities and the non-governmental National Executing Agency (the
               World Wildlife Fund Peru) to implement project activities (ICR, para 7).

               In summary, the PDO was aligned with the strategies of the government and the World Bank’s assistance
               both at appraisal and project closing. Overall, the relevance of the objective is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support indigenous peoples in Selected Communities in the Peruvian Amazon in their efforts to improve their
                             sustainable forest management practices

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change(TOC): While the project’s TOC described the project’s how the inputs/outputs led to
                             outcomes and longer-term impacts, these long-term outcomes were not reflected to the PDO statement and
                             the sustainability aspect was not defined in the results framework, as described in section 9.a. The theory of
                             change of the project envisioned that activities including providing technical and legal assistance and
                             subgrants for (i) legal recognition of indigenous peoples and native communities, (ii) demarcation and titling of
                             their lands, and (iii) small-scale community-based productive activities related to food security and income
                             generation (mainly agroforestry, tourism, crafts, and pisciculture) and formalization of associations would
                             result in outputs including recognition of native communities, demarcation and titling of native lands, and
                             implementation of productive activities by native communities based on sustainable forest management
                             practices, contributing to outcomes including improvements in sustainable forest management practices of
                             indigenous communities. In the long-term, the outcomes were expected to contribute to impacts including
                             reductions in deforestation and associated greenhouse gas emissions as well as improvements in the
                             livelihoods and conservations of lifestyles of native communities in the Peruvian Amazon.

                             Critical assumptions were ambitiously set, as follows: (i) land tenure insecurity, particularly in the native lands,
                             was a key driver of deforestation; (ii) with a formal land title, native communities would gain access to capital,
                             credit, permits, and existing forest management initiatives that require land tenure as a prerequisite for
                             eligibility; (iii) with technical and financial support, titled native communities would develop their own
                             productive activities to address poverty and food insecurity issues and refrain from leasing their land for non-
                             indigenous farmers and loggers; and (iv) leaders and members of indigenous peoples and native
                             communities were willing to actively participate in forest conservation and climate change mitigation.

                             The PDO indicators were mainly output oriented (see section 9.a. for details).



                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



Outputs (ICR, paras 38-53 and Annex 1):

      Direct project beneficiaries reached 29,017 people, not meeting the original target of 48,100 people.
       Female beneficiaries were 54 percent of the total project beneficiaries, meeting the original target of
       50 percent.
      100 percent of intended beneficiaries were aware of project information and investments, exceeding
       the original target of 75 percent. The ratio of female beneficiaries out of the total intended beneficiaries
       who were aware of project information and investments was 49 percent, not meeting the original
       target of 75 percent.
      100 percent of registered grievances related to delivery of project benefits were addressed, meeting
       the original target of 100 percent.
      5,349 people were directly employed or benefitting from food security and income generation
       subprojects, reaching more than six times of the original target of 820 people.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 38-53 and Annex 1):

      253 native communities were recognized and registered with the National Superintendent of Public
         Registries, not meeting the original target of 310 native communities (82 percent of the original target).
        39 native communities had their land demarcated, titled and registered with the National
         Superintendent of Public Registries, not meeting the original target of 130 native communities (30
         percent of the original target).
        5 native communities were with sustainable timber projects operating, meeting the original target of 5
         native communities (100 percent of the original target). The native communities developed the
         management declarations required by the national regulation, adopted good practices for harvesting
         timber with reduced environmental impact, and generated an average of US$ 323 per direct
         beneficiary within two months (ICR, para 48).
        231,604 hectares of native community land were titled in high threat areas, not meeting the original
         target of 780,000 hectares (30 percent of the original target).
        119 native communities were with food security and income generating projects, exceeding the
         original target of 70 native communities (170 percent of the original target). Most sub-projects reports
         indicate an increased production through sustainable forest management practices (ICR, para 49). In
         addition, beneficiaries started to increase added value of their products and gradually transform from
         primary producers to tertiary producers through the subprojects, which would potentially increase the
         profit margin of the agroforestry activities (ICR, para 49). The potential sustainability of the subprojects
         under component 2 were shown by the success factors identified by the National Executing Agency
         and the World Bank’s task team including increases in productivity of agricultural and aquacultural
         products, increases in incomes from tourism activities, and enhancements in commercialization of the
         sustainable timber products (ICR, paras 57-59). As reported by the Subproject Executing
         Organizations and beneficiaries themselves, the selected communities were enthusiastic about the
         project development, which contributed to project sustainability in the long term (ICR, para 59 and
         Annex 8).

Of the five PDO indicators, two indicators related to food security and income generating subprojects were
met or exceeded. On the other hand, three indicators related to legal recognition of indigenous communities
and titling of native land were not met, in particular, two PDO indicators related to native land titling



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



achieved only about 30 percent of the original targets. Overall, the achievement of original objective is rated
modest due to low achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Support indigenous peoples in Selected Communities in the Peruvian Amazon in their efforts to improve their
sustainable forest management practices

The original objective did not change but the targets of PDO indicators were revised at the first and second
restructurings. As a result, the ambition of the objective was also reduced. The key indicator changes were:

•     The target of PDO indicator 1 (native communities recognized and registered) was decreased from 310
to 250 to be in line with the canceled subgrants to native communities which had not started field work for
registration process by May 2020 (ICR, para 20).
•     The target of PDO indicator 2 (native communities which had their land demarcated, titled and registered
[PAD, Annex 2, page 25]) was decreased from 130 to 38, and complemented with a breakdown of targets for
native communities which had their land ownership title issued by the Regional Agricultural Office, but were
waiting titling and the formal title registration by the National Superintendent of Public Registries (58
communities) (ICR, para 20).
•     The target of PDO indicator 4 (coverage of native community titled lands in high-threat areas) was
decreased to 256,700 hectares, reflecting the total area of those 58 native communities (ICR, para 21).
•     The target of PDO indicator 5 (food security and income generating subprojects) was increased from 70
to 100 because these types of subprojects attracted higher demands of native communities and were able to
be implemented with lower costs (ICR, para 20).

Revised Rationale
The original theory of change was not affected by the changes in the PDO indicator targets.

Outputs (ICR, paras 38-53 and Annex 1):

      Direct project beneficiaries reached 29,017 people, not meeting the original target of 48,100 people.
       Female beneficiaries were 54 percent of the total project beneficiaries, meeting the original target of
       50 percent.
      100 percent of intended beneficiaries were aware of project information and investments, exceeding
       the original target of 75 percent. The ratio of female beneficiaries out of the total intended
       beneficiaries who were aware of project information and investments was 49 percent, meeting the
       revised target of 37 percent.
      100 percent of registered grievances related to delivery of project benefits were addressed, meeting
       the original target of 100 percent.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)




     5,349 people were directly employed or benefitting from food security and income generation
        subprojects, reaching more than three times of the revised target of 1,700 people.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 38-53 and Annex 1):

     253 native communities were recognized and registered with the National Superintendent of Public
        Registries, meeting the revised target of 250 native communities. The project supported 27 percent of
        the total 989 native communities that the government had recognized since 2001 (ICR, para 41).
        During implementation, this project was the sole source of financing that supported the recognition
        and registration of native communities in the country (ICR, para 41). As a result of the recognition,
        these native communities became fully entitled to the rights and guarantees envisaged in the legal
        framework for indigenous peoples and native communities, including the legal status required to
        formally claim their native land titles (ICR, para 39). The project suggested the Ministry of Agrarian
        Development and Irrigation to adopt a harmonized guidelines for the recognition and registration
        procedures (ICR, para 41).
       39 native communities registered land titles with the National Superintendent of Public Registries,
        meeting the revised target of 38 native communities. During implementation, the project collaborated
        with the Ministry of Agrarian Development and Irrigation to establish more precise procedures for the
        titling process, in particular for implementation of the agrological assessment, operationalization of the
        new registry system for rural properties, creation of the registry system for peasant and indigenous
        communities and the corresponding users’ manuals, and implementation procedures for measurement
        adjustments of permanent production forests (ICR, para 44). Those were important milestones to
        support the indigenous peoples and native communities to advance recognition and land titling
        registration processes between 2016 and 2018, as well as to benefit individuals and communities
        beyond the project beneficiaries (ICR, para 44).
       60 native communities had their land ownership title issued by the Regional Agricultural Office, but
        were waiting titling and the formal title registration by the National Superintendent of Public
        Registries, being increased from the baseline of 23 native communities and meeting the revised
        target of 58 native communities. Additionally, another 37 communities completed the field work
        needed for their land titling processes with the project support, expected to be titled in 2022 (ICR, para
        43).
       5 native communities were with sustainable timber projects operating, meeting the original target of 5
        native communities. The native communities developed the management declarations required by the
        national regulation, adopted good practices for harvesting timber with reduced environmental impact,
        and generated an average of US$ 323 per direct beneficiary within two months (ICR, para 48).
       231,604 hectares of native community land were titled in high threat areas, not meeting the revised
        target of 256,000 hectares.
       119 native communities were with food security and income generating projects, meeting the revised
        target of 100 native communities. Most sub-projects reports indicate an increased production through
        sustainable forest management practices (ICR, para 49). In addition, beneficiaries started to increase
        added value of their products and gradually transform from primary producers to tertiary producers
        through the subprojects, which would potentially increase the profit margin of the agroforestry
        activities (ICR, para 49). The sustainability of the subprojects under component 2 were strongly
        believed by the National Executing Agency and the World Bank’s task team based on the success
        factors identified including increases in productivity of agricultural and aquacultural products,
        increases in incomes from tourism activities, and enhancements in commercialization of the
        sustainable timber products (ICR, paras 57-59). As reported by the Subproject

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



       Executing Organizations and beneficiaries themselves, the selected communities were enthusiastic
       about the project development, which contributed to project sustainability in the long term (ICR, para
       59 and Annex 8).

In addition to the results measured by the results framework, the ICR reported the following outcomes, which
did not have any formal targets.

      The average annual deforestation rate in the titled native communities supported by the project (0.10
       percent) was lower than that in lands without assigned rights (0.17 percent) from 2001 to 2020 (ICR,
       para 45). In 2014 and 2020, deforestation increased significantly more in the lands without assigned
       rights. In 2014, the increase was associated with the expansion on palm oil plantations in lands
       without assigned rights, a practice that is constantly condemned by indigenous organizations (Meeting
       with the project task team, hereafter, the project task team meeting). In 2020, when most communities
       were titled, the sharply increase in deforestation in lands without assigned rights was associated with
       the pandemic, which caused many families in the lands without assigned rights to practice illegal
       logging for extra cash (the project task team meeting). According to the project task team, the project’s
       interventions may have contributed to keep the deforestation rates low in native communities when
       there were sharp increases in deforestation rates in the lands without assigned rights (the project task
       team meeting). IEG concurs with the ICR team that an assessment with a longer series of data would
       be necessary to assess the deforestation processes in the project targeted areas (ICR, para 45).
      Female direct beneficiaries’ improved incomes and greater participations in decision makings in
       associations and communities were observed, according to the technical reports from subprojects and
       the case study developed by the Global Dedicated Grant Mechanism (ICR, para 67). The Project
       promoted the important role of indigenous women in sustainable forestry management by allocating
       US$500,000 for subprojects proposed and/or primarily managed by women (ICR, para 17). IEG
       concurs with the ICR (para 67) that an in-depth assessment to analyze potential ripple effects to the
       other communities beyond the direct beneficiaries would be necessary to assess the project’s
       contribution in gender aspects.

Of the five PDO indicators, four indicators and the sub-PDO indicator for PDO indicator 2 fully met the revised
targets. The native community’s engagements in food security and income generating activities implied
possibilities that these activities might be sustained after project closing. On the other hand, the realism is
weak for critical assumption (ii), which assumed that gaining a formal land title would immediately enable
native communities to access capital, credit, permits, and existing forest management initiatives that require
land tenure as a prerequisite for eligibility in the theory of change in the section for achievement of the original
objective (ICR, para 9). It was an ambitious assumption involving multiple unpredictable factors including the
capacity and willingness of native communities to access those resources and the readiness of the resources
to be available for them in a timely manner upon requests. Evidence was lacking related to how the native
land titling resulted in actual sustainable forest management practices to conserve or protect forests.
Moreover, longer periods of data would be required to assess to what extent native land titling could
contribute to keep deforestation rates in the project target areas lower than the other areas in the same
districts, as described in the last paragraph. Overall, the achievement of original objective is rated substantial
but marginally due to limited evidence to support the credibility of critical assumption (ii) and the attributability
of the project to changes in deforestation rates.



Revised Rating
                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The original objective is rated modest due to low achievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            After the restructurings, the objective with the revised PDO indicators is rated substantial. Because the
                            project's scope was downscaled with the revised indicators, a split rating was applied to assess the outcome
                            rating (see section 6).



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, no internal rate of return was presented in the PAD. An economic analysis
   was conducted as part of the “Social and Cultural Assessment and Guidelines for the Operations Manual,”
   which estimated the indirect and direct costs of recognition and titling processes but did not quantify the
   expected benefits through the recognition and titling subprojects, the community-based productive subprojects,
   and the decreased deforestation in targeted areas and narrowed gender gaps related to access to training,
   natural and financial assets, and participation and leadership (ICR, para 54). At project closing, no internal rate
   of return was calculated through a classic economic and financial analysis due to the limited quantitative data
   related to the project benefits (ICR, para 55). The actual monetary and non-monetary benefits of the project
   were summarized in Table 2, page 26 in the ICR, showing that the actual achievements met the expectation at
   appraisal. Regarding cost effectiveness, the community recognition and land titling under this project costed on
   average US$3,000 and US$12,000 per community, respectively, which were significantly lower than those that
   were implemented through consultancy firms (ICR, Annex 4, page 51). As a comparison, it costed approximately
   US$43,800 per community to complete land titling under the third phase of the Rural Land Titling and
   Registration Project financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (ICR, Annex 4, page 51).

   Aspects of design and implementation that affected efficiency: Implementation delays were largely due to
   factors external to the project such as the COVID-19 pandemic, multiple national and regional elections, and
   bottlenecks in land titling processes. The land titling processes were delayed due to low commitments and


                                                                                                                           Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



insufficient technical and human capacity in the Regional Agrarian Offices (ICR, para 27). The efforts to
accelerating the land titling activities were prohibited by the travel restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic
(ICR, para 27), resulting in the actual expenditure for the project to be less than the estimate because funds
were needed to be allocated from component 1 to 3 (ICR, para 61).

The project was cost effective to conduct the recognition and land titling subprojects, compared to a similar
project funded by the Inter-American Development Bank. Though the project benefits were not quantified,
the monetary and non-monetary benefits from the project at project closing sufficed the expected benefits at
appraisal. Overall, the efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                                      Original targets without
Rating Dimension                                                           Revised targets with restructuring
                                      restructuring
Relevance of Objectives               High
Efficacy                              Modest                               Substantial
Efficiency                            Substantial
Outcome Rating                        Moderately Unsatisfactory            Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                  3                                    5
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)        3.85                                 1.62
Disbursement (%)                      70                                   30
Weight Value                          3*0.7 = 2.1                          5*0.3 = 1.5
                                      Moderately Satisfactory
Overall Outcome Rating
                                      (2.1 + 1.5 = 3.6, rounding this to the nearest whole number, 4)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk: There is a potential risk that limited availability of funds might prevent expanding productive
activities by native communities, as well as completing remaining land titling process for the 37 communities
that completed up to the field work (ICR, para 43). To prevent the risk, the closing reports of subprojects
under component 2 indicated plans to seek additional funds to expand its productive activities; for example,
by reinvesting part of profits in the association, applying to public programs, and cooperating with national
and international non-governmental organizations (ICR, para 96). Moreover, the National Steering
Committee and the National Executing Agency started to identify funding to expand the project activities
beyond the project target areas, especially to cover those communities whose subprojects were cancelled
due to the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, para 96). Furthermore, the National Steering Committee and the
National Executing Agency committed to continue following up with the 37 communities after project closing
(ICR, para 43).

Social risk: A high level of risk was noted at appraisal that non-indigenous inhabitants in the targeted
regions (campensinos, ribereños and colonos) would be unhappy to learn that they were not eligible for
benefiting under the project (PAD, Annex 4, page 41). To mitigate the risk, a social communication plan was
implemented with an aim to inform them other sources of financing that they were eligible to access for titling
lands (PAD, Annex 4, page 41). On the other hand, limited implementation of the communication plan was
reported during implementation (ICR, para 87). The remaining recognition and land titling activities might not
be smoothly completed if expectations of both indigenous and non-indigenous inhabitants in target areas
were not adequately managed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach were high and closely aligned with the strategic priorities of the
  government and the World Bank’s assistance, as described in section 3. Technical and environmental
  and social aspects were well considered during the extensive preparation period. The component design
  to provide indigenous peoples and native communities a leading role to design and implement
  subprojects was effective to engage the target communities and improve cost effectiveness of the
  recognition and land titling subprojects, as described in section 5. The risk assessment was solid;
  however, the implementation risk was not adequately mitigated. The PAD pointed out implementation
  risk associated with the National Executing Agency, which was a non-indigenous non-governmental
  organization with limited experience working with the World Bank (PAD, Annex 4, page 41). This risk was
  not fully mitigated by the originally planned mitigation measures including involving them into the
  appraisal mission and the preparation of the operation manual (PAD, Annex 4, page 41). Engaging the
  government institutions responsible for land titling was inadequate, resulting in the low political will and
  budget to strengthen the technical and human capacity of the Regional Agrarian Offices to process land
  titling applications that were increased by this project (ICR, para 27). The project design did not
  adequately plan for strengthening capacity of the National Executing Agency on M&E and fiduciary
  management throughout the implementation, resulting in implementation issues described in sections
  9.a. and 10. b. Moreover, some preparation challenges remained after appraisal and negatively affected

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



  implementation, including (i) high expectations from beneficiaries and limited data to set a realistic target
  for land titling, (ii) limited guidance in the operations manual to set the subproject-level indicators (i.e.,
  quantitative data to measure subproject outcomes), and (iii) lack of a centralized, detailed M&E database
  to improve data collection, processing, and analysis (ICR, para 93). Overall, the quality at entry is rated
  moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision inputs and processes were adequate in general based on the review of the National Executing
 Agency’s closing report, project records, and testimonials provided by project participants (ICR, para 94).
 The World Bank conducted a total of ten missions in almost every six months, in addition to regular
 communication with counterparts to track progress and support achievements of the indicators in the
 results framework (ICR, para 94). The takeover period of the role of task team leader lasted for some
 months to ensure a smooth transition (ICR, para 94). Supervision for environmental and social safeguards
 was adequate in general, by providing two training sessions to the National Executing Agency at
 preparation and after the Mid-Term Review on top of the regular guidance and reviewing the detailed
 safeguards report including all the subprojects that was submitted by the National Executing Agency in
 July 2020 (ICR, para 88). The candor and quality of performance reporting improved after the Mid-Term
 Review, starting to describe the implementation challenges related to financial management and land titling
 together with progresses in counterplans (ISRs No.7 and 8). The World Bank’s supervision team was also
 flexible to suggest the National Executing Agency with an alternative procurement method in compliance
 with the World Bank policies and the project period extension when the bidding issue was reported, as
 described in section 10.b. On the other hand, the weaknesses in project design related to M&E and
 fiduciary management were not adequately corrected during supervision in a proactive manner. Providing
 additional training on fiduciary policies was not fully sufficient to address the lack of experience and
 turnover of financial management staff at the National Executing Agency (ICR, para 94). Moreover, the
 focus on development impact was not strong because the World Bank relied on data provided by sample
 groups or the National Executing Agency without triangulating the data with other sources (ICR, para 94).
 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.

 The quality of the World Bank’s performance, thus, is rated moderately satisfactory, based on moderately
 satisfactory ratings both at entry and during supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While a theory of change was prepared by the PAD (para 11) describing the project inputs/outputs leading
 to outcomes including its potential impact on environment and people’s lives such as reductions in
 deforestation, greenhouse gas emissions, and poverty among indigenous people and native
 communities in the Peruvian Amazon, the PDO statement did not clearly specify which sustainable forest
 management practices were targeted and how these were expected to be improved. In addition, the
 impacts that were envisioned to be achieved with the project’s contribution were not reflected to the PDO
 statement and the results framework. Though the impacts would be expected to be observed beyond the
 project duration, tracking them in the results framework is an important aspect of a successful development
 operation. Most of the indicators were measurable except for the intermediate results indicator on intended
 beneficiaries who were aware of project information and agreed with project investments, for which no data
 collection methods were specified in the PAD and the operations manual (ICR, para 79). Moreover, the
 PDO indicators were in general output oriented. Data on increased food security, income, and capacity, as
 well as sustainability was not measured by indicators, resulting in insufficient quantitative data to measure
 the subproject outcomes (ICR, para 55). The original targets of the PDO indicators related to land titling
 were set excessively high, being influenced by the assumptions from the study of territorial demands of
 native communities and the high expectations of native communities (ICR, para 79).

 The M&E arrangements included the Global Executing Agency of the Dedicated Grant Mechanism,
 Conservation International, to monitor and share results of high-level indicators for the whole Dedicated
 Grant Mechanism program (ICR, para 80). Furthermore, the M&E system and arrangements were not well-
 embedded institutionally in terms of data collection and analysis. The National Executing Agency, which
 was responsible for M&E, relied on the Subproject Executing Organizations and the technical advisors
 hired by the project to collect data from native communities through in-person meetings, which was
 suspended for several months at the critical period of project implementation due to the COVID-19
 pandemic (ICR, para 81). No M&E database to integrate data on different types of subprojects was
 designed at appraisal, which resulted in gaps and inconsistencies in data stored in multiple Excel
 workbooks and reports (ICR, para 81).



b. M&E Implementation
  The weaknesses in M&E design were partially addressed at restructurings. Targets of PDO indicators
  were increased or decreased based on the reallocation of funds among components. The target of PDO
  indicator 1 (native communities recognized and registered) was decreased from 310 to 250 to be in line
  with the canceled subgrants to native communities which had not started field work for registration
  process by May 2020 (ICR, para 20). The target of PDO indicator 2 (native communities demarcated and
  title registered) was decreased 130 to 96, and complemented with a breakdown of targets for native
  communities which had completed registration of land titles (38 communities) and for native communities
  which were in the middle of titling and registration process (58 communities) (ICR, para 20). The target of
  PDO indicator 4 (coverage of native community titled lands in high-threat areas) was decreased to
  256,700 hectares, reflecting the total area of those 58 native communities (ICR, para 21). The target of
  PDO indicator 5 (food security and income generating subprojects) was increased from 70 to 100
  because these types of subprojects under component 2 were in high demands and able to be
  implemented with lower costs (ICR, para 20). On the other hand, a part of the reported data was not


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



  found to be reliable. The lack of specificity in data collection methods for the intermediate results indicator
  on native communities’ awareness and agreement to investments was not formally corrected, resulting in
  an inconsistency between the National Executing Agency’s perception on achievements and the reported
  number. Because of difficulties in aggregating all the participants in dissemination events at the
  community level and the Subproject Executing Organizations level, the National Executing Agency
  assumed that 100 percent of subgrant beneficiaries agreed with the proposed investments (ICR, para
  82). The assumption was not reflected in their report which indicated that the project achieved exactly
  the same values as the targets (75 percent of total beneficiaries and 37 percent of female beneficiaries
  agreed) (ICR, para 82). No technical audit was conducted to directly analyze the technical results
  reported by the subprojects (ICR, para 94). Moreover, the project’s beneficiary database was not
  completed until the ICR stage (June 2021), resulting in an inaccurate reporting of the intermediate results
  indicator on the number of people directly employed or benefiting from food security and income
  generation sub-projects (ICR, para 82). The M&E functions and processes were not likely to be sustained
  after project closing because the National Executing Agency depended on external sources to collect
  data and develop the M&E database for subprojects.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders to inform planning and
  decision‐making, including the restructurings. The monitoring data was essential to: (i) revise the targets
  of the PDO indicators and reallocate funds across the components; (ii) develop the harmonized
  procedures for native community recognition and land titling advocate for and design in cooperation with
  the government; (iii) introduce measures to increase women to submit proposals for subgrants; and (iv)
  plan subsequent interventions under the Dedicated Grant Mechanism among the government, non-
  governmental organizations, and other development institutions (ICR, para 82). On the other hand, the
  M&E data measured by the results framework provided limited evidence on outcomes because the PDO
  indicators were focused on outputs. The supplemental data on deforestation rates was provided in the
  ICR (Graph 1, page 20), but a longer series of data would be needed to assess achievements of
  outcomes (ICR, para 45).

  The shortcomings in the M&E design were partially addressed during M&E implementation. The gaps
  and inconsistencies in M&E data were reconciled at project closing, which limited the M&E utilization.
  Overall, the M&E quality is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards: The project was classified to Category B and triggered the following
   environmental safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats,
   OP/BP 4.36 Forests, OP 4.09 Pest Management, OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 7.50
   International Waterways. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



  and disclosed in March 2015, ensuring to apply environmental and social safeguards policies to all
  subprojects with focus higher risk activities including forestry management, production, and processing
  (ICR, para 85). Based on the ESMF during preparation, communities whose territories overlapped with the
  limits or buffer zones of natural protected areas were excluded from the project activities. At restructurings,
  no safeguards were added or dropped (ICR, para 85). Because the project activities to acquire and
  distribute personal protective equipment and sanitary kits were added at the second restructuring, a
  complementary ESMF was prepared, disclosed, and implemented to manage potential risks and impacts on
  environmental, health, and safety aspects (ICR, para 85). Regarding OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), major
  environmental risk concern was around the selection of beneficiary communities whose territories
  overlapped with the limits of natural protected areas (NPAs). At project closing, no beneficiary communities
  overlapped with NPAs (the project task team meeting). The communities overlapped with buffer areas of
  NPAs were developed in line with the NPA management plans and conservation criteria (the project task
  team meeting). Regarding OP 4.36 (Forests), the ESMF stated that subprojects that involve land use
  change of forests were not eligible. As confirmed through supervision missions and reports, only secondary
  forests were intervened, and these were managed per the provisions of the ESMF (the project task team
  meeting). Regarding OP 4.09 (Pest Management), the ESMF stated that subprojects that required the use
  of pesticides were not eligible (the project task team meeting). At project closing, it was confirmed that the
  project complied with this measure throughout implementation, and that chemical products for pest
  management were not used (the project task team meeting). Regarding OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural
  Resources), no subproject was executed within cultural heritage areas, and no chance findings during the
  execution of subprojects occurred (the project task team meeting).

  Social safeguards: the project triggered OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. At restructurings, the following
  social risk concerns were stated and addressed in the following months: (i) the risk of not achieving the
  PDO to benefit indigenous peoples in compliance with OP 4.10; (ii) the limited implementation of the
  communication plan to manage expectations of beneficiaries regarding land titling processes; (iii) the delay
  in submitting a written response to a complaint formally through the Grievance Redress Mechanism; and
  (iv) the outdated repository with all community assembly minutes in digital format (ICR, para 85). Overall,
  the project complied with all environmental and social safeguards during implementation and at project
  closing (the project task team meeting).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The project experienced financial management issues in early years of
  implementation due to the following shortcomings: (i) delays in preparing operational manual for
  subprojects, (ii) staff turnover, (iii) low budget execution, and (iv) delays in submitting financial reports
  (ICR, para 90). The National Executing Agency later addressed those issues, which resulted in exponential
  increase in the budget execution after the third year of project implementation (ICR, para 90). The financial
  management risks identified at appraisal, such as a complex flow of funds particularly transferring funds to
  beneficiaries, and the need of the National Executing Agency to closely oversee the financial management
  of the Subproject Executing Organizations, were adequately addressed (ICR, para 90). The National
  Executing Agency started to virtually monitor the subprojects after March 2020 due to the mobility
  restriction under the COVID-19 pandemic, by improving the financial coordination with indigenous
  organizations with the support of a field administrative consultant (ICR, para 91). Subproject
  implementation and corresponding budget execution were delayed or cancelled under the state of
  emergency, resulting in the restructurings to reallocate funds among categories and extend the project

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



   duration (ICR, para 91). The budget preparation and approval and authorization controls were adequate
   (ICR, para 91). All the financial audit reports had unqualified opinions and arrived on time (ICR, para 91),
   including the last audit report for 2020-2021 (the project task team meeting).

   Procurement: The procurement issues included: (i) delays in recruiting advisors due to the low quality of
   terms of reference; (ii) delays in uploading procurement documents, particularly the latest procurement
   plan, to the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement of the World Bank; and (iii) the National
   Executing Agency’s incompliance with the World Bank’s policies during the bidding process of radio
   communication equipment (ICR, para 92). To address those issues, the World Bank provided additional
   training on the use of the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement, conducted a procurement
   post review, and guided the National Executing Agency to relaunch the bidding process of radio
   communication equipment by extending the project closing date and increasing the threshold for Request
   for Quotations, which is simpler and shorter procurement process compared to the Request for Bids (ICR,
   paras 25 and 92). Other than those issues, the procurement documentation and decisions were generally
   adequate, in terms of quality, reliability, timeliness, and transparency, without any changes in award
   recommendations due to complaints from bidders (ICR, para 92).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were mentioned in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The original objective is rated
                                                                                 modest due to low achievement.
                                                                                 After the restructurings, the
                                                                                 objective with the revised PDO
                                                                                 indicators is rated substantial.
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 With the high relevance rating
                                                                                 and the substantial efficiency
                                                                                 rating, the outcome is rated
                                                                                 moderately satisfactory when a
                                                                                 split rating is performed.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 98-101) presented four lessons. Three of them are included below with rephrasing
because these may benefit future projects related to sustainable forest management through
engaging indigenous people and native communities.

Working through indigenous people’s organizations is an effective approach to engage
indigenous people and native communities to improve land titling and conduct other
sustainable forest management activities. Adequate technical and financial support for
institutional capacity strengthening is essential to engage them in the climate dialogue and decision-
making. A more structured, permanent governance framework for the indigenous people’s
organizations to participate in the Forest Investment Plan, Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
and Forest Degradation, and other relevant initiatives is recommended by the National
Steering Committee. Physical visits and training sessions specifically targeted for women would be
necessary to increase women-led projects and their participation in decision making processes.
Alliances between indigenous enterprises and the Centers for Productive Innovation and
Technology Transfer as well as with other related public entities for competitiveness incubation were
key for the generation of products and services with an added value and for the targeting of new and
larger markets. Such alliances could be useful for boosting additional women-led projects.

Missing a digitalized system to monitor progress of project implementation in terms of
technical, financial, and environmental and social aspects in an agency responsible for
project implementation can negatively affect effective project implementation and M&E
quality. Securing budgets for developing a new system or strengthening an existing system should
be strategically planned in the local context during preparation, in order to operationalize the system;
but this was not done by the project. Triangulation of reported data by the World Bank through a
technical audit could have also been effective to identify data discrepancies in earlier stages to
remedy the situation(ICR, para 94). The use of a comprehensive, automated, and georeferenced
information system is required for sustainable community forest management projects to track
community requests, approval processes, physical and financial progress, efficiency and to
adequately track deforestation. Considering limited internet connection in the field, the system
should be compatible with an offline application to collect the data in digital format and then transfer
it the online system.

Strong political commitments and resources of government agencies at the local level
responsible for approving land titles are essential to expedite titling processes. Although the
project promoted agreements with regional governments by supporting them to acquire equipment
and hire consultants, these measures were not enough to fully expedite the titling processes
because the Regional Agricultural Office had a limited number of specialists to review the
consultants’ products to formally approve titling documentations. The project identified the average
time and cost of each stage in the recognition and land titling processes per region, which can be
utilized to ensure commitments from public budgets to supply the necessary financial and human
resources.

In addition, IEG formulated the following lesson:

The project's two-pronged approach, which combined land titling and productive
investments to generate income, is an effective way to support forest communities to carry

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)



out sustainable forest management practices. The project provided technical and financial
assistance to native communities to strengthen governance and capacities to increase land titling
activities and community-based productive initiatives, that was a combination of interventions that
directly contributed to their efforts of improving sustainable forest management practices (ICR, para
53). These activities were envisioned to contribute to long term income generation, which would
incentivize communities to protect their forests. However, to ensure a success of this approach, it is
important to clearly define sustainable forest management, to strengthen local capacity of public
institutions and communities, and to establish a good M&E system.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The report is concise and follows the guidelines in general
to provide accurate data. The ICR tries to triangulate efficacy section data by providing additional data on
deforestation rates though the evidence was not yet strong until a longer series of data becomes available to
support achievement of outcomes. The quality of evidence and analysis for the efficacy section could have
been strengthened by discussing the weaknesses of the TOC and the PDO indicators. This would provide a
better narrative to support the ratings and available evidence. The ICR’s lessons are clear and useful.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
