     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0023173

1. Program Information



 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Cabo Verde                        Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                 Approved Operations
 0                                  0

 Operation ID                       Operation Name
 P165631                            Cabo Verde DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                  Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-64250                         30-Jun-2020                                        39,642,418.80

 Bank Approval Date                Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2019                       30-Jun-2020
                                   IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                    40,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                     40,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                 39,642,418.80                                            0.00




P171080_TBL
 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Cabo Verde                        Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                      Operation Name
 P171080                           CV DPF2 ( P171080 )




                                                                                        Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-64250,IDA-67440                       07-Jul-2021                                            25758531.03

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  07-Aug-2020                               07-Jul-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Actual                                        25,758,531.03                                                0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Xiaolun Sun                 Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Financing Agreement for the First State-Owned Enterprises Reform and Fiscal Management DPF did not
specify the Program Development Objectives (PDOs). It referred to the Letter of Development Policy, which
stated that the DPF would support government reforms "to reduce fiscal risks in key SOEs, while boosting private
sector led provision of infrastructure services" and "to strengthen efficiency, accountability, and transparency in
fiscal management". The Program Document of DPF1 defined the PDOs similarly: (i) reducing fiscal risks from
SOEs while improving service delivery in infrastructure, and (ii) strengthening effectiveness and accountability in
fiscal management.

The Financing Agreement for the Second DPF did not state the PDOs either and referred to the corresponding
Letter of Development Policy, which IEG could not locate. The Program Document of DPF 2 retained the same
PDOs as the first.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs of the DPF series are taken to be:

      to reduce fiscal risks in key SOEs;
      to boost private sector led service delivery in infrastructure; and
      to strengthen effectiveness and accountability in fiscal management


b. Pillars/Policy Areas


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



The DPF series had two pillars that mirrored the two PDOs (para 36 PD of DPF1). For the purpose of this ICRR,
the pillars are as follows:

      Pillar A: reducing fiscal risks in key SOEs;
      Pillar B: improving private sector led service delivery in infrastructure; and
      Pillar C: strengthening accountability and effectiveness in fiscal management


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The financing consisted of two IDA credits of SDR 28.9 million (US$40.0 million equivalent) and SDR 18.3
million (US$25.0 million equivalent), approved on June 5, 2019, and August 7, 2020, respectively. Both DPFs
became effective a few weeks after approval, with the credits fully disbursed (actual disbursements were
US$39,642,419 and US$25,758,531, respectively) before closing on schedule one year later. Given the impact
of Covid-19, the Bank financed DPF2 under IDA's Crisis Response Window.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives were highly relevant to country conditions, government programs, and the WBG partnership
 strategy.

 The objectives addressed a key challenge identified in the 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic- that weakly
 managed SOEs posed a considerable risk to Cabo Verde's macroeconomic stability. Despite fiscal
 consolidation efforts, public debt (130 percent of GDP in 2016) continued to rise. A significant part of the debt
 was held by large SOEs, with the total debt of the three largest companies reaching 34 percent of GDP.

 The objectives were consistent with the priorities of the Strategic Plan for Sustainable Development (Plano
 Estratégico de Desenvolvimento Sustentável 2017/2021, which aimed to transform the country into a
 maritime and air transport hub and to ensure economic stability and sustainability (and social inclusion,
 sovereignty and democracy).

 The objectives were central to Focus Area II of the CPF for FY20-25, which sought to strengthen the
 environment for a more diversified economy. CPF Objective 3 aimed to sharpen fiscal and macroeconomic
 resilience by introducing hard budget constraints on SOEs and streamlining tax expenditures, strengthening
 the medium-term fiscal framework, and bolstering public investment and public debt management. CPF
 Objective 4 supported government efforts to improve the foundations for private sector growth by addressing,
 among other things, air and maritime transportation constraints, through reform of transportation SOEs and
 promotion of private sector engagement.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)




As designed, the theory of change was credible, with prior actions and triggers expected to contribute to the
objectives. Loss-making SOEs represented a major source of extra-budgetary spending and a big driver of
debt. The three largest SOEs were the Public Water and Electricity Company (ELECTRA), the state-owned
Real Estate Company (IFH), and Cabo Verde Airlines (CVA). Reform of these and other SOEs would
improve their financial position and reduce fiscal exposure. Strengthening regulation and management would
improve the delivery of critical services by private providers. An enhanced legal framework would allow better
budget and debt management and greater fiscal accountability. In addition, several DPF2 prior actions
adapted the triggers to reflect reform progress, strengthening the results chain.

Following the Covid-19 outbreak, some reforms stalled, leading to the dropping of three triggers. In a couple
of cases (energy and social housing), the Bank changed the intent of the prior actions from cost recovery for
the targeted SOEs to affordability to maintain access for the poor, disabled, and youth to the services
provided by these SOEs. In addition, three new prior actions under DPF2 (renewable energies, energy
efficiency, and information and communication technology) expanded the scope of the DPF series. While a
reasonable response to changing circumstances, these changes were de facto fundamental changes to the
objectives of the operation but were not reflected in the approve PDOs.

This ICRR uses the prior action numbering system in the ICR to avoid confusion. Related prior actions
(e.g., sequential support in the same area as part of the same results chain) are discussed together.

Objective 1: Reducing fiscal risk in key SOEs was supported by five prior actions - three under DPF1 and
two under DPF2.

DPF1-PA1 (Moderately Satisfactory): The Recipient has adopted and implemented a strategy to reduce
fiscal exposure to SOEs while boosting air connectivity, as evidenced by (i) the approval, through Resolution
87/2017 of August 2017, of an agenda and a list of 23 entities (including the airline CVA) for SOE
restructuring, privatization or concession; and (ii) the issuance of Resolution 23/2019 of March 2019,
authorizing that the debts absorbed by the central government as part of the national airline's sale be offset
by the proceeds from the restructuring of select entities.

The 2017 SOE Report by the government identified CVA as the SOE posing the greatest fiscal risk and drain
on public finances. Including CVA in the list of SOEs for restructuring and approving the list were initial
steps toward repositioning the state's role in the air transport sector. DPF1-PA1 authorized the allocation of
revenues from the disposal of the government's stake in CVA to be used exclusively to pay off CVA's debts
that the government had absorbed during the privatization of the airline. This was an important step in
reducing the fiscal burden of CVA. The triggers for DPF2 were to support continued divestment of CVA and
further implementation of the CVA reform plan, However, the Covid-19 outbreak thwarted these plans, and
prior action for DPF2 did not support further CVA reform.

DPF1-PA3 (Moderately Satisfactory): To improve the financial situation of the energy utility, the Recipient
has approved a new performance-based management contract with ELECTRA, incorporating adequate
targets, results indicators, and incentives.

Poor management of the Public Water and Electricity Company (ELECTRA) was the main cause of the long-
standing high electricity losses. Approving an improved performance-based management contract with the
public utility represented a credible effort to improve its management efficiency and financial situation. If



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



followed up with full implementation of the action plan to reduce commercial losses and approval of a new
tariff structure (DPF2 triggers), it could reduce fiscal risks from ELECTRA.

DPF2-PA3 (Moderately Unsatisfactory): To increase the sustainability of the energy sector and reduce the
cost and environmental impact of power generation, the Recipient has adopted a resolution approving the
2018-2040 Power Sector Master Plan fostering the use of renewable energies.

DPF2-PA4 (Unsatisfactory): To promote energy efficiency, the Recipient has adopted a decree law
establishing a national labeling system for electrical equipment, including fines for suppliers, distributors, and
retailers who do not comply with the labeling system.

Adopting a power sector master plan would be a foundational step for modifying the power generation mix
towards cheaper and cleaner sources. Establishing a labeling system would allow consumers to make better-
informed purchase decisions and contribute to reduced demand for energy. While both PAs were relevant for
reducing the environmental impact of energy production and consumption, contributing to increased
electricity generation from cheaper sources, and improving ELECTRA's profitability in the long run, they were
not clearly connected to the approved fiscal or financial objectives of the operation.

DPF1-PA4 (Satisfactory): To reduce fiscal risks associated with the social housing program Casa Para
Todos, the Recipient has instructed the IFH to open separate dedicated bank accounts for collecting the
proceeds of the sale of those units remaining with IFH (standing I and II), and IFH has opened the accounts.

DPF2-PA5 (Moderately Satisfactory): To improve fiscal transparency and increase social inclusiveness of
the social housing program, Casa Para Todos, the Recipient has (i) carried out an independent financial audit
of IFH's 2019 accounts dated March 30, 2020; and (ii) issued a resolution establishing subsidies for youth
and people with disabilities to buy their first home.

Opening dedicated bank accounts for collecting the proceeds from the social housing units managed by the
state-owned Real Estate Company (IFH) would improve the transparency of the flow of funds related to the
social housing program (CPT). Reinforced by an independent financial audit of IFH's accounts, which would
provide more information on the actual cost of the CPT and facilitate program management, the actions
would help reduce fiscal risks associated with CPT. DPF2-PA5 also supported providing subsidies to youth
and people with disabilities to access housing, although these actions did not support the objectives of
reducing fiscal risk in the social housing sector.

Objective 2: Boosting private sector led service delivery in infrastructure was supported by five prior
actions - one under DPF1 and four under DPF2.

DPF1-PA2 (Satisfactory): For enhanced financial sustainability and quality in maritime inter-island service
provision, the Recipient has (i) proceeded to grant an exclusive concession to a qualified private strategic
partner for the provision of minimum inter-island public transportation services.

DPF2-PA1 (Satisfactory): To enhance financial sustainability and quality in maritime inter-island service
provision, the Recipient has established in the concession contract rules governing public service obligations
and quality requirements of maritime inter-island transportation.

To improve inter-island maritime transport services, the government decided to open the sector to the local
private sector. Granting exclusive concession to a qualified private partner and adopting necessary
regulations that govern service obligations and quality requirements, including availability and frequency of

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



services in the less profitable routes, for the concessionaire were important actions for introducing an
effective partnership with the private sector to enhance financial sustainability and service quality in maritime
transport services.

DPF2-PA2 (Unsatisfactory): To increase energy affordability for low-income households, the Recipient has
(i) adopted a decree law granting access to the social electricity tariff to households classified as very poor
and poor in the Single Social Cadaster and (ii) issued a joint directive making the enrollment of these
households into the social tariff scheme automatic.

To make energy more affordable to low-income households, the government introduced a social tariff in 2018
that provided a discount of up to 30 percent of the electricity bill to poor households. DPF2-PA2 supported
harmonizing the social tariff criteria with other social programs and making the enrollment of beneficiaries
automatic. While these actions would make it easier for poor households to access the social tariff scheme,
they were irrelevant to the approved objective of boosting private sector led electricity delivery.

DPF2-PA6 (Satisfactory): To improve competition and ensure an open and non-discriminatory access
regime in the international bandwidth capacity market, the Recipient has adopted a decree implementing
regional ECOWAS regulation (C-REG-06-06-12), stipulating conditions for accessing landing stations for
international submarine fiber optic cables.

The DPO series envisioned adding ICT to DPF2. The Covid-19 pandemic underscored the critical importance
of digital connectivity in business continuity and service provision. Implementing ECOWAS regulations on
conditions for access would improve the regulatory regime for broadband services, which were provided by
private companies, address alleged anti-competitive practices, allow for the development of an equitable
broadband market, and enhance digital connectivity. These actions would contribute directly to the objective
of boosting private sector led ICT services.

Objective 3: Strengthening effectiveness and accountability in fiscal management was supported by
eight prior actions - five under DPF1 and three under DPF2.

DPF1-PA5 (Satisfactory): To enhance budget management, the Recipient has submitted to Parliament a
draft Organic Budget Law defining the rules and budgetary principles that apply to the preparation,
implementation, evaluation, control, and accountability of the budget.

DPF1-PA6 (Satisfactory): To enhance debt management, the Recipient has submitted to Parliament a draft
Debt Law which in Article 16 enshrines development of regular MTDS and associated annual borrowing plans
consistent with public debt targets defined in the MTDS (Article 5).

DPF2-PA7 (Satisfactory): To strengthen the medium-term fiscal framework, the Recipient has enacted a law
approving the 2020 Budget that includes a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) consistent with the
provisions of the new budget and debt laws and reflecting medium-term fiscal targets that support a decline in
the public debt to GDP ratio.

Despite constitutional requirements, Cabo Verde did not have an Organic Budget Law or a rigorous debt
management strategy. The DPF1 supported filling these important legal lacunae, which was needed to instill
fiscal discipline, accountability, and transparency in the preparation, implementation, evaluation, and control
of the budget, strengthen the link between the annual budget and the MTFF, and guide borrowing operations
and properly manage debt risks. DPF2 supported strengthening the MTFF by implementing the new budget
and debt laws. The preparation of the MTFF would inform policymakers on the sustainability of fiscal policy.

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



At the same time, developing the medium-term debt management strategy would underpin decisions on the
desired profile of new borrowers and the debt portfolio. These actions would contribute to improved fiscal and
debt management results.

DPF1-PA7 (Highly Satisfactory): To enhance fiscal accountability, the Recipient has introduced a new
Court of Account Law extending the powers of the supreme audit institution to all entities managing public
funds and introducing additional audit methods, including performance and compliance audits.

DPF2-PA8 (Highly Satisfactory): To improve the financial independence and sustainability of the Court of
Accounts, the Recipient has adopted a decree law updating the Court of Accounts' legal regimen, including
the establishment of inflation-linked services fees.

A 1993 law had governed Cabo Verde's supreme audit institution with significant shortcomings, including the
scope and types of audits undertaken. Parliament had delayed passing a bill to modernize the Court of
Accounts for a decade. Adopting the long-awaited Court of Account Law was an important step toward
expanding the supreme audit institution's mandate to ensure adequate accountability in public funds and to
reinforce a performance and evaluation culture in the public sector. DPF2 supported efforts to strengthen the
financial autonomy of the Court of Accounts by updating the fees charged to different government agencies
to current prices and indexed to inflation. These measures were important steps toward full financial
autonomy and would enhance its ability to deliver on its mandate without interference from the government or
other state players.

DPF1-PA8 (Satisfactory): To implement the standards of the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange
of Information for Tax Purposes, the Recipient has applied for membership in the Global Forum.

DPF2-PA9 (Moderately Satisfactory): To rationalize tax expenditures, the Recipient has enacted a law to
revoke or streamline the main cost of ineffective tax incentives.

Despite substantial progress, Cabo Verde remained on the EU watchlist for non-cooperative tax practices.
Joining the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes would help the
country adopt global tax transparency standards through the forum's monitoring and peer review activities.
This was a condition of the EU to prevent the inclusion of Cabo Verde on the blacklist of non-cooperative
jurisdictions for tax purposes. Cabo Verde also had a complex tax incentive system, with pervasive tax
exemptions and disputable effectiveness in attracting investment. Eliminating and streamlining inefficient
taxes would yield fiscal savings and contribute to more rationalized tax expenditures. The Government
adopted a formal benchmark model to systematically evaluate and publish all tax incentives, which was a
useful tool for identifying those that should be eliminated. However, the PA was vague, without a target
amount nor any criteria for assessing effectiveness..

DPF1-PA9 (Satisfactory): To rationalize public investment selection, consistent with the 2014 planning law
and the 2018 budget decree-law, all new investment projects in the Recipient's 2019 Budget submitted to
Parliament have been selected in accordance with phase 1 of the Public Investment Management System
and consistent with the Recipient's development objectives.

Capital spending was a major driver in the build-up of Cabo Verde's debt. Enhanced screening and
prioritization of public investment projects were important part of controlling ineffective public spending,
although this action became irrelevant a year later when no new investment in the 2020 budget met the
minimum size threshold to be subject to the required analysis.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

RI0 (satisfactory) captured the impact of the PA and measured progress toward the objective of CVA reducing
its reliance on fiscal transfer. DPF2 dropped the follow-up support due to the severe impact of Covid-19 on the
air travel industry and the impossibility of pursuing the planned reforms of CVA. However, it retained the
indicator with a revised baseline and target. ICR notes, "RI was dropped prior to program closing date." IEG
reviews the approved PDOs, PAs and RIs, and thus includes this indicator in the assessment.

RI3 (moderately unsatisfactory) was added in DPF2. While adopting a long-term power sector master plan
would foster increased generation from renewable sources, many things needed to happen (e.g., investments in
renewable energy facilities) to achieve the target outcome and contribute meaningfully to progress toward the
objective. While a good measurement of progress in renewable energy generation, the indicator did not inform
on the impact of the PA, the financial situation of ELECTRA, or the fiscal risks to the government. Also, for an
indicator introduced in 2020, retrospectively setting the baseline in 2018 and a target for 2021 practically
guaranteed to achieve the target, diminishing its usefulness for measuring the impact of the DPF support.

RI4 (unsatisfactory) was added in DPF2 and appropriately measured the impact of the PA. However, there is a
significant logical leap between better labeling of electrical equipment and reducing fiscal risk from ELECTRA,
making the RI less relevant to achieving the objective. Again, for an indicator introduced in 2020, retrospectively
setting the baseline in 2018 and a target for 2021 practically guaranteed meeting the target. The ICR raises
questions about the measurability and tractability of this indicator.

RI5 (satisfactory) measured progress toward achieving the objective and captured the impact of the PAs, albeit
with some gaps. That is, opening separate, dedicated accounts for IFH's social housing transactions and
conducting audits of IFH's financial accounts would improve the transparency of the social housing program,
which could in turn contribute to better program management and reduced fiscal support to IFH.

Indicators under Objective 2

RI1 (satisfactory) captured the impact of the PAs and measured progress toward the objective of improved
maritime service delivery. Revisions in DPF2 strengthened the relevance of the indicator by tracking more
closely what the private service provider could control.

RI2 (moderately unsatisfactory) replaced an original indicator that measured ELECTRA's commercial
performance. While it captured the impact of the new PA and progress in better targeting the social tariff for
electricity, it did not measure achievement of the objective of private sector led service delivery.




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



RI6 (satisfactory) was added in DPF2 and reasonably captured the impact of the PA to support improved ICT
competition through the implementation of regional ECOWAS regulation. A lower bandwidth price would
enhance access for the carriers and, thus, the end users.

Indicators under Objective 3

RI7 (satisfactory) captured the impact of the PAs in the two DPFs and measured progress toward the objective
of enhanced fiscal management.

RI8 (satisfactory) adequately captured the impact of the PAs to expand the mandate and the independence of
the audit institution. It measured strengthened capacity of the audit institution to perform its check and balance
functions to ensure fiscal accountability.

RI9 (satisfactory) captured the impact of the PA and measured progress toward meeting global tax transparency
standards through the Global Forum peer review process.

RI10 (unsatisfactory) Although revoking/streamlining main cost ineffective tax incentives would facilitate the
elimination of poorly targeted, redundant, and ineffective exemptions, which could yield critical fiscal savings,
many other factors influence tax expenditures as a share of GDP.

                                                                                            Actual /     RI
                              Associated         RI                              Actual
Results Indicator                                          Baseline    Target              Targeted Achievement
                                 PAs         Relevance                           Value
                                                                                           Change      Rating
Objective 1: Reducing fiscal risk in key SOEs
RI0 Decline in central
government financial                                                   1.5%
                                                           2.4% GDP
support (transfers,            DPF1-PA1            S                   GDP         NA          -        Negligible
                                                             (2018)
subsidies, capitalization,                                            (2021)
and guarantees) to CVA
RI3: Increased power
                                                                                  40.8
generation from additional                                            30 MW
                               DPF2-PA3          MU         0 (2018)              MW         136%      Substantial
variable renewable energy                                             (2021)
                                                                                 (2021)
facilities
RI4: Increased proportion
                                                                       30%        48%
of energy-efficient labeled    DPF2-PA4           U         0 (2018)                         160%        Modest
                                                                      (2021)     (2021)
electrical equipment
RI5: Decline in central
government financial                                                  < 0.5%      5.1%
                              DPF1-PA4,                    1.6% GDP
support (transfers,                                S                   GDP        GDP       -318%       Negligible
                               DPF2-PA5                      (2018)
subsidies, capitalization,                                            (2021)     (2021)
and guarantee) to IFH
Objective 2: Improving service delivery in infrastructures
RI1: Improved frequency       DPF1-PA2,            S        7 (2017) 32 (2021)     27        80%       Substantial
and safety of inter-island     DPF2-PA1                                          (2021)
maritime services (regular



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



    weekly frequencies by
    class-certified ships)

    RI2: Share of poor and
    extremely poor households DPF1-PA3,                                     100%  35.6%
                                                  MU       0% (2018)                       35.60%       Modest
    enrolled in the energy        DPF2-PA2                                 (2021) (2021)
    social tariff.
    RI6: Wholesale price of
    international capacity                                     €775       < €600 €45.14
                                  DPF2-PA6         S                                        417%          High
    (bandwidth price for 1                                    (2018)       (2021) (2021)
    STM1 in euro/Mbps/month)
    Objective 3: Strengthening effectiveness and accountability in fiscal management
    RI7: Successful
    implementation of            DPF1-PA5,                    -0.3%         0.4% -11.1%
    government fiscal targets    DPF1-PA6,         S           GDP          GDP    GDP     -1543%      Negligible
    (fiscal primary balance as a DPF2-PA7                     (2018)       (2021) (2021)
    share of GDP)
    RI8: Increase in number of
    additional audits completed DPF1-PA7,                                           23
                                                   S         0 (2018) 5 (2021)              460%          High
    by SAI under the new legal DPF2-PA8                                           (2021)
    framework
    RI9: Completion of all
    necessary reforms to
                                 DPF1-PA8,                                   Yes    Yes
    obtain a largely compliant                     S       No (2018)                        100%          High
                                  DPF2-PA9                                 (2021) (2021)
    rating in the Global Forum
    peer-review process
    RI10: Streamlined tax
    expenditures (as evidenced
                                 DPF1-PA8,                     4.5%         4.0%   7.0%
    by a decline in tax                            U                                       -500%       Negligible
                                  DPF2-PA9                    (2018)       (2021) (2021)
    expenditures as a share of
    GDP)


  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Reducing Fiscal Risks in Key SOEs

               Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



Two PAs in DPF1 and three in DPF2 supported this objective, including approving a list of 23 SOEs for
restructuring, privatization, or concession; a concession for a private partner for inter-island shipping; and a
new management contract for ELECTRA. Among the results, there was a more than threefold increase in
fiscal support to IFH rather than the planned decline to below a third of the baseline. Central government
support for ELECTRA was not tracked. Instead, the results framework measured renewable power generation
and energy efficiency labeling of electric equipment, the targets of which were substantially exceeded (by 36
percent and 60 percent, respectively). However, they were less relevant for measuring progress toward
reducing fiscal risk in the targeted SOEs. The ICR does not report on the government's financial support to
CVA, selling 51% of CVA to a subsidiary of Icelandair in March 2019 and another 10% in December 2019.
However, the impact of Covid-19 on the travel industry resulted in poor performance of CVA and an
accumulation of debt, rendering continuous implementation of the CVA reform plan (full public divestment of
CVA) impossible.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2 Improving private sector led service delivery in infrastructures

Rationale
PAs in DPF1 and three PAs in DPF2 supported this objective, including establishing rules for the private
provider of maritime transportation services and implementing regional ICT regulations. Regular
weekly frequencies by class-certified ships increased, reaching 80 percent of the target. Improvement in ICT
access as measured by reduced bandwidth price exceeded expectation by over four times. However, the PAs
on enrolling the poor and extreme poor households in the energy social tariff and subsidizing the vulnerable
to access housing were irrelevant to Objective 2, as were the associated results.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthening effectiveness and accountability in fiscal management

Rationale


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



                  Five PAs in DPF1 and three PAs in DPF2 supported this objective, including adopting budget and debt laws,
                  approving the 2020 budget with a medium-term fiscal framework, introducing laws to extend the powers and
                  financial independence of the supreme audit institution, participating in the global forum on tax transparency,
                  and streamlining ineffective tax incentives. There was significant progress in enhanced audit capacity and
                  compliance with international tax transparency standards. However, achieving government fiscal targets was
                  out of reach during the Covid-19 pandemic, with the primary balance as a share of GDP rising to a deficit of
                  11.1 percent instead of a surplus of 0.4 percent. Tax expenditures rose from 4.5 percent of GDP to 7 percent
                  instead of declining to 4 percent.




                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall, the reforms supported by the DPF series helped improve services delivery in maritime inter-island
transport, ICT access, accountability in the use of public funds, and tax transparency. They were less successful
in helping reduce fiscal risks in key SOEs or strengthening fiscal management. DPF2 recognized that reducing
fiscal support to SOEs was challenging amid the Covid-19 crisis. However, instead of adjusting the objectives of
the DPF series to reflect the new realities, it maintained the original objectives while shifting DPF2's focus to
supporting social inclusion in accessing infrastructure services. This reduced the relevance of some PAs and
RIs.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The original design of the DPF series was logical, with sound theory of change and generally well-defined
indicators. The objectives of reducing government financial support to SOEs and improving fiscal balance



                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



became inconsistent with the urgent response in the aftermath of the Covid-19 outbreak. Regrettably, the
objectives of the series were not amended, rendering some of the results irrelevant to their achievement..


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the sustainability of the outcomes achieved is moderate. The best results were maritime and ICT
services delivery, fiscal accountability and tax transparency. The DPF series achieved them through legal and
institutional improvements that are likely to be sustained. The ICR notes weakness in the current set up for the
supreme audit institution, which may threaten the independence of the audit authority and reduce its mandate
and the quality of its work. For the outcomes missed, which were in the areas of SOE reforms and fiscal
management to reduce public debt, the ICR reports that the government remains committed to pursing the
related reforms as soon as the socioeconomic condition allows. The World Bank provides continued support
through SOEs Related Fiscal Management Project, ongoing TAs, and the Cabo Verde Sustainable and
Equitable Recovery DPF series (phase 1 of the series is under way).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

In designing the DPF program, the team drew lessons from the last programmatic Poverty Reduction Support
Credit (PRSC) 8 and 9, which closed in 2016, three years before the approval of DPF1. The ICR of the PRSC
series pointed out the importance of acknowledging the political economy challenges associated to sensitive
SOE-related reforms and the need to align the ambition of DPF support to the government’s capacity to deliver
on the reforms. In response, the DPF series focused on ongoing reforms that enjoyed certain momentum and
champions in Cabo Verde. It learned from unsuccessful previous experience with non-enforcement of
performance-based contracts with SOEs, anchoring the contract in a broader framework of SOE law and
incorporating adequate targets, results indicators and incentives.

All the PAs drew from analytical work and project experience of the Bank and others. The theory of change
shows a good understanding of the critical issues and the reforms needed. There were shortcomings in the
relevance of some new PAs in DPF2 and the impact of some DPF1 PAs when they lost follow-up support. The
RIs were straightforward, although some of the new indicators introduced in DPF2 were irrelevant and the lack
of data sources was problematic.

The Program Document of DPF1 identified eight risks. It assessed the overall risk as substantial, including high
macroeconomic risks and substantial risks in the implementation capacity of sector strategies and policies and
stakeholder support. It noted that delays in reforming SOEs would derail efforts to reduce fiscal financing needs


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



and that external and natural shocks could increase fiscal pressure and result in fiscal slippages, which is what
happened. There were efforts to strengthen SOE oversight, as well as Bank support through the SOEs Related
Fiscal Management Project, the Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit and loan with Cat DDO,
and World Bank and IMF support for the implementation of a comprehensive strategy for improved debt
management. These measures were appropriate even if they could not fully mitigate the fiscal impact of Covid-
19. The mitigation measures to address capacity constraints and stakeholder resistance were also credible (e.g.,
TA and concentrating on reforms that benefited from ongoing policy dialogue, that leveraged other WBG
operations, and that had champions and momentum).

The Program Document of DPF1 indicated that the design of the DPF series drew on consultation at several
levels (Parliament, Council of Ministers, key stakeholders, management, and employees). The World Bank
participates in the 5-member Budget Support Group led by the African Development Bank and discussed with
partners the program supported by the DPF series (The ICR reports that the Bank presided during the
preparation and implementation of the program, from 2019 to 2021).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank prepared an ISR of DPF1 in June 2020. It reported adequate reform implementation and outcome
achievement, exceeding three RI targets by December 2019, progressing well in three other RIs, but
achieving no advance in the other three RIs. Notably, central government financial support to CVA and IFH
declined, ELECTRA’s commercial loss lessened, and the authorities exceeded the fiscal primary balance and
tax expenditure targets. However, the socioeconomic impact of Covid-19 halted the progress in SOE reforms in
the aviation and the energy sectors. The ISR noted that these reforms would be delayed until after the pandemic
was under control and the authorities would adjust the policy matrix for DPF2 accordingly. The ISR also adjusted
the risk ratings: while maintaining the overall risk at substantial, it raised the institutional capacity risk to high and
reduced fiduciary and stakeholder risks to low.

Changes to several PAs and RIs reflected the new realities and government priorities, and the final RIs captured
the impact of the revised PAs. However, with the formal objectives left unchanged, some of the impacts were not
relevant to the operation. The objectives of reducing fiscal support to key SOEs and public debt were
inconsistent with the COVID response and the Bank should have formally amended them.

The Program Document of DPF2 accurately assessed the heightened macroeconomic risks and indicated that
additional mitigation measures would include supplemental support from the IMF, the World Bank, and other
partners.

The ICR notes shortcomings in M&E during supervision, although the issues raised (problematic collection,
quality control, and sharing of administrative data across government agencies) are not specific to this DPF
series.



                                                                                                          Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The objectives and prior actions were mostly relevant and selected based on extensive analytical work, prior
engagement, and close coordination with the IMF and other development partners through an established
mechanism. The Bank assessed key risks appropriately, proposed reasonable mitigation measures, and used
tools (e.g., Crisis Response Window) to mitigate them when they materialized. The adjustments to the support
program were timely and consistent with the new needs. It would have helped with results achievement if the
PDOs were also revised when it became clear that major SOE reforms were unlikely during a crisis.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR notes an increased poverty rate in 2020 due to the economic impact of the crisis, but a reduction in
2021 as a result of resumed economic growth. The DPF2 strengthened the support for the poor and vulnerable
to access energy and social housing.



b. Environmental

The ICR notes that one potential source of the negative environmental impact of the program was the electricity
social tariff, which could increase energy demand. On the other hand, the program supported actions to promote
renewable energy and energy efficiency, which could partly offset some of the negative impacts.



c. Gender

The ICR does not refer to gender.



d. Other

                                                                                                Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)




None identified.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides helpful information on the implementation and results of the DPF series. It is also candid in
pointing out the shortcomings in the program's focus and the M&E framework and draws valuable lessons.

However, it is thin on the evidence and analysis. For example, paragraph 26 states that the four PAs
“strengthened the overall program but also the rating”. However, the discussion presents only why reforming
ELECTRA was needed, not why the specific prior actions were important to achieving the PDOs or how they
strengthened the overall program. It is also unclear what rating is referred to here – outcome achievement,
World Bank performance, or relevance of the PAs or RIs.

There is a certain inconsistency in the ICR. For example, it judges that removing DPF1-PA1 and the related
results indicator weakened the overall program. However, the discussion only reports on the evolution of events
regarding CVA, not on how dropping the PA and the associated indicator may have weakened the program. The
discussion concludes “dropping this prior action and related results indicator allowed the program to maintain its
overall relevance” (para 24). This contradicts the title sentence and suggests that their removal - if it happened
at DPF2 approval as dropping PAs and RIs are not allowed during implementation - would have strengthened
the program.

Some lessons need more evidence or analysis in the ICR to back them up. For example, the first lesson,
“sustained implementation and support missions could have helped the Beneficiary achieve stronger results”
suggests that the DPF series suffered from inadequate missions, which was a major cause for weak results. The
ICR presents no evidence or discussion of the link between missions and results. Similarly, while the lesson that
“support to M&E system is key in a context with limited capability” is indisputable, the discussion ignores the fact
that the ISR reported on all indicators – how, we do not know and the ICR does not offer insight – and does not
differentiate between a functioning M&E system for monitoring this specific DPF series and a government’s
overall M&E capacity. Likewise, the reflection on the role of a strong, independent SOE reform unit in SOE
reforms is interesting, although the discussion reviews the sequence of events rather than evidence that the
SOE reforms in Cabo Verde stalled because the regulator was under the Ministry of Finance.


a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately            Moderately                  DPF2 did not amend the PDOs
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              despite significant changes to

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde DPO (P165631)



                                                                               the PAs and RIs in response to
                                                                               the Covid-19 crisis. This reduced
                                                                               the relevance of Bank support to
                                                                               achieving the PDOs even
                                                                               though the support was relevant
                                                                               to the new country context.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

This review concurs with ICR on the need to proactively adjust the DPF program, including its objectives,
supported actions, and results monitoring systems, according to the changing circumstances. One additional
lesson not discussed in the ICR is the importance of complementary support programs. The Bank implemented
this DPF series in the context of several other Bank operations (lending and ASA) supporting SOE reforms,
fiscal and debt management, taxation, energy, ICT, and transport, as well as a CAT DDO. These interventions
laid the foundation for the reforms supported under this DPF series, helped achieve the progress tracked by this
series' indicators, and will carry forward some of the unfinished reform agenda in this series.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
