     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023034

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P133531                                   Shanxi Gas Utilization

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83480                                30-Jun-2020                                          97,950,891.20

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2014                               30-Apr-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            97,950,891.20                                               0.00

 Actual                                        97,950,891.20                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Peter Nigel Freeman         Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objective, as cited on p.5 of the Loan Agreement, as well as on p.3 of the PAD,
   was “to increase gas utilization to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in selected counties in Shanxi
   Province”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Distributed Gas-fired Combined Heat-and-Power (CHP) plants (Estimated cost as
   appraisal: US$260.29 million, of which $79 million from IBRD; Actual cost at closing: IDA US$268.59
   million). The component included two investment sub-projects of uniform capacity (3x42 MW), and affiliated
   facilities. Both sub-projects were green-field plants, to be built for heating supply and power generation to
   the adjacent county-level cities of Baode and Xiyang. The gas source was the provincial gas network,
   operated by Shanxi Natural Gas Company (SNGC), which had been extended to both cities. Annual gas
   consumption was an estimated 285 million cubic meters for both projects combined, with total electricity
   generation estimated to reach around I,160 GWh per annum, to be delivered to the provincial power grid, to
   meet the electricity demand in the province. A total thermal capacity for heating of about 120 MW was
   expected to meet the expanded heating demand of the two county cities for a floor area of 2.37 million
   square meters. Although SNGC had intended to start construction of the CHP sub-projects in April 2014
   and complete construction in October 2015, actual construction of both plants only commenced in April
   2016 and January 2017 respectively, and was completed in December 2019.

   Component 2: Expansion of the Gas Distribution Network (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$32.35
   million, of which US$18 million from IBRD; Actual cost at closing: IDA US$31.67 million). This component
   included investment in sub-projects in four country cities, in Xiangyuan, Changzhi, Tunliu, and Qingxu
   counties. The projects involved the installation of pipelines and pressure regulating stations to expand the
   gas distribution network to residential, industrial and commercial consumers, along with Supervisory Control
   and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems to monitor the operation of each network. The gas source was the
   provincial gas network, operated by SNGC, except for the Changzhi sub-project, which was supplied by a
   local Coal Bed Methane (CBM) developer who was connected to the provincial network. These sub-
   projects were expected to meet the expanded demand for gas in the four cities by 2020, from an estimated
   136,700 households and 21 industrial consumers, calling for an increased gas supply 244.15 of million
   cubic meters. Construction of these sub-projects was expected to commence in October 2014 and be
   completed by December 2019, In fact, construction commenced only in November 2016, but was
   nevertheless completed by December 2019.

   Component 3: Technical Assistance (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$2.75 million, entirely from IBRD;
   Actual cost at closing: US$4.35 million). The aim of the component was to help mitigate the risks related
   to project design and management, through capacity building and technical support to implementing
   agencies, as well as activities to upgrade the provincial gas network system.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



   Of the initial US$ 295.39 million cost of the project, IBRD financing amounted to US$100 million, with the
   balance to be provided by the Government and local financing sources. Actual costs at project closing
   amounted to US$304.61 million, with US$97.95 million (i.e. 98 percent) disbursed from the World Bank
   loan. Minor changes were made in loan allocation to allow for an expansion in scope of Component 2, as
   suggested during the Mid-Term Review (2017). By adding an investment in a new sub-project in
   Yangcheng, it was hoped to make up for a reduction in gas demand in Changzhi, Tunliu and Xiangyuan
   cities that had occurred, as a result of a slow-down of the Chinese economy. A minor saving in costs of
   US$2.3 million of the IBRD loan from Component 1, arising at the time, was reallocated to Components 2
   and 3.

   Borrower contribution

   At appraisal, the Borrower contribution was expected to be of the order of US$92.39 million, with a further
   US$103 million coming from local financing sources. These expectations were met, by and large, with
   actual borrower contribution at project closing amounting to US$90.08 million, and the contribution of local
   financing sources amounting to a higher-than-expected US$116.58 million.

   Dates

   The project was approved on March 28, 2014, becoming effective on July 30, 2014. A Mid-Term Review
   was held on May 26, 2017. The project was originally set to close on June 30, 2020. However, on account
   of the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on construction of both CHP plants, the project’s closing was
   extended to April 30, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

Though China’s rapid economic development over the previous three decades had rested heavily on coal
consumption, the resultant severe pollution has driven the country to address its environmental
challenges. Smoggy weather in over 15 cities in Northern China, and serious nationwide air, land and
water pollution, have encouraged a shift towards clean energy and a less coal-dominated economy. Gas
has been one of the most important sources to support this clean energy development in the country.

Gas consumption represented a still relatively small share of China’s overall energy mix. In 2011, gas
accounted for only about 5 percent of total energy consumption, well below the global average (about 24
percent). Domestic exploitation had however confirmed a total of about 3.78 trillion cubic meters of
technically recoverable natural gas at the time, equivalent to 40 times the actual production in 2010. Based
on this, the Government had set up an ambitious plan to accelerate gas development, aiming to increase
the share of gas consumption in primary energy to 7.5 percent by 2015. As a result of this, the access of
the population to gas would increase from 188 million people (14 percent of the national total) in 2010 to
250 million (18 percent of the national total).



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



At the time of appraisal, the government of Shanxi province had launched a provincial gasification program
to shift its economic structure away from coal-dominated industries through clean energy
development. Shanxi province was at the time the second largest coal producing province in China,
producing about 25 percent of the national total in 2011. Economic development in the province had relied
heavily on coal. but this had created serious environmental problems, prompting the authorities to promote
gas usage as a way to transform its economy along a greener path.

The government of Shanxi’s Gasification Program, introduced in late 2010, aimed to increase gas utilization
within the province from about 0.7 billion cu. meters per annum (bcma) in 2008 to 9.0 bcma in 2015 and
28.0 bcma by 2020. Total gas supply from Shanxi was estimated to be about 12.0 bcma by 2015 and 36.0
bcma by 2020, when the gas export to other provinces was taken into account. The main sources of gas in
the province were domestic coal bed methane (CBM), imported natural gas, coke gas, and local coal
converted gas. Shanxi had abundant CBM resources (equal to about a third of national total reserves) and
five main natural gas trunk pipelines passed through the province, operated by PetroChina and SinoPec,
providing imported natural gas. The main markets targeted for gas utilization were city gas, industrial,
chemical and power generation, and transportation (both compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied
natural gas (LNG) fueled vehicles). At the time of appraisal, these players relied on coal, coal gas, LPG or
diesel as their main fuels. Key market players included both national and provincial state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) engaged in this sector, as well as private local and foreign companies. Upstream
developers included PetroChina, SinoPec, China CBM (a national SOE), Jincheng Mining Group (a
provincial SOE) and other international energy enterprises. Shanxi Guoxin Energy Development Group
(GXED) led the construction of the gas pipelines and associated infrastructure, in participation with other
provincial SOEs, building some 3,000 km of main gas transmission network across the province, covering
94 of its 119 counties. Downstream gas utilization was diversified, with GXED’s subsidiaries providing the
gas distribution services in most counties.

In 2014, the Government of China launched the “Energy Revolution” to ensure a transition to a sustainable
energy system, effectively superseding the Provincial Gasification program. However, in September 2017,
in response to a proposal by Shanxi province, the State Council endorsed Shanxi as a pioneer province to
implement the 2016-2030 “Energy Revolution”.

Implementation of the provincial gasification program was not without its problems. There was an absence
of gas regulation at the national level, distorted pricing in gas markets and use of a quota system to allocate
gas. To achieve the targets of the provincial gasification program, the government of Shanxi province
worked closely with the central government to establish enabling gas policies and a regulatory framework to
guide the development of the sector. A reform of gas pricing was initiated by the central government to link
gas prices to other competitive fuels – first piloted in two provinces and subsequently implemented nation-
wide during the project implementation period. However, electricity tariff reforms did not take place on
schedule. Despite an agreement that an increase in the local electricity tariff would be implemented by
end-2016, the electricity tariff was approved only in 2020, but subsequently lowered to boost the Covid-19
economic recovery. The actual tariff for heating was also much lower than required. These factors
ultimately put significant pressure on the financial viability of the CHP plants that were constructed under
the project.

Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives were consistent with those of the World Bank Group (WBG)’s
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), FY2013-16, at appraisal, remaining so at project closing. The


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



               developmental objectives of the project addressed the CPS themes of “Supporting Green Growth and More
               Efficient Use of Natural Resources”, and of “Promoting More Inclusive Development”. It was expected that
               the operation would, improve the living standards of gas consumers through use of cleaner energy, while
               the community at large would benefit from reduced Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, which contributed
               to global climate change. At project closing the development objectives of the operation were consistent
               with the objectives of the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF), FY2020-25, for the pillar on
               “Promoting Greener Growth”, especially under engagement area # 2.1: Facilitating the Transition to a
               Lower-Carbon Energy Path, through a reduction in coal consumption and scale-up of natural gas,
               renewable energy and energy efficiency. It was also broadly consistent with the objectives of engagement
               area #2.2: Reducing air, soil, water, and marine plastic pollution.

               The project’s PDO remained relevant to the evolving energy strategy in Shanxi, as well as China. Under
               the new energy strategy, Shanxi province continued to promote clean energy development, but this
               included not only the provincial gasification program but also the usage of renewable energy (RE). This
               meant that while gas distribution network sub-projects under Component 2 were still the main government-
               promoted investment to replace coal combustion for residential and industrial users, the operation of gas-
               fired CHP plants was affected significantly. Gas-fired CHP plants had to be operated principally as peaking
               plants to improve RE integration in Shanxi’s power grid, which meant that annual hours of operation of the
               gas-fired plants were reduced considerably (which also meant that project indicators relating to Component
               1 could no longer be achieved).

               Based on the above, Relevance is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To increase gas utilization in selected counties in Shanxi Province”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             The project represented an effort to increase gas utilization to reduce GHG emissions in selected counties in
                             Shanxi province, as part of the provincial gasification program. The project’s activities consisted of (a)
                             investments in distributed CHP gas-fired plants in Baode and Xiyang citiies, (b) expansion of gas distribution
                             networks in four counties (Xiangyuan, Changzhi, Tunliu and Qingxu) in the province, (c) provision of technical
                             assistance for capacity building and project monitoring. Outputs produced by these activities included
                             electricity, heating and gas supply to the project areas, replacing coal power and coal use in households.
                             These led directly to PDO-level outcomes, contributing to improved sustainability of heating/gas supply

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



service and an improvement in air quality in Shanxi and norther China. Higher-level outcomes arising from the
project included potential climate change mitigation, jobs in clean energy industry, and innovation and
knowledge with global benefits.

Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were consistent with the above results
chain. Achievement of project outcome was measured by indicators relating to annual gas utilization (in cu.
meters) and avoided carbon emissions (tons of CO2 equivalent) in the county cities and CHP plants
supported by the project. Intermediate indicators included installed capacity (in MW) and annual power
supply (in GWh), annual heating supply (in gigajoules) from the two distributed gas-fired CHP plants and
number of households and other gas users.

Indicators were adjusted (downwards) at the time of the Mid-Term Review in 2017, to reflect the drop in gas
demand under a slowing economy (no restructuring was required). Targets of the Outcome and intermediary
indicators were further adjusted in June 2020, with a formal restructuring in order to adapt the project to the
evolving provincial energy strategy.

Outputs

- By close of project, electricity generation capacity of 288 MW had been installed in the form of the two gas-
fired CHP plants, exceeding the target of 252 MW. The higher-than-targeted capacity was the result of
improvements made in technical design during construction (without impact on the cost).

- The number of households and industrial users connected to gas supply reached a total of 53,639 by close
of project, significantly higher than the target of 43,000 (reduced from the original target o 45,000). This
higher-than-targeted achievement was largely due to the newly-added sub-project in Yangcheng city.

Outcomes

Despite the higher-than-planned achievement in generation capacity installed and gas connections made,
actual utilization of gas – at 160 million cu meters fell far short of target. The target had itself been reduced
from 365 million m3 to 255 million m3 to reflect the decision that the CHP plants were to be run to provide
peaking capacity in non-heating season, to improve RE integration in the province. The decline in gas
utilization was on account of a drastic reduction in actual generation of electricity and heat in both gas-fired
CHP plants, reflecting constraints arising from the electricity tariff, and gas supply and prices. Actual
electricity sales achieved only 39 percent of target, the approved electricity tariff of 0.56 Y/KWh, equivalent to
a gas price of 2.35 Y/m3, being lower than the tariff required to cover costs at both plants, at their actual
purchased price of gas of 2.59 and 2.66 Y/KWh respectively at the two CHP plants. As a result, the
implementing group, Huaxin Gas Group (HXGG), had no financial incentive to generate more. Also, on
account of a shortage of gas supply in winter (in both Shanxi and in the country), one of the two CHP plants
(at Baode) was required to stop generation in early December 2020, and the generation of the other plant
was reduced.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)




                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            “To reduce greenhouse gas emissions in selected counties in Shanxi Province”

                            Rationale
                            The performance of the project in meeting the objective of reducing GHG emissions in the project areas was
                            measured by a single PDO indicator and two intermediate indicators.

                            Outputs

                            The first full year of operation of the two CHP gas-fired plants covered the full heating season, November 1,
                            2021 to March 31, 2022. Against this background,

                            (i) The supply of heating by the CHP plants, at 204.4 million mega joules (MJ) by close of project, exceeded
                            its target of 150 million MJ by a substantial margin.

                            (ii) Annual supply of electricity by the CHP plants was only of the order of 250.06 GWh by close of project,
                            against a target of 700 GWh (revised downwards in 2020, from the original target of 1,100 GWh). This
                            substantial under performance was because of reasons mentioned earlier – that on account of the high
                            prevailing price of gas and low electricity tariff, the owners of both CHP plants had no financial incentive to
                            generate power.

                            It may be mentioned that some movement on electricity pricing reform has taken place since the close of the
                            project in 2021, with the NDRC initiating a policy on capacity payments for peaking power plants like gas-fired
                            plants, so that owners would have the financial incentive to run the plants for peaking, with reduced hours of
                            operation. Also, an increase in price margins for cost pass-through from generators to consumers was
                            announced in late 2021. However, this came too late to affect the achievement of the project’s objectives..

                            Outcomes

                            The only indicator used to measure the achievement of this objective was the level of annual avoided CO2
                            emissions. The target for this was 535,320 tons, revised downwards at restructuring from the original target
                            of 820,290 tons. Actual achievement, based on the (low) quantum of electricity generated and heating
                            supplied by the gas-fired plants, was only 334,400 tons, or 62.4 percent of the revised target. Based on this
                            partial achievement, efficacy for this objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



  Project efficacy for PDOs 1 and 2 were rated Modest on account of a failure to achieve their targets. To no
  small extent this was due to a change in the government’s priorities away from accelerated gas utilization,
  towards the development of renewable energy, which led to a slower increase in gas utilization and
  corresponding reduction in GHG emissions from the project. These outcomes were in part also due to delays
  in implementation of tariff reform, which negatively impacted incentives to generate electricity at the two gas-
  fired CHP plants. Based on this, overall efficacy is rated Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest


5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial efficiency

The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at appraisal was estimated, on the basis of cost-benefit analysis,
separately for the individual investment sub-projects. Costs taken into account included the investment and
operation costs of each sub-project; benefits were based on economic values of electricity, heating and gas
supply, plus the global environmental benefits of the replacement of coal by gas consumption. On this basis,
EIRR for the two gas-fired CHP plants were estimated at 17.5 and 14.0 percent respectively, and for the four
sub-projects in the gas distribution network ranging between 21.4 and 47.4 percent. EIRR at project completion
were estimated on the basis of the same methodology, but with up-dated social values for carbon emission ($71
to $143 per ton CO2e). As such, EIRR for the two CHP plants were estimated at 12.1 and 12.0 percent
respectively. For the gas distribution sub-projects, using the low carbon valuation, they ranged between -11.6
percent and 51.6 percent (for the Yangchen sub-project), for a weighted average of 16.5 percent. Using the
high carbon valuation, they ranged from 17.8 and 19.0 percent for the CHP plants, and from -9.3 to 66.2 percent
for gas distribution (weighted average, 21.6 percent).

Financial analysis conducted for the same sub-projects produced financial rates of return (FIRR) of 6.9 to 3.2
percent at appraisal for the CHP units, and a range of between 9.6 to 11.1 percent for the gas distribution sub-
projects. FIRR conducted on completion of the project, based on actual expenditures and revenues to 2021 and
estimated expenditures and revenues thereafter, worked out to 2.7 percent and 3.2 percent respectively for the
two CHP plants (weighted average 2.9 percent), and to range of between -13.8 and 36.2 percent for the gas
distribution sub-projects (weighted average 11.8 percent).

Operational/Administrative Efficiency

The project underwent a ten-month extension to the closing date. At closing, total costs were marginally higher
than estimated at appraisal (by 3.1 percent). Overall, project administration was effective (ICR, para 43), the
Project Management Office (PMO) being efficient in financial management, procurement of the main works
contracts and construction management. However, changes in the structure of the project, arising out of the
evolving energy strategy of Shanxi province, together with delays in approving the electricity tariff, significantly
undermined its overall performance.




                                                                                                        Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



Based on the above, the efficiency of the project is rated Modest. The project did not deliver its full expected
benefits, and both economic and financial rates of return at completion were mostly lower than anticipated at
appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives were substantially relevant to the World bank’s Country Partnership
Framework and the evolving energy strategy for Shanxi province. Project efficacy was rated modest for both
development objectives, on account of a failure to achieve targets. Project efficiency was also rated Modest. On
this basis, the project’s overall outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

A variety of risks to the project’s development outcome exist, as follows:

Operational Risk: The technical performance risk for the CHPs is limited, since the operation and efficiency
of their plant and equipment has been tested quite thoroughly. No significant risks have been identified
regarding the operation of the gas networks, though gas prices remain unpredictable. However, the
uncertainties regarding the load factor of the CHP plants constitutes a major risk, going forward, as it
depends on the priority and dispatch given to RE plants. Uncertainty persists whether the events if 2017,
when the dispatch of the CHP plants was severely curtailed by the provincial government, could be repeated.
Also, if the demand for the CHP, which produce heat as well as power, moves fully to peaking power mode,



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



as it is currently, it could produce a non-optimal combination of heat and power during certain periods, with a
loss of efficiency. According to the ICR (para 94), the operational risk is rated High.

Competitiveness Risk: The cost of electricity produced by the project CHPs might be uncompetitive under
the new price and dispatch situation compared to other electricity sources. In the absence of electricity tariff
reforms, the possible entry of new low-cost RE technologies in the future could further exacerbate the
situation, making the project relatively less competitive. As such, the competitiveness risk is rated High
(ICR,para 95).

Financial Risk: Reduction in the plants’ energy production could affect the financial sustainability of the
project, and will call for special adjustments in the tariff to make sure that the fixed costs of the units continue
to be covered. A shift to a capacity payment for the CHPs, as is envisaged, would mitigate this
risk. Meanwhile, the financial risk is rated High (ICR, para 97).

Environmental and Social Risk: This risk is considered to be Moderate (ICR, para 98). All social and
environmental issues have been managed during project implementation. The operation of the CHPs had a
positive environmental impact, and all pending social issues (mostly including compensation for land
acquisition) were addressed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was relatively limited in its flexibility and was unable to adapt to changes in priorities
  and energy policies of the central and provincial governments. Preparation of the project was fairly
  sound, the Bank team (mostly field-based) having worked closely with counterpart agencies, to ensure
  full compliance with domestic and Bank requirements on fiduciary and safeguards considerations (ICR,
  paras 86-87). Key operational risks, especially relating to environmental and safety aspects, were
  identified and mitigation measures introduced. An important condition of the sustainability of the
  operation was reform of the gas and electricity tariffs; however, though this was covenanted in the
  project, mitigation measures were weak. This risk did materialize and ended up jeopardizing the financial
  viability of the project.

  On the basis of the above, the project’s quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para 88), the Bank team provided proactive and effective implementation support to
 the project through regular missions and field visits. Some 15 bi-annual supervision missions were
 conducted over a seven-year period, manned by technical, fiduciary and safeguard specialists, to conduct

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



 a comprehensive review of implementation progress and to provide on-going guidance as necessary. This
 included oversight and guidance on environmental risk management for the construction of the CHP plants,
 extension of the gas network and land resettlement aspects of the project. The Bank closely monitored the
 satisfactory implementation of the Environmental Management Plan. The team also conducted a Mid-Term
 Review in 2017, at which time appropriate changes were made to the project, as they were also at the time
 of the restructuring in June 2020.

 For the most part, the Bank team was relatively stable during the implementation period. The task team
 leader (TTL) did not change after approval, was country office-based and maintained a strong relationship
 and dialogue with counterparts. The Bank fiduciary and safeguards specialists also remained stable
 through most of the implementation period.

 That said, as pointed out by the ICR (para 92), the project could have benefited from a more substantive
 restructuring once the team realized the impact of the tariff policy delays and changes in energy strategy
 on the operation of the CHP plants. The restructuring could have considered changes to project design or
 even to the PDO, as well as to the outcome indicators, to ensure the successful implementation of the
 operation.

 Based on this, quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Theory of Change (ToC) was fairly clear and straightforward. Indicators in the results chain
 were generally relevant and consistent with the PDOs, while also being specific and measurable. The two
 PDO outcome indicators were based on tons of avoided CO2 emissions in the province, and cubic meters
 of gas consumption respectively, and could be measured on the basis of hours of operation of the CHPs
 and number of connections for the gas network – both of which were easy to evaluate on a real time basis.
 Intermediate indicators, measuring installed capacities (in MW), annual power supplies (in GWH), annual
 supplies of heating (in gigajoules) and numbers of households and other gas users, were similarly suitable
 for the purpose and correctly represented the project’s outputs.

 M&E design included appropriate arrangements for data collection, compilation, analysis and reporting
 (ICR, para 71).




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E indicators remained unchanged during the project’s implementation period. The PMO carried out
  the data collection and provided clear reports on the progress of the project to the Bank on a regular
  basis. According to the ICXR (para 71), these data were generally reliable and produced on time. The
  M&E system was reported to have been particularly effective in monitoring the safeguards aspects of the
  project. Additionally, survey reports were required and completed at appraisal and completion, regarding
  the quality of social services (gas and heating supply) in the relevant cities, to provide information on
  project impacts.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on performance and results progress were used by HXGG and the World Bank to inform project
  management and facilitate decision-making, including restructuring of the project. Data collected by the
  M&E system facilitated monitoring of progress, and helped in the identification of emerging issues in
  project implementation. The results of the M&E system qwere shared with the provincial authorities to
  improve their policy making (ICR, para 73).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A, per OP 4.01 at appraisal stage, due to the risk of fire and
   explosion in the operation phase. The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental
   Assessment, OP/BP 4.01, Physical & Cultural Resources, OP/BP 4.11; and Involuntary Resettlement
   OP/BP 4.12.

   Environmental Safeguards: In terms of compliance, sound and comprehensive environmental assessment
   documentation was prepared, including an Environmental Assessment (EA), an Environmental Impact
   Assessment (EIA) and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), by the Borrower, to clarify the potential
   environmental impacts and ensure that appropriate mitigation measures were developed and agreed
   upon. Mitigation measures to be adopted by the client were reported in the EMP. During restructuring, an
   EIA report, an updated EMP and an EA summary report were prepared by the PMO for the new component
   to be implemented in Yangchen County.

   A Risk Assessment report was also prepared by a certified institute, in line with international practice, and
   incorporated into the EIA. Critical sources of risk were identified in the report, and mitigation measures and
   a monitoring plan developed. During implementation, the Borrower showed strong commitment to
   implementing the EMP and providing monitoring reports in timely manner. A Physical Cultural Resources
   Management Plan was also prepared as part of the EIA/EMP, which included mitigation measures,
   institutional strengthening, monitoring plan and Chance Find procedures to be applied during the
   construction stage of the project. The monitoring reports were provided by the PMO on timely basis, and


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



  these showed that mitigation measures were satisfactorily implemented and that impacts on physical
  cultural resources were negligible.

  There were no outstanding safeguards issues after project closing. The grievance redress mechanism
  (GRM) was established and operated at site by the PMO.

  Social safeguards: The Involuntary Resettlement safeguards (OP/BP 4.12) was triggered on account of the
  land acquisition and associated affected households. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Resettlement
  Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed during project preparation, and were duly
  implemented. A social consultant, recruited to monitor the compliance of social safeguards during the
  project period, prepared regular monitoring reports as well as a social survey report in 2021, regarding the
  gas and heating supply service covered by the project. The survey report, which was submitted to the Bank
  prior to project closing, did not identify any pending issues (ICR, para 82).

  According to the ICR, all required environmental and safeguards issues had been addressed satisfactorily
  over the implementation period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  According to the ICR (para 85), the financial management (FM) arrangements in place provided assurance
  that the Bank loan was being used for its intended purposes. All audit reports were submitted on time and
  with unqualified (clean) opinions. Any FM-related issues identified by auditors in audit reports were dealt
  with by project agencies in timely manner. Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were of acceptable
  quality. The project’s overall FM performance was deemed to be satisfactory.

  The procurement system was similarly considered adequate for project implementation. According to the
  ICR (para 84), contracts financed by the loan were procured in accordance with the rules and procedures
  laid out in the Loan Agreement. Variations in contract duration, if any, were examined and changes
  processed in compliance with the terms and conditions of the contracts. Procurement performance was
  rated by the ICR as satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  --



d. Other
  Institutional Strengthening: The project had an institutional strengthening impact, arising out of investments
  made under Component 3 – which included 6 sub-components supporting the reinforcement of the social
  and environmental assessment and monitoring capacity of HXGG and improvement in occupational
  safety. Beyond supporting the implementation of the project, the capacity building activities contributed to
  an enhancement in competency of staff of HXGG. A SCADA sub-component to the project was added to


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



   Component 2 to improve efficiency of operation of the provincial gas network, including the five counties
   covered by the gas distribution component of the project.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. When a project outcome is contingent on Government policies, reforms and regulations,
that need to take place to enable project implementation, there is a need to manage the risk
that these reforms may not take place in time, or be modified by changing priorities and
circumstances. In the case of the project in question, the change in central and provincial energy
strategy, which resulted in the CHP plants being used for peaking purposes only, undermined their
commercial viability, and hence the outcome of the project.

2. Covenants should be used if the commitment of the client is confirmed and the Bank has
the capacity to act in the event of non-compliance. For the project in question, a revision of
electricity tariffs was essential to the success of the operation. However, the upfront commitment of
the Government was less definite that appeared at the outset. When the tariff covenant was
breached, the Bank had no real recourse and had to accept the non-compliance despite the
negative impact on the project’s outcome.

3. Given the complexity of energy transition, the Mid-Term Review can play a critical role in
providing the opportunity for a restructuring to adjust the design: In the case of the project in
question, country and sector priorities changed, necessitating a more fundamental restructuring of
the operation – in terms of design and objectives - than actually took place, for the project to
produce a satisfactory outcome.

4. Clarity is needed on the role of gas in the overall energy strategy of a country, when
financing a project based on gas utilization. Usage of gas in the power sector of countries
previously dependent on coal has seen challenges as a result of volatility in price of gas, at a time
when reduced costs of renewable energy and battery storage. This has made gas power less viable
as base load for power plants, resulting in gas power being utilized only as peaking units to stabilize
the grid. Against this background, there is an urgent need for both the provincial and central


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Shanxi Gas Utilization (P133531)



governments in China to review and clarify their energy sector strategic priorities as regards the use
of gas, going forward.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well written, evidence-based and internally consistent, and provides a fair amount of detail
on the changes that took place during implementation of the project, as well as on safeguards and fiduciary
aspects. The achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed, as is the Risk to Development Outcomes and
Monitoring & Evaluation. The overall lessons arising from the performance of the project appear to be relevant,
but could however have been more comprehensive in their scope.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
