     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023066

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P146827                                    LR-Youth Opportunities Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56210,TF-A9505                         31-Dec-2020                                          13,567,668.97

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Nov-2015                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,000,000.00                                    3,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             13,447,685.83                                    3,500,000.00

 Actual                                         13,567,668.97                                    3,500,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. iii) and the Financing Agreement of February 14, 2016
   (p.5) the objective of the project was “to improve access to income generation opportunities for targeted youth
   and strengthen the government's capacity to implement its cash transfer program”.

   When the project was restructured in April 2020, the objective was revised to “improve access to income
   generation opportunities for targeted youth”.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Apr-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Pre-Employment Social Support and Household Enterprises for Urban Youth
   (appraisal estimate US$3.2 million, actual US$3.1 million): This component was to finance three sub-
   components:

   Subcomponent 1A: Pre-employment Social Support: This sub-component was to finance activities
   supporting the development of noncognitive skills and positive attitudes toward work among youth, through
   intensive pre-employment and psychosocial support, as well as psychosocial support to Ebola (EVD)-
   affected youth and survivors.

   Subcomponent 1B: Household Enterprises: This sub-component was to finance activities to increase labor
   productivity of youth working in household enterprises and to facilitate the entry of youth into household
   enterprises.

   Subcomponent 1C: Capacity and Systems Building: This sub-component was to finance activities to build
   capacity and systems for key stakeholders involved in the implementation of the project at both central and
   local levels.

   When the project was restructured in April 2020, the name of component 1 was changed to “Pre-
   Employment Social Support (PESS) and Small Business Support (SBS)”.

   Component 2: Productive Public Works and Life Skills Support: (appraisal estimate US$6.53 million,
   actual US$7.31 million): This component was to finance two sub-components:

   Subcomponent 2A: Productive Public Works and Life Skills Support: This sub-component was to finance
   the provision of productive public works opportunities and life skills training for eligible youth.

   Subcomponent 2B: Capacity and Systems: This sub-component was to finance the building of capacity and
   systems under the Libera Agency for Community Empowerment (LACE) for the implementation of
   household enterprise support, productive public works, and life skills training.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



  When the project was restructured in April 2020, the name of component 2 was changed to “Community
  Livelihood & Agriculture Support (CLAS)”.

  Component 3: Capacity Building for Cash Transfer Program (appraisal estimate US$1.2 million,
  actual US$185,000): This component was to finance capacity building within the Ministry of Gender,
  Children and Social Protection (MGSCP). The aim was i) set minimum standards of operations in the
  modalities of identifying, targeting, and delivering cash transfers; ii) update project operational procedures
  and guidelines; iii) develop coordination mechanisms and ensure synergies in the implementation of this
  subcomponent; and iv) provide knowledge exchange events at all government levels and international study
  tours.

  When the project was restructured in April 2020, Component 3 was dropped since it was no longer needed
  to achieve the revised PDO. The remaining funds were reallocated to other components.

  Component 4: Project implementation and coordination (appraisal estimate US$2.57 million, actual
  US$3.0 million): This component was to finance three subcomponents:

  Subcomponent 4A: This subcomponent was to finance project implementation and coordination by the
  Ministry of Youth and Sports (MYS).

  Subcomponent 4B: This subcomponent was to finance the project implementation and coordination by the
  Liberian Agency for Community Empowerment (LACE).

  Subcomponent 4C: This subcomponent was to finance project implementation and coordination by the
  Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (MGCSP).

  When the project was restructured in April 2020, subcomponent 4C was dropped since it was no longer
  needed to achieve the revised PDO. The remaining funds were reallocated to other components.

  Due to extremely high inflation at the Mid-Term Review (MTR) in April 2019 (27 percent) the project
  required Additional Financing (AF) to protect livelihoods of beneficiaries under component 2 and address a
  funding gap under component 4.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$13.50 million. Actual cost was US$13.56 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$10.0 million which completely
  disbursed and a Trust Fund grant in the amount of US$3.5 million which also completely disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any financial contributions.

  Dates: The project was restructured five times:

        On March 29, 2019, the project was restructured to receive AF in the amount of US$3.5 million to
         cover increases in operations cost and cost overrun due to a modification in design which had not



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



            been anticipated during project appraisal due to a significant increase in inflation (from 8-10 percent
            in 2014/15 to 24 percent in 2018).
           On April 7, 2020, the project was restructured to: i) revise the PDOs and the Results Framework to
            exclude the objective and indicators relating to capacity building for cash transfers and read as “to
            improve access to income generation opportunities for targeted youth”; ii) modify selected PDO
            indicators, reduce outcome targets for selected indicators and add new indicators to better measure
            and monitor activities under PPW; iii) extend the project closing date from December 31, 2020, to
            June 30, 2021 to allow for accommodating the nearly one-year effectiveness delay; iv) change the
            titles of Components 1 and 2 to reflect properly activities and objectives of these components; and v)
            reallocate funds between components.
           On July 7, 2020, the project was restructured to change the loan closing date of the Sida financed
            RETF (TF0A9505), from December 30, 2020, to June 31, 2021, in line with the new project closing
            date.
           On December 23, 2020, the project was restructured to: i) adjust implementation parameters of
            project components to align them with COVID-19 realities; ii) adapt the Results Framework to reflect
            the changes in implementation of the various project components; iii) make reallocations between
            disbursement categories.
           On June 25, 2021, the project was restructured to change the closing date from June 30, 2021, to
            September 30, 2021, to allow the Project Management Team (PMT) to have ample time to work with
            the payment service provider to address the liquidity constraint which has made it difficult to
            disburse final labor subsidy payments to 1,372 CLAS beneficiaries living in hard to reach rural.
            communities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) before the Ebola outbreak in mid-2014, Liberia had experienced substantial
growth since the end of the fourteen-year conflict in 2003. The service and commerce sectors, including
construction, retailing, and hospitality, were the leading contributors to the economy, while agriculture
remained the single largest source of employment in the country. Iron ore mining and other concessional
sectors, such as palm and rubber production, also contributed to GDP growth. Liberia had also attracted
reinvestments to its traditional sectors in forestry, rubber, and mining.

However, despite these achievements, high levels of poverty and underemployment, combined with low
human capital, persisted and presented significant challenges. Around 48 percent of households were
classified as being in extreme poverty and about 85 percent of the active work force had only vulnerable
employment, without access to a pension, insurance policies, health benefits, or job security. At the time of
appraisal, out of the total labor force, the formal sector employed only 17 percent, while the informal sector,
characterized by significant underemployment, low productivity, and low wages, employed 78.5 percent.

The Ebola crisis had, in addition to the toll on human lives and suffering, an economic impact in regard to
forgone outputs, higher fiscal deficits, rising prices, lower real household incomes, disruption to education




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



               and training activities, reduction in demand for goods and services as well as trauma/psychosocial impacts
               of the crisis, and escalation of tensions given increased economic vulnerability.

               Furthermore, Liberia experienced many years of conflict until 2003, negatively affecting youth opportunities
               and behavior. These youth were exposed to a wide range of traumatic experiences, including forced
               recruitment into armed groups, violence, and victimization, in addition to the daily stresses of poverty and
               insecurity. In addition to unresolved trauma, other psychosocial impacts included poor work ethics, poor
               sexual and reproductive health choices, including high rates of teenage pregnancy and related caretaking
               burdens of female and male youth. These constraints affected the youth’s ability to communicate and
               collaborate effectively in a work environment.

               The government of Liberia requested the Bank’s support for addressing the youth employment needs and
               for strengthening the country’s safety net system and its ability to respond to shocks as well as increase the
               resilience of poor households that were adversely affected by the Ebola outbreak.

               The project supported Liberia’s National Government Strategy-Pro-Poor Agenda for Development and
               Prosperity (PADP) (2018-2023), the second in the series of five-year National Development Plans under the
               Libera Vision 2030 framework. In particular, the project supported Pillar I (Power to the People) and Pillar II
               (Economy and Job), and Pillar IV (Governance and Transparency).

               At appraisal, the objective of the project was in line with Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
               Liberia (FY2013-17) which aimed at increasing resilience of poor and vulnerable households, focusing on
               youth underemployment, in particular, as a conflict driver. The objective of the project was also aligned with
               the Bank’s flagship report on “Youth Employment in Sub-Saharan Africa” (2014) and the Bank’s Africa
               Social Protection Strategy (2012-2022) promoting development of equitable, fiscally sustainable, and
               scalable social protection systems.

               The objectives were also consistent with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               (FY19-24) under Pillar II (Building Human Capital to Seize New Economic Opportunities) objective 5
               (Improved earning opportunities for youth and women). Also, the CPF focuses on improving self-
               employment outcomes by supporting entrepreneurs’ access to capital, markets, and economic
               opportunities. In addition, the project was in line with the CPF’s long-term goals to create demand-driven
               skills-training platforms to scale up and integrate into new projects.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to income generation opportunities for targeted youth

                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)




Rationale
Theory of Change:

The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as providing pre-employment trainings,
and psychological support trainings for the youth, on the job and vocational trainings as well as preparing new
land for cultivation and providing agricultural inputs and agricultural processing were to result in the above
stated objective.

Outputs:

      Recruited 2000 youth ages 15—17 who received pre-employment social support under the project.
      Delivered a program of pre-employment skills training and psychosocial support to at-risk or
         vulnerable youth;
      Provided orientation workshops to communicate to the youth the objectives and expected outcomes of
         the program (basic business management skills, financial literacy and life skills needed for successful
         engagement and operation in household enterprises).
        Facilitated youth groups on the development of their own subproject proposals.
        520 targeted youth completed pre-employment social support training under the project, not achieving
         the original target of 2,000 youth.
        22 percent of targeted urban youth completed apprenticeships or vocational skills training, not
         achieving the original target of 70 percent.
        10,000 targeted rural youth completed life skills training under the project, achieving the target of
         10,000 youth.
        5,132 hectares were cultivated with support from the project, achieving the target of 5,000 hectares.
        All of the urban and rural Community Oversights Committees were active, achieving the target of 80
         percent.
        The project benefitted 14,108 beneficiaries, not achieving the target of 15,000 beneficiaries. Of these
         beneficiaries, 51 percent were female, achieving the target of 50 percent being female.
        10,722 beneficiaries benefitted from safety nets programs, achieving the target of 10,000
         beneficiaries.
        3,386 beneficiaries benefitted from labor market programs, not achieving the original target of 5,000
         beneficiaries.

Outcomes:

      3,289 targeted urban youth were operating small business with support from the project, exceeding
       the original target of 3,000 youth.
      92 percent of household enterprises initiated or expanded by targeted urban, that were supported by
       the project, were operational for more than six months, achieving the original target of 75 percent.
      The average annual earnings of targeted rural youth in Community Livelihood and Agriculture Support
       was US$459, achieving the original target of US$300.
      1,840,000 person-days in public works were provided by the project, not achieving the target of 2
       million person-days.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve access to income generating opportunities for targeted youth

Revised Rationale
The project’s theory of change did not change for this objective when the PDO was restructured.

Outputs (in addition to the outputs stated above)

      520 targeted youth completed pre-employment social support training under the project, achieving the
       revised target of 520 youth.
      22 percent of targeted urban youth completed apprenticeships or vocational skills training, not
       achieving but close to the revised target of 23 percent.

Outcomes

      3,289 targeted urban youth were operating small business with support from the project, not achieving
         but close to the revised target of 3,400 youth.
        3,386 beneficiaries benefitted from labor market programs, not achieving but close to the revised
         target of 3,400 beneficiaries.
        96 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied with project interventions, exceeding the target of 70
         percent.
        The average annual earnings of targeted rural youth in Community Livelihood and Agriculture Support
         was US$459, achieving the target of US$450.
        An Impact Evaluation (IE) showed that 59 percent of beneficiaries of the Small Business Support
         (SBS) round 1 reported at least one of the paid activities they participated in was through self-
         employment, compared to 50 percent for non-beneficiaries in the control group. Also, program
         beneficiaries experienced a 16 percentage points increase in rates of self-employment, on average,
         compared to the control group. Program beneficiaries were also 9.3 percentage points more likely to
         have their main paid employment activity be in self-employment, working in average an additional 4.6
         hours per week in self-employment activities compared to individuals in the control group.
         Beneficiaries were also working an average of 7.6 hours more per week in paid employment than non-
         beneficiaries.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



                              To strengthen the government’s capacity to implement its cash transfer program

                              Rationale
                              Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as improving
                              operational procedures as well as improving standards for targeting and payments in cash transfers were to
                              result in the above stated objective.

                              Outputs:

                                    Supported the establishment of register and target mechanisms for a future full-fledged system.
                                    Developed technical papers and terms of references. The ICR did not state for what activities.
                                    Created the Liberia Household Social Registry (LHSR) and Integrated Management Information
                                     System (MIS) architecture.
                                    Renovation and furnishing of space to host the LHSR at the Ministry of Gender, Children, and Social
                                     Protection to enable the physical establishment of the registry.

                              Outcomes:

                                    The average share of beneficiary households receiving bi-monthly cash transfers before or on the
                                     15th of the proceeding months was zero, not achieving the target of 70 percent.



                              Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective (with original targets) was Substantial and achievement of the second
                            objective was Modest.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale



                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



  Achievement of the first objective was Substantial after the restructuring. The second objective was dropped
  during the restructuring.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency:

The PAD (p. 24) conducted a traditional Economic analysis. Approximately 90 percent of YOP funds were to
finance Components 1 and 2 which constituted the main activities targeted to improving access to income
generation opportunities among youth. Other benefits related to establishing the basic social safety net system
were to be expected in the long term and were not easily quantifiable.

The PAD’s analysis of the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) focused on the benefits to increased earnings over
the lifetime of youth that participate in the program, as well as immediate consumption gains realized in the first
year of inclusion due to the grants and wages. The analysis considered two scenarios: i) the program was
considered to be effective at increasing the initial earnings of the youth by 10 percent and maintaining this
increase in earnings but not increasing the rate of earnings growth; and ii) the program was considered to be
effective at improving the earnings growth of the youth by 2 percent per year over their lifetime. Under the
scenario of a level increase of earnings by 10 percent, the ERR for pre-employment support was 8 percent, 2
percent for household enterprise grants and support, and 3.5 percent for productive public works. Under the
scenario of a boost to earnings growth of 2 percent, the ERR increases to 15 percent, 9 percent and 10 percent
respectively. This analysis indicated that the project was a worthwhile investment.

The ICR did not repeat the economic analysis that was conducted at appraisal by using information available at
the time of closing.

Operational Efficiency:

The original implementation period was extended by nine months from December 31, 2020, to September 30,
202, to allow for the completion of activities, which had been delayed due to a delay in the project becoming
effective and the Covid-19 pandemic. During the MTR, the Bank team identified cost underruns (component 3)
and overruns (component 4) across different components that were reallocated during the restructuring.

According to the ICR (p. 24) the project experienced high implementation costs due to its wide coverage of all
15 counties resulting in high costs of service provision and monitoring of activities. Furthermore, the original
project budget had underestimated staffing costs for the five-year implementation period. During the MTR, the
complex project design and national coverage were identified as major cost drivers. The ICR (p. 28) stated that
the project restructuring happened one year later than planned due to the PMT taking longer than expected
account for the finances under component 3 since disbursement was paused under that component,




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



key consultants had to be let go and goods and services had to be reduced to allow for an increase in the
support to beneficiaries.

Taking everything together, the project’s overall efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original PDO: Relevance of the objective was High. Efficacy under the original objective was Substantial as well
as Efficiency resulting in an outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

Revised PDO: Relevance of the objective was High. Efficacy under the revised objective was Substantial.
Efficiency was Modest, resulting in an outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

As a result, the project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcome are limited due to these two factors:

Government commitment: The project team signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
Ministries of Agriculture and Internal Affairs and the Liberia Anti-corruption Commission for the integration of
the project activities in their program or activities indicating government commitment. Also, the Bank
continues to stay engaged in the area through two projects, the Recovery of Economic Activity for Liberian
Informal Sector Employment (REALISE) (financing amount US$10.0 million) which aims to increase access

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



to income earning opportunities for the vulnerable in the informal sector in response to the COVID-19 crisis
in Liberia and the Liberia Social Safety Nets Project (LSSNP) (financing amount US$ 18.9) which aims to
establish the key building blocks of a basic national safety net delivery system and provide income support to
households who are both extremely poor and food insecure.

Stakeholder ownership: Under the Community Livelihood and Agriculture Support (CLAS) component,
beneficiary youth groups established Village Saving Loan Associations (VSLA) to improve the group’s
stability and continue farming activities, as well as access to secured loans. These VSLAs are now providing
beneficiary youth groups with access to secure loans for household needs and as credit unions for
participating communities




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p.16) the project was built on lessons learned from implementing youth
  employment programs in Liberia. These lessons included: i) Community Driven Development (CDD) can
  be an effective tool for empowering communities, enhancing social service delivery and contributing to
  building local institutions; ii) stakeholder and donor coordination is essential in all development activities
  in a post-conflict context, especially during the transition from relief to development phase where priorities
  need to be clearly identified and sequenced; iii) Paying attention to fiduciary and project management
  skills in a weak post-conflict set-up is a critical factor; iv) Use of clear and transparent criteria for the
  selection of beneficiaries is key as it provides coverage against possible political interventions; v)
  Introducing pre-employment support and life skills alongside technical skills is key to project
  implementation; and vi) integrating a robust control and accountability framework in the design and
  implementation process to ensure transparency and accountability and prevent corruption is important.

  According to the PAD (p. 23) the Bank team identified relevant risks, the following were rated as
  Substantial: i) inadequate capacity and accountability mechanism and lack of clarity around functional
  assignments and responsibilities; ii) limited financial management and procurement capacity; iii) basic
  monitoring and management systems, and widely varied capacity at the national and county levels; iv)
  limited qualified service providers and innovative training providers in Liberia; v) land acquisition for
  project negatively impacting local communities; and vi) spread of Ebola to staff and project beneficiaries.

  The Bank mitigated these risks by strengthening local fiduciary and management skills, supporting the
  continued development of an IT-based Management Information System (MIS), undertaking Economic
  and Sector Work (ESW) to determine the capacity of skills development service providers as well as
  putting health safety protocols in place to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus. These mitigation efforts
  were adequate.

  The project’s Results Framework and M&E preparatory arrangements were adequate overall (see section
  9a for more details).

  The project was relatively complex and included three implementing agencies with limited capacity, the
  Ministry of Youth & Sports (MYS), the Libera Agency for Community Empowerment (LACE), and the
  Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (MGCSP). Also, the PAD was not sufficiently clear in

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



  stating that the second part of the objective (to strengthen the government’s capacity to implement its
  youth cash transfer program) was designed as a temporary transition arrangement until the Bank’s new
  Libera Social Safety Net Project was implemented. Furthermore, effectiveness was delayed by 10
  months due to the Ebola pandemic.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the Bank team (September, 29, 2022) the Bank conducted 15 supervision missions on a
 regular basis and filed 11 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) throughout implementation.

 The Bank restructured the project five times and obtained AF to bridge the financing gap resulting from
 high inflation. According to the ICR (p. 28) the main financing was supposed to happen at the time of the
 Mid-Term Review (MTR) but ended up taking place a year later since the PMT took longer than expected
 to finalize information that was needed for the restructuring. Also, a new government had come in place a
 year earlier and it took time to reach consensus for staff lay-offs.

 The project did not encounter any financial management or procurement related implementation issues
 (see section 10b for more details).

 Also, the Bank team provided adequate Aide Memoires, and Implementation Progress Reports that
 allowed Bank management to stay informed.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s original and revised objectives were clearly stated. The project’s theory of change and how
 project activities and outputs were to result in intended intermediate outcomes was sound and adequately
 reflected in the Results Framework. The selected indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable, relevant
 and all had targets. Also, the indicators were adequate for capturing the contribution of the project activities
 towards achieving the objective. However, PDO indicator 1 (targeted youth operating small business with
 support from the project) and Intermediate Outcome Indicator 1 (Youth receiving start-up grants) seemed to
 have measured the same outcome.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



 The design of the project-related M&E linked to an Impact Evaluation (IE). According to the PAD (p. 21) the
 Ministry of Youth and Sports (MYS) was responsible for establishing an M&E system for this project in
 particular, as well as the entire youth sector in general. The IE included a baseline survey (year 1) and two
 follow-up surveys (years 3 and 5).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Management Team (PMT) included an M&E officer who was responsible for conducting ad-
  hoc monitoring visits to county teams to identify shortcomings and provide support for improvement on a
  regular basis. In addition, M&E officers of each implementing agency were responsible for monitoring
  project activities that were implemented by county offices. The ICR (p. 29) stated that independent
  parties were contracted to conduct targeted studies such as specific evaluations and midterm and
  internal project completion evaluations as well as surveys when needed.

  The project’s Results Framework was restructured twice to reflect the change in the PDO and changes in
  project components. Nine months before project closure the targets for two intermediate outcome
  indicators (“targeted urban youth completing pre-employment social support training under the project”
  and “share of targeted urban youth completing apprenticeships on vocational skills training”) were
  reduced. According to the Bank team (September 29, 2022) the actual need for indicator revisions was
  identified during the MTR but was formalized only one year later due to political challenges.

  According to the Bank team (September 29, 2022) indicators were regularly measured and reported and
  were found to be reliable and of good quality.




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 30) the project’s M&E provided information on implementation progress and
  bottlenecks, which allowed for informed decision making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). The project prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Also, according to the ICR
   (p. 30) the project conducted community consultation for voluntary land donation to avoid relocation.

   The project also developed a Grievance Redress System (GRS). The ICR (p. 31) stated that during field
   visits the Bank team noticed that the toll free number for lodging grievances and complaints was only

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



  reachable through one telecom provider and not accessible in some communities. The Bank team asked
  the project management team to address this issue. Due to this shortcoming, the project’s safeguard
  performance was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory. The ICR did not state if this issue was resolved
  by the time the project closed.

  The project also triggered the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and
  prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The Bank team evaluated the
  project’s compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies during the MTR and found that existing safeguard
  procedures and practices were broadly consistent with the Bank’s safeguard policies and instruments. The
  overall safeguards rating recorded in the operations portal was Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  The Project Financial Management Unit at the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (MFDP) was
  responsible for the project’s Financial Management (FM).

  According to the ICR (p. 31) the independent General Auditing Commission (GAC) conducted audits on
  Terms of References, which were accepted by the Bank and the government. Also, the GAC performed an
  annual audit at the end of each government fiscal year. At the MTR, the Bank raised concerns regarding
  slow disbursement and provided recommendations, which the project team addressed.

  According to the Bank team (September 29, 2022) all audit reports were satisfactory to the Bank and there
  were no qualified opinions expressed in the project’s audit reports at any time during implementation.

  The ICR (p. 32) stated that due to delays in submitting the Audit Recommendation Action Plans, the
  project’s FM rating at project closer was Moderately Satisfactory.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 32) the project’s procurement performance was mostly in the Satisfactory range
  except between June 2019 and January 2020 when it was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to slow
  implementation of planned procurement activities. This obstacle was addressed by the Bank providing
  more support resulting in the project’s procurement performance being rated Moderately Satisfactory again
  in January 2020. The ICR stated that the project was able to build capacity for using the Bank’s Systematic
  Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system and was able to solve all STEP related issues.

  When the project closed, procurement was rated Satisfactory and all agreed procurement activities had
  been completed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



   According to the ICR (p. 26) the project’s introduction of mobile payments and phones to beneficiaries
   exposed them to digital financial services and increased their chance of connecting digitally. Also,
   beneficiaries stated that mobile money payments made them feel empowered since they could choose to
   cash out the money whenever was convenient to them and owning a mobile phone allowed them to
   connect with people outside their community. Lessons from the project’s successful transition to mobile
   payments paved the way for full transition of the LSSNP’s Social Cash Transfer Program to mobile money
   payments for all beneficiaries.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 34-35) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        Engaging with local communities ensures continuous project support and community
         ownership. This project used various communication tools, including text messaging, and
         radio talk shows to involve local communities resulting in community members understanding
         their roles and providing free land for youth groups to cultivate.
        Using direct payments of grants to beneficiaries through mobile money for
         procurement of farm inputs allows for greater local ownership. In this project, the PMT
         transferred the full beneficiary amount to targeted youth groups who carried out purchases of
         farm inputs with the support of community facilitators. This procurement method also created
         a market for local community members and supported the provision of materials of adequate
         quality to project communities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and was sufficiently
outcome driven. The ICR did not conduct a traditional economic analysis, lacked conciseness and did not state
which of the planned outputs were delivered. Also, the lessons learned largely provided information on
implementation aspects. The ICR did not apply the split rating correctly, as the ICR is expected to assess
achievements across the entire project duration. The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial but only marginally
so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
