     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Improving employability (P143995)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023063

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P143995                                    BO Improving employability

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54610                                  31-Dec-2020                                          7,090,652.86

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-May-2014                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              8,925,005.88                                             0.00

 Actual                                          7,090,652.86                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Improving Employability and Labor Income of Youth Project
   (IELIYP) as set out on page 6 of the Grant Agreement was to improve employability and labor income of poor
   youth by supporting the expansion of the Skills Development Program in Selected Cities. The PDO in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD) had the same formulation.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Improving employability (P143995)



   The Skills Development Program referred to in the PDO is a national public employment program for youth
   that consists of vocational in-class training coupled with internships in private and public sector firms.

   There were four key indicators supported by four intermediate indicators to measure progress towards
   achievement of the PDO.

   “Selected cities” were the nine departmental capital cities (Trinidad, Sucre, Cochabamba, La Paz, Oruro,
   Cobija, Potosi, Santa Cruz, and Tarija), the City of El Alto, and five intermediate cities with more than 50,000
   inhabitants; a total of 15 cities.

   For the purposes of this evaluation, efficacy will be assessed separately for [improved] employability of poor
   youth and [improved] labor income of poor youth. The phrase “…by supporting the expansion of the Skills
   Development Program in Selected Cities” denotes an intermediate outcome generated by outputs from
   project activities and considered as part of the Results Chain.

   A split rating will be applied to the evaluation to reflect a reduction in the scope of the project, including its
   geographic coverage.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving and Expanding the Skills Development Program (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$15.8 million; actual cost US$5.39 million). The component had three sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Improving and expanding the Mi Primer Empleo Digno Program (MPED), a skills
   development program providing vocational in-class training coupled with internships in private and public
   sector firms for medium and auxiliary level technical jobs. MPED stipends were available for all eligible
   MPED beneficiaries to finance the training.

   Sub-component 1.2: Implementing a pilot skills training and technical assistance program (MESTTA) for
   micro-entrepreneurs in the selected cities by designing and implementing a training program to
   enhance inter alia math, language, communications, ICT knowledge and entrepreneurial skills; providing
   technical assistance to improve and strengthen entrepreneurs’ skills in specific areas as needed, and
   support the development of business plans and access to finance, including award of stipends.

   Sub-component 1.3: Providing on a pilot basis remedial secondary education in selected cities as a second
   chance at formal education for poor youth to improve their access to jobs. Stipends were available for
   eligible students who had previously completed at least primary education.


                                                                                                          Page 2 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BO Improving employability (P143995)



Component 2: Strengthening the implementation arrangements to administer, monitor and evaluate
skills development programs (estimated cost at appraisal US$5.7 million; actual cost US$1.7
million). The component had two sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening the implementation arrangements and the institutional capacity of the
Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Prevision (Ministerio de Trabajo, Empleo y Prevision Social,
MTEPS) to administer and coordinate the Skills Development Programs. This was to be achieved by
providing technical assistance support for the design and implementation of management information
systems to promote skills development programs. This included the provision of ICT equipment, training for
MTEPS staff to operate and maintain the systems, and by designing and implementing related information
and communications strategies.

Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the institutional capacity of the Economic and Social Policy Analysis
Unit (Unidad de Analisis de Politicas Sociales y Economicas, UDAPE) in the Ministry of Development
Planning (MDP) to improve the evaluation of the Skills Development Programs. The subcomponent
included support for mid-term process evaluations of the implementation of the skills development programs
to identify and rectify problems; and for monitoring of program results through beneficiary surveys, an
impact evaluation of the micro-entrepreneurs’ program, and technical assistance to improve UDAPE’s
financial management and procurement capacity.

Significant Changes During Implementation

Two level 2 restructurings were undertaken, one in 2017 and another in 2019.

The first restructuring was motivated by slow project startup and implementation – at end-December
2017, three years after project approval, only 2 percent of the Grant had been disbursed; and by a
reorientation of education policy. Activities were modified for both project components:

Project management was shifted from the two ministries initially involved (Labor, Education) to MDP. This
addressed the significant delays that had occurred in the early stages of project implementation, and it also
changed the focus of the project – away from in-class vocational training towards workplace training
(internships, job insertion) and skills training to enhance employability – items that better addressed
immediate job market needs. Project activities were modified accordingly:

      Under component 1, sub-component 1.1 was revised to emphasize workplace training (internships,
       on-the-job training) and skills training as means to facilitate access to formal employment. Sub-
       components 1.2 (support to micro-entrepreneurs) and 1.3 (remedial education) were dropped as not
       fitting into the National Employment Plan (NEP).
      At the same time, the results framework was revised:
              o With the elimination of sub-component 1.2 and 1.3, the relevant indicators were also
                 eliminated. The indicator for sub-component 1.2 (average labor earnings of youth
                 entrepreneurs) was replaced by an indicator to measure the share of registered vacancies
                 filled by project beneficiaries, mainly relevant to sub-component 1.1.

 Under component 2, mid-term process evaluations were dropped.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Improving employability (P143995)



         The closing date was postponed by a year due to those early delays, in particular a year-long delay
          in effectiveness due to low government priority following Board approval (ICR, p 26); as well as slow
          start-up of key activities due to an inexperienced implementation team.

   The second restructuring sought increased flexibility in beneficiaries’ access to training and introduced
   gender considerations:

         Skills training was delinked from participation in subsidized on-the-job training, as private firms were
          reluctant to offer jobs to registered youth, making it difficult to sequence programs.
         Packages of interventions (for instance, training and internships, or specific training and on-the-job
          training) replaced one-off interventions. Subsidies for on-the-job training were differentiated for men
          and women to facilitate increased women participation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. Total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$21.50 million. The actual cost at Closing
   was US$7.09 million. The lower actual amount mainly reflects a drop in spending on Component 1
   “Improving and Expanding the Skills Development Program”, with only 35 percent of the approved amount
   for that Component being disbursed; and a drop in spending on Component 2 “Strengthening the
   Implementation Arrangements to Administer, Monitor and Evaluate the Skills Development Program”, with
   66 percent of the approved amount for that Component being disbursed.

   Financing. The project was financed with a US$20 million IDA Credit of which US$7.09 million was
   disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 14, 2014, and became effective on September 29, 2015. The
   16-month delay in effectiveness reflects the low priority given to the project by the government in place at
   the time of Board approval. The original closing date, December 31, 2020, was extended to December 31,
   2021, at which time the project closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is aligned with country needs and government policy at the level of youth employment, and it
accords with Bank strategy in Bolivia.

At project start-up, almost a quarter of Bolivian youths (men and women) were neither employed or in
school; and of those who were, their labor force participation was characterized by high levels of informal
and non-salaried employment. Due to low skills, this group, mostly belonging to poor families, had
significantly lower labor incomes than what non-poor youth were earning. For the past ten to twelve years,
the lack of access of young workers to well-paying jobs or to on-the-job training has been a central concern

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BO Improving employability (P143995)



               of the government at central as well as local levels. This has in particular been the case for poor youth who
               lack basic and technical skills or labor market experience. While many of them may have jobs, their lack of
               skills limits their access to formal jobs and better earnings.

               Against that background, the Bolivian government in 2009 launched an employment services mechanism
               (servicio plurinacional de empleo, SPE) providing intermediation and counseling services, and started
               seeking ways of expanding skills development programs. The project under review follows on and
               continues the support provided under a previous Bank project – Investment in Children and Youth Project
               (P101084). It is also aligned with research and best practice for youth skills development reflected in the
               Bank’s World Development Report for 2013 on jobs. The Project is consistent with the latest World Bank
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY16-FY20 (a new one is under preparation), where it responds to
               the first of two pillars guiding World Bank engagement – the promotion of broad-based and inclusive
               growth. Within that pillar, Objective 3 aims at improving income generation.

               While the project was relevant to the needs of national youth, it did not generate the expected response
               from private sector companies. The ICR (ICR, page 24) notes that, while the project carried out
               consultations with the private sector to design interventions that would better meet company needs,
               companies still were reluctant to participate in implementation: they were just not interested in
               training/contracting people without skills or experience.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve employability of poor youth in selected cities

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change held that improved employability of poor youth was to be achieved by improving and
                             expanding the MPED skills development program in the selected cities through the provision of (i) training for
                             medium and auxiliary level technicians; and (ii) MPED stipends for training participants. These outputs would
                             plausibly contribute to improving employability and labor income of poor youth, as measured by increased in
                             beneficiaries’ employment rate and labor income.

                             Outputs and intermediate results

                                        The number of youths who benefited from the project was 5,626, short of the original target of target of
                                         14,900.
                                        The number of cities covered by the program increased from 6 to 9, short of the original target of 15.

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO Improving employability (P143995)




      The number of youths beneficiaries who completed skills certification was zero, not achieving the
       original target of 6,560.
      The number of youths who benefited from micro-entrepreneurs’ skills training and technical assistance
       program (MESTTA) was zero, not achieving the original target of 2,000. This indicator was dropped
       with the 2017 restructuring that eliminated sub-component 1.2.
      The number of youths who completed secondary education with project support was zero, short of the
       original target of 2,240. This indicator was dropped with the 2017 restructuring that eliminated sub-
       component 1.3.

Outcomes

The share of beneficiaries with jobs with at least a minimum salary one year after completing participation in
the project was 60 percent, exceeding the original target of 40 percent. According to an impact evaluation,
youth who benefited from the project had a higher chance of obtaining employment than youth in a control
group. Using a difference in difference method, the evaluation found that that participating in the project
contributed to a 20-percentage point increase in employment rate. Although the project met its placement rate
target, this was achieved for a smaller population than originally planned (5,262 vs. 14,900). For this reason,
the overall efficacy rating for this objective is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve employability of poor youth in selected cities

Revised Rationale
The project maintained the same objective – to improve the employability of participating poor youth, albeit
within a smaller geographic area (from 15 to 7 cities) and with a lower target population (from 14,900 to
6,500).

Outputs and intermediate results

      The number of youths who benefited from the project was 5,626, short of the revised target of 6,500.
      The number of cities covered by the program increased from 6 to 9, exceeding the revised target of 7.
      The number of youths who received on-the-job training was 4,368, exceeding the target of 4,000. This
       indicator was introduced at the 2017 restructuring.
      The number of youths who participated in internships was 1,052, short the target of 1,500. This
       indicator was introduced at the 2017 restructuring.
      The number of youths who completed the employability training course was 877, short of the target of
       target of 6,500. This indicator was introduced at the 2017 restructuring. The 2019 restructuring revised
       the target downwards to 3,500. The ICR notes that the were no formal assessment of the training
       outcomes (para. 41).


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO Improving employability (P143995)




      The share of youths who completed the on-the-job training and / or internship was 43 percent, short of
       the target of 60 percent. This indicator was introduced at the 2019 restructuring.

Outcomes

The share of beneficiaries having jobs with at least a minimum salary one year after completing participation
in the project was 60 percent, exceeding the revised target of 50 percent.

The percentage of employment vacancies registered during the project that are filled with a project
beneficiary was 100 percent, exceeding the 50 percent target. This indicator was introduced at the 2017
restructuring.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve labor income of poor youth in selected cities

Rationale
The Theory of change can be seen under Objective 1.

Outputs and intermediate results

See outputs and intermediate results reported above for Objective 1 (under original outcome targets and
intermediate results indicators).

Outcome

Youth who benefited from the project had, on average, monthly labor income that was 10 percent higher than
youth in a control group. This result fell short from the 20 percent target and was achieved for 5,626 youth,
short of the original target of target of 14,900.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve labor income of poor youth

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BO Improving employability (P143995)



                              The project maintained the same objective – to improve the labor income of poor youth, albeit within a smaller
                              geographic area (from 15 to 7 cities) and with a lower target population (from 14,900 to 6,500).

                              Outputs and intermediate results

                              See outputs and intermediate results reported above for Objective 1 (under revised outcome targets and
                              intermediate results indicators).

                              Outcomes

                              Youth who benefited from the project had, on average, monthly labor income that was 10 percent higher than
                              youth in a control group. This result fell short from the 20 percent target and was achieved for 5,626 youth,
                              short of the revised target of 6,500.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The two objectives to improve employability and labor income of poor youth were partly achieved. The
                            achievements are consistent with a modest efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The objective to improve employability of poor youth was almost fully achieved while the objective to improve
                            labor income of poor youth was partly achieved. The achievements are consistent with modest efficacy
                            rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The ICR did not include a quantitative economic analysis in the absence of sufficient data at the time of the
   Review. However, the PAD did undertake a benefit-cost analysis for sub-components 1.1 and 1.3. The internal

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO Improving employability (P143995)



rate of return for the former was estimated at 13.5 percent and 9.8 percent for the latter. The assumptions
underlying the calculations were detailed in the PAD and are considered reasonable.

There were shortcomings in implementation efficiency early on in the project, as project effectiveness
was delayed, and the project, once effective, experienced slow implementation resulting in its first
restructuring. Underlying factors were uncertain government commitment (according to the ICR) and initially
weak organizational arrangements. These factors were reflected in a low disbursement rate (2 percent of
project funds) during the first three years of implementation. Later, social unrest elated to elections in 2019 and
the negative effects of Covid 19 also reduced project efficiency.

The ICR reviewed unit costs of program delivery (ICR, pages 21 and 22), finding that the unit cost of job
insertions at US$1,161 compared well with similar programs in other countries at similar levels of development
and ranging between US$1,000 to US$2,000. Unit costs of training programs were low at US$73 and US$62,
respectively, for soft skills and technical programs. At US$256, the ICR notes that the cost of internship
programs was relatively high.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  13.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

In accordance with OPCS/IEG guidelines for restructured projects, the final Outcome rating is determined by the
ratings for the original project and the restructured project, weighted by the percentage of Bank funds that
disbursed before and after the restructurings. In this case, 82% of Bank funds were disbursed under the
revised outcome targets.

              Dimension                       Original Objectives          Restructured Objectives
  Relevance of objectives                                                High
  Efficacy
  Objective 1                                       Modest                         Substantial
  Objective 2                                       Modest                          Modest


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO Improving employability (P143995)



 Overall Efficacy                                    Modest                        Modest
 Efficiency                                                            Modest
 Outcome Rating                              Moderately Unsatisfactory     Moderately Unsatisfactory
 Outcome Rating Value                                    3                             3
 Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                         1.3                          5.79
 Disbursement (%)                                      0.18                          0.82
 Weight Value                                          0.54                          2.46
 Total Weight Value                                                0.54 + 2.46 = 3
 Overall Outcome Rating                                       Moderately Unsatisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR assesses the risk to development outcome as substantial, and this ICR Review finds this
plausible. While the government has indicated that it is committed to youth employment (and this is reflected
in programs launched at the local and central level around the Public Employment Service), many of the
initiatives are dependent on foreign financing and, for instance, it remains unclear to what extent initiatives
introduced under the project under review will continue, and at what level, without external
support. Moreover, the COVID-19 epidemic also introduces a significant risk factor.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was relevant to the PDO and would remain relevant through restructuring. It was more
  generally aligned with the Bank’s partnership strategies in Bolivia, including with its focus on promoting a
  more skilled labor force. The original design was appropriate for the circumstances, drawing on World
  Bank experience in designing similar projects elsewhere in Latin America and other regions, as well as
  on its implementation experience in Bolivia. It was designed to strengthening implementation of outputs
  from an already ongoing youth employment project (P10184), and it was firmly ensconced in relevant
  employment and labor market policies that were in force at the time in the country.

  That said, other challenges, notably an effort to benefit from access to a final IDA blend window for
  Bolivia, and a subsequent delay in effectiveness would disrupt a potentially seamless overlap with the
  earlier, still ongoing youth employment project. This created an unintended hiatus in financial flows to the

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Improving employability (P143995)



  programs supported by the two projects and delayed start-up of this project. Early implementation would
  also be slowed down due to process (PIU) weaknesses (insufficient guidelines, accounts structure,
  signature registration, and so forth) that would delay start-up and execution progress during the first few
  years of project implementation. Progress would also be slowed down by insufficient mobilization of
  private firms to support workplace training and facilitate subsidized employment. (These aims would later
  be actively pursued as a result of revisions to project design during the 2017 restructuring that placed
  emphasis on insertion and workplace training.)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 With the arrival of a new government in 2017 the emphasis of the project changed, in broad terms, from
 skills training to job insertion. This raised the need for a more active participation of private firms in the job
 market, something they had been reluctant to do with the earlier, strong link between in-class and on-the-
 job training. This was to require significant technical and field-level support to keep the project in line with
 the government’s new priorities and maintain the focus on increasing employability. Here, the supervision
 effort appears to have been successful. Supervision missions with the appropriate skills content were
 organized every six months, including provision of technical assistance. They included two course
 corrections in the form of the restructurings, the first one significant (as noted in the Section on Significant
 Changes), the second one involving more technical adjustments; both were undertaken in close
 collaboration with the government.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Objectives were straightforward, and indicators were relevant and measurable. The M&E framework, while
 not specifically articulated, was nevertheless designed to allow tracking of performance, adjust
 implementation if needed, and demonstrate the impact of policy interventions. Process and impact
 evaluations as well as tracking survey analysis were undertaken to improve implementation by monitoring
 results and outcomes of the skills development programs. The Project Coordination Unit (NCU) in the
 Ministry of Labor served as the implementation entity with overall responsibility for project
 implementation. At local levels, the project was to be implemented by departmental project offices,
 supported by technical assistance from the project.


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Improving employability (P143995)




b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring of implementation was undertaken through World Bank missions and by client entities –
  initially the national coordination unit (NCU) which at the local level operated through project offices in the
  participating departments. Towards the end of the project, monitoring encountered problems – progress
  data was not readily available or on-time and was incomplete. The ICR (page 28) points out that this was
  partly due to the absence of a fully operational monitoring systems: monitoring data was collected from
  different sources and consolidated manually.



c. M&E Utilization
  Information was gathered through supervision and used to adjust project activities. The information
  system consisted of several modules on different themes but was not fully completed and delayed delay
  data consolidation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Category C and did not have any safeguards triggered. During
   implementation, the environmental risk rating and environmental safeguard performance were defined as
   low and satisfactory, respectively.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Annual audits were consistently clean. There were delays in contracting and
   completing the audit for 2020. By project completion, the borrower had finalized all financial activities. The
   final audit and evaluation activities were completed by the closing date. All amounts due to the companies
   participating in the project were honored, and the borrower completed an inventory of the project’s goods.

   Procurement. Procurement activities were affected by frequent staff changes, requiring training by the
   World Bank of new staff joining the project implementation unit (PIU). Contracts of the original PIU were
   not signed on time, causing delays to project implementation. Migrating to new World Bank procurement
   guidelines, revised in 2017, also caused delays. Using the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement was challenging and required substantial training. One key aspect during implementation




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Improving employability (P143995)



   was ensuring that the project archives and documents on procurement activities were formally transmitted
   between implementation teams and executing agencies.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   Gender. During project implementation, a total of 7,939 women applied to project programs, representing
   46 percent of the total applicants. There was a steady increase in the number of women participating in the
   programs up to 2019, and in 2020, the number of applicant women surpassed the number of men, reaching
   53 percent of the total number of applicants. The trend confirmed Government efforts to promote gender
   equity. The original PAD included support for women with children under six years of age, participating in
   the MPED, through stipends to cover subsistence, transportation, and day care costs. After the 2017
   restructuring, the PMEIL included day care support for young mothers during the two-month training
   phase. For the on-the job training/job insertion, it included support for the first payment of the prenatal
   allowance (a monetary incentive for the birth of a child). In 2019 during second restructuring, the childcare
   benefit was extended to women who participate in the internship program (not only in the on-the-job
   training); the value of the benefit was set at BOB 100 per month per child; and the gross wage subsidy
   was increased by 5 percentage points for women in on-the-job training.




11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR.

In a complex context, opt for a straightforward project design. While this project was well-
grounded in country strategy, it nevertheless was challenged by a difficult institutional (and political)
context: Two institutions, unfamiliar with the World Bank, were initially assigned to managing the

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BO Improving employability (P143995)



project, generating significant delays and uncertainties about implementation, and requiring a
rationalization of project design.

A successful project needs the involvement of all key participating parties, including public
and private sector representatives. A constructive dialogue was developed between the Bank
and the government, allowing agreement on two significant restructurings. However, insufficient
attention was paid to involving private firms, which were a necessary ingredient in ensuring
successful implementation. This would become a contributing factor to lower project targets.

Applying available targeting tools can ensure adequate beneficiary targeting. The project
used existing targeting tools, applied under the previous project effectively reaching the relevant
population – vulnerable youth from low-income families with low education levels.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided extensive information on project implementation that allowed the project to be assessed, and
the results and ratings of the operation to be summarized and evaluated. Still, the discussion around the split
rating, as well as its application methodology made the drawing conclusions from it, difficult: conventionally, the
achievement of objectives is assessed across the entire duration of the project for both sets of objectives; here,
this did not seem to be the case. Beyond that, the ICR is candid, relatively concise, and followed the
guidelines. The evidence and analysis are consistent with the evidence laid out in the ICR, as reflected in the
similarity of ratings between the ICR and the ICRR. A notable exception is the rating of Bank performance,
where the IEG is inclined to take a stricter approach to the weaknesses in design and their importance for
project outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BO Improving employability (P143995)




                                                                    Page 15 of 15
