     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0023003

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P149129                                    Kenya Devolution Support Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-57650                                  31-Dec-2020                                        198,723,844.21

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2016                                30-Sep-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        192,990,399.98                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan             J. W. van Holst              Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program-for-Results (PforR) Program’s Development Objective (PDO) was to strengthen the capacity of
   the Recipient’s core national and county institutions to improve delivery of devolved services at the county
   level.

   For the purpose of this ICR review, the PDO will be parsed to assess the extent to which it was achieved as
   follows:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



   PDO 1: to strengthen the capacity of the Recipient’s core county institutions to improve delivery of devolved
   services at the county level.

   PDO 2: to strengthen the capacity of the Recipient’s core national institutions to improve delivery of devolved
   services at the county level.

   The PDO remained unchanged. The PforR financing amount also did not change. Several Disbursement-
   Linked-Indicators (DLIs) went through minor adjustments reflecting that the responsibility for some of the
   results was clarified or moved from one agency to another and that some of the funds were re-allocated from
   one DLI to another due to increased demand for county performance grants.

   Split rating. A split rating of objectives was not justified for this review because neither the scope of the PforR
   nor its ambition changed during implementation, and the financial commitments remained basically the
   same. The PDO was not revised; however, the DLIs were adjusted to increase incentives and to better
   support intended outcomes (but not to change the PforR’s ambition).



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Apr-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Description of Activities:

   (i) Finalization of the operational manual for the Program;

   (ii) Establishment of the steering and technical committees for the Program;

   (iii) Establishment of the secretariat for the Program;

   (iv) Carrying out of the initial sensitization of counties about the Program;

   (v) Initiate the procurement of the annual capacity and performance assessment (ACPA);

   (vi) Building the capacity of county governments participating in the Program.

   The PDO was to be achieved through a PforR operation which supported the implementation of the
   government’s National Capacity Building Framework (NCBF), aimed at promoting the devolution process to

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



  improve service delivery. The PAD stated that the PforR would support implementation of the National
  Capacity Building Framework Medium-Term Intervention (NCBF-MTI) in five key result areas (KRAs) - (i)
  Public Financial Management (PFM), (ii) Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (PME), (iii) Human Resources
  and Performance Management (HRM), (iv) Devolution and Inter-Governmental Relations, and (v) Civic
  Education and Public Participation (CE&PP) – and set national and county level results for each KRA. The
  PforR was designed to support the implementation of the five KRAs of the NCBF-MTI by strengthening
  institutional capacity for devolved service delivery at national and county levels.

  The operation had two PDO indicators and eight Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), connected to the
  KRAs. The DLIs specified the results that had to be reached in order to achieve the PDO, by result area,
  and provided incentives for the government agencies to implement reforms by releasing funds as soon as
  the DLI targets were reached.

  Changes during implementation:

  Two Level 2 restructurings were undertaken during implementation (see ICR, paras 12 and 13).

  During the first restructuring, in April 2020, the following changes were made:

        Time to produce financial statements under DLI1 was increased from 7 to 9 months, and time to
           complete the Annual Capacity and Performance Assessment (ACPA) (DLI2) was also extended
           within the same time frame;
          A new DLI2a was added; it articulated that the Ministry of Devolution and Arid and Semi-Arid Lands
           (MoDA) will coordinate the implementation of the PforR;
          County planning mandate was shifted from the MoDA to the National Treasury (NT), reflecting the
           change in the ministerial responsibilities (DLI3);
          Value-for-money (VfM) audit was removed from the ACPA and replaced with a requirement that the
           NT undertake end-of-year VfM audits (DLI5);
          For DLI3-6, a year 6 Disbursement Linked Result (DLR) was added to ensure that NT, MoDA,
           Kenya School of Government (KSG), and Ministry of Public Service, Youth and Gender Affairs
           (MoPSYGA) have incentives to implement capacity building plans in FY 2019-20;
          Number of counties to sign up for the capacity and performance grant was increased from 35 to 47
           (DLI7), and some of the funds were re-allocated from DLI8 to DLI7;
          The verification protocol of DLIs 7 and 8 was separated, with DLI8 only covered in the ACPA.

  During the second restructuring, in December 2020, the PforR’s closing date was changed by nine
  months, from December 31, 2020, to September 30, 2021, to allow the project team to pay close attention
  to sustain or even improve the performance on the ACPA indicators.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  PforR Cost. Total PforR cost at appraisal was estimated at US$200 million. This amount was not revised
  during implementation. Actual disbursement at closing was US$193 million.

  Financing. The PforR was financed with an IDA credit of US$200 million.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



   Borrower Contribution. A Borrower contribution was not expected at appraisal. This was revised during
   implementation, and a contribution was made in the amount of US$87.3 million. The actual contribution at
   closing was US$68.9 million.

   Dates. The PforR was approved on March 15, 2016, and became effective on September 15, 2016. The
   original Closing Date, December 31, 2020, was extended once, for nine months, to September 30, 2021, at
   which time the PforR closed.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Rationale

  The PforR was designed to directly support the government’s NCBF-MTI by complementing government
  financing of the five devolution capacity building key results areas (KRAs). It also aimed to support the
  NCBF-MTI alignment of national and county results. In addition, the PforR focused on enhancing existing
  county systems to reinforce government’s own PforR and system strengthening initiatives, including through
  providing results-based financing directly to counties.

  The PforR identified three broad issues that had a negative impact on the devolved service delivery: (i) lack
  of county level systems for managing finances, human resources, and planning, monitoring and evaluation;
  (ii) undeveloped intergovernmental mechanisms; and (iii) unstructured citizen engagement - and selected
  five KRAs to address them:

  - KRA 1: Public Financial Management (PFM): county budgeting, revenue management; use of Integrated
  Financial Management Information Systems (IFMIS); financial accounting, recording, and reporting,
  procurement, and internal and external audit performance.

  - KRA 2: Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (PME): county planning, progress reports, monitoring, and
  evaluation (M&E), and linkages between county plans and budgets.

  - KRA 3: Human Resource and Performance Management (HRM): county staffing plans, human resources
  (HR) competency frameworks, appraisal, and performance contracting systems.

  - KRA 4: Devolution and Inter-Governmental Relations (D&IGR): introduction of a new performance-based
  conditional grant.

  - KRA 5: Civic Education and Public Participation (CE&PP): rollout of civic education and county civic
  education units; greater number of counties that meet the County Government Act requirements for public
  participation and transparency.

  The PDO was aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (FY2014-18), which
  prioritized actions to help Kenya deliver on the ‘devolution dividend’. Devolution was considered a means to

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



                       increase equity in development across Kenya, reduce spatial disparities, and promote accountable and
                       responsive local governments.

                       The PDO was also fully aligned with the CPS for Kenya at PforR closure (the CPS FY14–18, extended under
                       the Performance and Learning Review of the CPS to FY20), specifically with the third results area
                       “consistency and equity—delivering a devolution dividend”.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Office of the Auditor General (OAG) has conducted county audits on time

                Rationale
                The indicator was clearly defined, measurable, and linked to the KRA 1 - Public Financial Management.
                Audits were conducted for all counties that submitted financial statements, 47 in total. At Program approval,
                the audits were significantly delayed. The audits were used for assessing overall country fiduciary capacity
                and governance, as well as to determine how much a county can receive through new grants, and the DLI 1
                provided an incentive to perform these functions in a timely fashion. The relevance of DLI 1 is rated High
                because it supported functions that were critical for the Program and for counties' institutional development,
                was fully aligned with the results framework (RF), and supported the PDO.



                Rating
                High

                DLI 2
                DLI
                Introduction and timely implementation of ACPA by the Ministry of Devolution and Planning

                Rationale
                The indicator was well defined, measurable, and linked to the KRA 1 - Public Financial Management. ACPA
                would be conducted by MoDP; the indicator would be fulfilled when: (i) ACPA is concluded on time for
                inclusion of capacity and performance grants' allocations each year and (ii) starting in year 3 of the Program,
                value for money (VfM) audits are included in the ACPAs. The relevance of DLI 2 is rated High because,
                together with DLI1, it supported functions that were critical for the Program and for county institutional
                development, was fully aligned with the (RF), and supported the PDO.




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)




Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Ministry of Devolution and Planning implements annual planned activities to strengthen countrywide
frameworks and systems and to address county capacity gaps

Rationale
The indicator had a broader definition but was measurable. It was linked to three KRAs: KRA 2 (Planning,
Monitoring and Evaluation), KRA 4 (Devolution and Inter-Governmental Relations), and KRA 5 (Civic
Education and Public Participation). Under the defined procedure, in Year 1, the MoDP would prepare and
submit a capacity building plan, which would be then verified by the performance contracting unit and by the
Program’s Technical Committee and then, if the requirements were met, endorsed by the Program’s
Technical Committee. In Years 2-5, the MoDP would be submitting both the annual workplan and the
implementation report, and the same verification procedure would follow. The relevance of DLI 3 is rated
Substantial because it supported the PDO and was fully aligned with the RF.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
Ministry of Public Service, Youth and Gender Affairs (MoPSYGA) implements annual planned activities to
strengthen countrywide frameworks and systems and to address county capacity gaps

Rationale
This indicator had a broader definition but was measurable. It was linked to the KRA 3 - Human Resource
and Performance Management. Under the defined procedure, in Year 1, the Directorate of Public Service
Management (DPSM) would prepare and submit a capacity building plan, which would be then verified by the
performance contracting unit and by the Program’s Technical Committee and then, if the requirements were
met, endorsed by the Program’s Technical Committee. In Years 2-5, the DPSM would be submitting both the
annual workplan and the implementation report, and the same verification procedure would follow. The
relevance of DLI 4 is rated Substantial because it supported the PDO and was fully aligned with the RF.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
National Treasury (NT) implements annual planned activities to strengthen countrywide frameworks and
systems and to address county capacity gaps

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)




Rationale
This indicator had a broad definition but was also measurable. It was linked to the KRA 1 - Public Financial
Management. Under the defined procedure, in Year 1, the National Treasury (NT) would prepare and submit
a capacity building plan, which would be then verified by the performance contracting unit and by the
Program’s Technical Committee and then, if the requirements were met, endorsed by the Program’s
Technical Committee. In Years 2-5, the NT would be submitting both the annual workplan and the
implementation report, and the same verification procedure would follow. The relevance of DLI 5 is rated
Substantial because it supported the PDO and was fully aligned with the RF.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
Kenya School of Government (KSG) implements annual planned activities to address county capacity gaps

Rationale
The indicator had a broader definition but was also measurable. It was linked to all five KRAs. Under the
defined procedure, in Year 1, the Kenya School of Government (KSG) would prepare and submit a capacity
building plan, which would be then verified by the performance contracting unit and by the Program’s
Technical Committee and then, if the requirements were met, endorsed by the Program’s Technical
Committee. In Years 2-5, the KSG would be submitting both the annual workplan and the implementation
report, and the same verification procedure would follow. The relevance of DLI 6 is rated Substantial because
it supported the PDO and was fully aligned with the RF.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
Counties have participated in an annual assessment of performance and met MACs

Rationale
The indicator was clearly defined, measurable, and linked to the KRA 4 - Devolution and Inter-Governmental
Relations. The indicator would be fulfilled when: (i) the ACPA Minimum Access Conditions have been met; (ii)
allocation of capacity and performance grant is included in the Division of Revenue Bill and County Allocation
of Revenue Bill on the basis of the ACPA results; and (iii) when the funds for the previous tranche have been
disbursed to the counties as per Program entitlements, unless such disbursements are withheld due to a
violation of law by one or more counties. The relevance of DLI 7 is rated High because it supported functions
that were important for the Program and for counties' institutional development, was fully aligned with the
results framework (RF), and supported the PDO.



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)




                  Rating
                  High

                  DLI 8
                  DLI
                  Counties have participated in an annual assessment of performance, met minimum access conditions (MACs)
                  and minimum performance conditions (MPCs) for grant funding and implemented projects according to Program
                  requirements

                  Rationale
                  This indicator was clearly defined, measurable, and linked to the KRAs 1-3 and 5 (please see above). The
                  indicator would be fulfilled when: (i) the Minimum Access Conditions (ACPAs) have been met; (ii) allocation of
                  capacity and performance grant is included in the Division of Revenue Bill and County Allocation of Revenue
                  Bill on the basis of the ACPA results; and (iii) when the funds for the previous tranche have been disbursed to
                  the counties as per Program entitlements, unless such disbursements are withheld due to violation of law by
                  one or more counties. The relevance of DLI 8 is rated High because it supported functions that were
                  important for the Program and for counties' institutional development, was fully aligned with the results
                  framework (RF), and supported the PDO.



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  Relevance of objectives was rated high, since the objectives were aligned with country priorities, as well as
                  with the WBG strategies at approval and at closure. All DLIs were linked to the RF and consistent with the
                  PDO indicators; they provided strong incentives for institutional performance enhancement. On balance, the
                  relevance of the DLIs is High, providing incentives to cause institutional change in support of the PDO and
                  alliance with the RF. Overall relevance is therefore rated high.



                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
PDO 1: to strengthen the capacity of the Recipient’s core county institutions to improve delivery of devolved
services at the county level.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The theory of change for this objective, developed for the ICR, shows a link between inputs and outputs, and
then moves directly to the final result under this objective: improved institutional performance at county level.
The immediate outcomes are missing, and the outputs are expressed as a list of main DLIs (completed
annual capacity building plans and implemented activities to address capacity gaps and strengthen HRM and
PFM frameworks). The DLIs were designed for incentivizing and monitoring progress during Program
implementation, they do not fully reflect PforR’s outputs or outcomes; those can be derived from the
KRAs. The TOC specifies neither the areas where capacity was improved in county institutions, nor which
institutions were involved. It is unclear from the TOC if the project activities were aimed at enabling the county
institutions to perform the new tasks of a devolved service provision system or not. Outside of the TOC
section, the ICR describes such new tasks as “managing finances, human resources, planning, monitoring,
and evaluation” (ICR, page 7) and provides in-depth details on their substance (KPAs 1-5, ICR, page 7),
intended outcomes, and achievement of outcomes. The TOC could have included a list of the main intended
outcomes and describe outputs in terms of capacity building targeted (rather than input-level indicators such
as the number of training sessions provided).

Responding to IEG’s question sent to the Bank project team regarding what was done within the targeted
county institutions to transform them into agencies capable of sustainable delivery of devolved services
and how their capacity to perform new tasks was developed, the team provided the following information. To
build capacity, the counties conducted capacity needs assessments and, using the Program grants,
developed capacity building plans, focusing on the KRA areas. The grants were then also used for training,
development of policy or legislation, purchasing equipment, civic education and engagement, technical
assistance (TA), and peer learning. Capacity building was initiated by both the national government and the
counties. The counties, based on their needs, could request training services from the Kenya School of
Government, or TA from the national government officials, or TA/training from the hired consultants. County
expertise was shared using peer meetings and workshops.

Program Achievements (based on ICR, paras 23-32 and Annex 1)

PDO 1 addressed two of the three issues with the devolved service delivery that the PfoR tackled: (i) the lack
of county level systems for managing finances, human resources, and planning, monitoring and evaluation;
and (ii) unstructured citizen engagement.

The PforR achieved or exceeded all its PDO 1 indicator targets and all but one intermediate indicator targets.
The unachieved target was for the intermediate indicator 2.5 “Number of county projects with a satisfactory
value-for-money level”; the reason was that at PforR closing, the Value for Money Audit report was yet to be
submitted to the Bank. The latter is considered a minor shortcoming.

County capacity in the five PforR’s KRA areas improved. The achievement of the PDO indicator 1
(“Counties have strengthened institutional performance as demonstrated in the ACPA”) significantly exceeded
the target of average county performance score of 55 percent and reached 71 percent (out of 100 percent).

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



About 83 percent of counties showed constant year on year improvement in their scores, 15 percent had
inconsistent up and down performance, while one county, Nairobi, stagnated. This indicator measured
performance against the five KRAs adopted by the PforR: PFM, PME, HRM, CE&PP, and investment
implementation and environmental and social safeguards performance.

County institutional systems covering financial management, planning, procurement, and safeguards
were enhanced. At PforR closing, the PDO indicator 2 (“Number of counties which comply with the MPCs”)
exceeded the target of 35 counties and reached 38 counties; and the performance on the Intermediate
Results Indicator (IRI) 2.2 (“Improved Planning and M&E capacities”) was at 97 percent. The former indicator
(PDO indicator 2) measured county capacity on financial management (financial statements and audit
opinions), planning (annual planning documents), use of funds in accordance with the investment menu,
procurement, core county staffing, and environmental and social safeguards systems. These systems are
vital for improving the delivery of devolved services. The latter indicator (IRI 2.2) measured improved
performance by counties.

The PforR expanded access to key devolved services (transport, water, health, agriculture, and rural
trade). As a result of the PforR, counties developed infrastructure and provided modern services, benefitting
2.5 million people. At closure, out of the 121 projects supported in FY16/17 and FY2017/2018, 65 percent
were complete, eight percent were above 85 percent completion, and the remainder were below 85 percent
completion. The benefits from the new infrastructure included increased access to education services,
reduction in post-harvest losses, improved road network in historically marginalized counties, and improved
social amenity facilities with the potential to reduce conflict in remote counties. The End of PforR’s Evaluation
Report prepared by MoDA demonstrated beneficiaries’ satisfaction with PforR outcomes in the areas of
health care (improved access to health care for over 1 million people and upgraded medical equipment);
water and sanitation (improved sanitation and reduced time for collecting water); farm-to-market connectivity
in remote areas; and increased food security.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation improved. The PforR exceeded its targets on PME. Specifically, the
number of County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs) that followed the guidelines increased by 12
percent, exceeding the target of 10 percent; the number of counties producing Annual Progress Reports on
time increased by 97 percent, significantly exceeding the target of seven percent; and the number of counties
where the M&E Committees meet regularly increased by 17 percent, as compared to the target of five
percent. At closing, 95 percent of the counties had set up functional units and established planning and M&E
frameworks; 85 percent of counties had functioning County M&E Committees in place; 93 percent of counties
produced CIDPs and annual development plans according to quality standards and on time; and 97 percent
of counties produced timely Annual Progress Reports on the implementation of their CIDPs. As a result,
effectiveness of the county level planning was increased; accuracy of plans improved; and budgeting was
synchronized with implementation schedules.

Human Resource and Performance Management systems and practices were modernized. The targets
were exceeded. At PforR closing, the mean performance score for counties on HRM was 69 percent, up from
35 percent prior to the PforR. County governments adopted model policies, structures, systems, and
procedures developed by the national government agencies, including the review of allocation of functions,
organization structures, staffing patterns, and HRM practices; staff rationalization and redeployment; planning
for staff recruitment and development; and strengthened systems for recruitment, promotions, and
appointment.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



Public Financial Management improved. Two targets were exceeded, and one was not achieved (as
explained in the first paragraph of this section). Specifically, the number of counties that prepare Annual
Environmental and Social Audits/reports increased by 15 percent, as compared with the target of six percent;
and county institutional performance score was 71 percent, as compared with the target of 60 percent. Also,
the quality of financial statements improved by 18 percent and of financial reporting by 13 percent; budget
format and quality increased by 39 percent; automated systems for revenue collection increased by 62
percent, and the OSR increasing by 66 percent; procurement procedures improved by 32 percent; and
internal audit improved by 26 percent. However, further improvement of capacity in the areas of cash
management, public investment management and revenue automation was still needed at closure.

Additionally, county auditing was enhanced. The share of qualified audit opinions was increased from 28
percent to 77 percent, the number of adverse and disclaimed audits was reduced, and two counties with no
prior auditing obtained unqualified audits. The time needed to produce audited financial statements
shortened, and the OAG produced them within the DLI deadline. However, their certification was delayed due
to a late appointment of the Auditor General.

Systems for citizen engagement were enhanced. The targets were achieved or exceeded. The mean
performance score increased from 50 percent to 82 percent. At PforR closing, 93 percent of counties had set
up functional civic education units; 93 percent had established systems for access to information; 93 percent
had institutional structures, systems, and processes for public participation; 70 percent had participatory
planning and budgeting forums to engage the communities; and 81 percent were sharing core PFM material
online and in print.

The PforR supported Counties to respond to COVID-19. About 51 percent of the discretionary
performance grants to qualifying county governments financed health-care investments. The PforR increased
county bed capacity by over 2,700, many of which served as COVID-19 isolation centers; supported the
installation of over 10 oxygen plants; and helped the counties to embed measures in capacity building and
strategic plans that mitigate the effects of the COVID19 pandemic. Counties repurposed part of the capacity
building grants toward COVID-19 awareness raising and training in rural communities, provision of personal
protective equipment to over 1,000 front line health workers; and distribution of masks to local communities.

The PforR achieved or exceeded all its targets under PDO 1 except one intermediate indicator target. The
latter is considered a minor shortcoming. As a result of the PforR, counties’ capacity in all five KRA areas
increased, as reflected in the PDO indicator 1, which significantly exceeded the target. Specifically: (i) county
capacity on financial management, use of funds as per investment plans, procurement, staffing, and
safeguards - systems vital for the delivery of devolved services - was enhanced, exceeding the targets; (ii)
access to key devolved services (transport, water, health, agriculture, and rural trade) increased, benefitting
2.5 million people; (iii) PME systems’ improvement efforts lead to increased effectiveness of the county
planning and budgeting; (iv) HRM system’s modernization meant more efficient recruitment, promotion, and
appointments; (v) PFM reform lead to improved capacity in such areas as financial reporting, budget
formulation, revenue collection, procurement, and internal and external audit; and (vi) citizen engagement
was enhanced (access to information was provided and systems for public participation were created).

This review concludes that the efficacy with which Objective 1 has been achieved is substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: to strengthen the capacity of the Recipient’s core national institutions to improve delivery of devolved
services at the county level.

Rationale
Theory of Change

Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1. It also applies to Objective 2.

Program Achievements (based on ICR, paras 23-32 and Annex 1)

PDO 2 addressed the third issue with the devolved service delivery that the PforR tackled: the undeveloped
intergovernmental mechanisms. It also financed capacity building of the national institutions to support the
devolved service provision. All related targets were met. Specifically, the following activities (monitored by the
RF) were implemented:

        Capacity building at MoDA;
        Capacity building at the Directorate of Public Service Management (DPSM);
        PFM capacity building at NT;
        KSG implemented annual planned activities to address county capacity gaps;
        Capacity building to strengthen inter-governmental relations.

IEG notes that, despite the achievements listed above, the ICR provides inadequate information about the
national level capacity building activities, those that were implemented at the MoDA, DPSM, NT, and intended
to strengthen inter-governmental relations (in relation to the latter, it is unclear where the activities were
implemented). Also, while the RF includes indicators that monitor the implementation of these activities, no
quantitative targets were used; instead the RF utilized the “Yes”-“No” unit of measurement. Further, the
outcomes of capacity building at the national level are unclear because only the inputs have been mentioned.

Nevertheless, the achievement of capacity building activities at the national level was indirectly verified by
project monitoring and measurement.

Under PDO 2, the PforR invested in capacity building of the national institutions to support the devolved
service provision and strengthen inter-governmental relations, meeting all related targets in the following
national level institutions: MoDA, DPSM, NT, and KSG.

This review therefore concludes that the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved was substantial, but
only marginally so because of the inadequate information in the ICR on the extent to which national capacity
to support the delivery of devolved services to counties in five key results areas was improved.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 At closing, the average achievements of all DLIs stood at 92 percent. The program exceeded the targets for
 its two PDO indicators. All intermediate result indicators were achieved or exceeded except one. As a result
 of the PforR, counties’ capacity in all five KRA areas increased, including on financial management, use of
 funds, procurement, staffing, and safeguards (systems vital for the delivery of devolved services); access to
 key devolved services (transport, water, health, agriculture, and rural trade) improved; and citizen
 engagement was enhanced (access to information was provided and systems for public participation were
 created). These results, together with the program’s monitoring data, indicated that the extent to which
 Objective 1 was achieved was substantial. Objective 2 achievement was also substantial, but because ICR
 provides inadequate information on the increase in national capacity to support devolved services, this
 achievement is only marginally substantial. Nevertheless, this review rates the program’s overall efficacy as
 substantial.




 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The Program provided structured and relevant support to newly created counties in Kenya, enhancing them with
critical systems for the delivery of services to communities. PDO 1 addressed the lack of county level systems
for managing finances, human resources, and planning, monitoring and evaluation, and unstructured citizen
engagement. PDO 2 addressed the undeveloped intergovernmental mechanisms and financed capacity building
of the national institutions to support the devolved service provision.

The PforR achieved or exceeded all its PDO indicator targets and all but one intermediate indicator targets. The
latter is considered a minor shortcoming. County implementation capacity in all five PforR’s KRA areas was
improved. The counties’ financial management, planning, auditing, PFM, PME, and HR systems were improved;
access to the devolved services (transport, water, health, agriculture, and rural trade) was expanded; and
systems for citizen engagement were enhanced. These outcomes were due to the increased capacity of
service providers at the county level and the improved capacity of national institutions to improve the delivery of
devolved services at the county level.

Since this review rated the Program’s relevance as high and there were only minor shortcomings in its efficacy,
the Program’s overall outcome is rated satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and Fiduciary risks. Technical risk was mitigated through the assessment of minimum access
conditions (MACs) during annual ACPAs. During implementation, capacities of counties improved, evidenced
by assessments conducted during implementation. Fiduciary issues (weak procurement, fraud, and
corruption) were mitigated through strengthening PFM and procurement, and performance measures. As a
result, the PforR enhanced county capacities, and the risk to development outcomes was rated Low. The
project supported systems strengthening of, among others, human resources, financial management, citizen
participation, PME, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, which allowed counties to perform
their basic functions (ICR, para 71).

Financing risk. There was a financing risk: counties might not have had sufficient resources to finance
operations and maintenance (O&M) of investments supported by the PforR. To mitigate this risk, the
counties used the following: (i) expansion of services, which increased the base for service fees/charges,
which could be used to maintain and operate the infrastructure; (ii) investment in solar-powered equipment,
to reduce O&M; and (iii) increases in budget allocations to support O&M (ICR, para 72).




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PforR objectives were aligned with the CPS and NCBF-MTI. The objectives were realistic and linked
  to addressing the most critical issues that prevented improvements in service delivery. The RF and the
  DLIs were well designed and aligned with the PDO and the ToC. The country context supported PforR
  implementation: in 2013, 47 county governments were set up and assumed service delivery functions,
  and several government ministries were mandated to promote devolution. The major stakeholders - KSG,
  Ministry of Public Service, NT, MoDA, and OAG - were included in the PforR activities. However, three
  important institutions were not included at project appraisal (National Environment Management Authority
  (NEMA), Commission for Administrative Justice (CAJ), and the Council of Governors) although they were
  brought in midway during implementation, increasing the focus on environmental and social management
  (ICR, para 41).

  The DLI verification protocol was well designed: the ACPA were conducted three times by an
  independent body, and the integrity of the assessment results was respected by the counties and the
  Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). The Annual Capacity and Performance Assessment
  (ACPA) had a design requirement of including a value for money (VfM) audit, which, as it turned out, was
  unrealistic to undertake annually due to the audit’s complexity (ICR, paras 42, 53, 67). At restructuring,
  the requirement was therefore modified, and it was decided that only one VfM audit would be done going
  forward, by the National Treasury (NT) at PforR closure. As noted in Section 8 on M&E below, while the
  PDO indicators measured progress on devolved capacity to provide services at the county level and the


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



  capacity of national institutions to provide support to the counties, the results framework did not include
  indicators to measure improvements in service delivery directly. This was a shortcoming at appraisal.

  On balance, this review rates quality at entry as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The PforR benefited from the stability in the staffing of the supervision team, which supported strong client
 relations and helped to manage the PforR implementation despite a high county level staff turnover, a
 problematic inter-departmental coordination in the counties, and other coordination and management
 challenges. Another challenge was financial: inadequate budget allocations at the national level throughout
 PforR implementation. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated the problem. Yet another external problem
 was a below expected level of revenue collection during FY21/22 and the resulting budget cuts. Delays
 outside of the Bank team’s control were challenging too. The ACPAs were often delayed due to
 procurement issues, resulting in the ACPA misalignment with the national budget process. In addition, the
 funds to counties by the National Treasury (NT) were often late and subsequently disbursements of grants
 to county governments were also late. In addition, during the first two years of implementation, delays
 occurred with submission of audited financial accounts by the OAG. Lastly, COVID-19 affected the
 completion of ‘Level 2’ investments.

 The ICR reports (para 47) that the Bank supervision team consistently addressed these external
 challenges throughout project implementation. During implementation, the PforR had one TTL (all four
 years), who was country-based. All KRA leads and most task team members also stayed on the team for
 the length of implementation and were locally based. This allowed for a close engagement with the client
 and for provision of effective guidance to the involved agencies. The team also quickly reacted to the
 results of the MTR and made the needed adjustments. Specifically, at appraisal, a small unit of the MoDA
 Secretariat was assigned to support the PforR. It turned out, the PforR required more support, and a sub-
 DLI (DLI2a) was introduced at restructuring to increase the support from MoDA. Also, the adjustment
 related to removing the annual VfM audit requirements was timely. Overall, the team’s close on-the-ground
 involvement in managing the PforR supported a satisfactory implementation of the first devolution PforR in
 Kenya, which was a difficult task, especially considering that it required the team to work closely with 47
 county governments and eight national government agencies.

 This review rates quality of supervision as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Indicators for the PforR’s results framework were aligned with the PDO, linked to the Theory of
 Change (reconstructed for the ICR) and the DLIs, and were operationally sound and easy to monitor. The
 targets were realistic with two exceptions: the requirements for DLI1 and 2 were overly optimistic and were
 modified at the MTR. The two PDO indicators measured progress on capacity development and systems to
 deliver devolved services which were the core issues in the PDO. The DLIs were designed to track
 progress on national and county level results.(ICR, papa 52). The results framework did not include
 indicators to measure improvements in service delivery directly, which was a shortcoming because these
 were intermediate project level outcomes, which had to be measured and monitored for the purpose of
 reporting on the projects value-added for the beneficiaries (in this case, service recipients).

 A verification process was designed to monitor results through the ACPA and through annual verification of
 national level work plan implementation. For DLIs 1, 2, 7 and 8, ACPAs were conducted by independent
 firms contracted by the MoDA. For DLIs 3, 4, 5 and 6, verification was done through annual workplans and
 implementation reports. The PforR also used the M&E tools such as county budget implementation reports
 and financial statements, annual reports, capacity building implementation reports, and the MTR (ICR, para
 53).

 A shortcoming of the M&E design was its insufficient monitoring of the national level capacity building
 activities in the MoDA, DPSM and the NT, which were aimed at strengthening the national-county inter-
 governmental relations. The indicators for national results were limited to the input level indicating that
 capacity building took place, while no outcome level indicators (such as improved performance of the
 agencies) or output level ones (such as changes in agencies’ practices as a result of training) were used.
 The targets were non-quantitative: the RF utilized the “Yes”-“No” unit of measurement.

 IEG notes that a completion report – KPSD End of PforR’s Evaluation Report - with information on
 stakeholder satisfaction was prepared by MoDA at PforR closure. This report complements the RF data.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, three ACPAs were conducted, collecting data on MACs and MPCs.
  Disbursements on DLIs 1, 2, 7 and 8 were based entirely on ACPA results. The verification protocol was
  effective, and the envisaged checks and balances for results verification proved useful. Verification of
  national level results was done in a consistent manner. Disbursements for DLI 3, 4, 5 and 6 were based
  fully on verified annual workplans and implementation reports. At program closing, the verification of
  some of the DLIs was pending, and the VfM audit was still outstanding, which was a minor
  shortcoming (ICR, para 55).

  County level improvements on M&E achieved due to the program’s investments, supported program’s
  M&E performance, including RF monitoring, and contributed to improving the quality of the program’s
  progress reports. The program also put in place a Geo-Enabling system for Monitoring and Supervision


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



  platform capturing status of completion, beneficiaries, and amount received for both grants (ICR, para
  56).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were routinely used to inform program management and decision-making. As a result, the
  program made several adjustments. For example, when it was clear that program coordination was
  lagging, a sub-DLI was introduced to incentivize program coordination activities (DLI 2a). First program
  restructuring was also informed by the M&E data. MoDA could benefit if it were to institutionalize the
  ACPA process as a tool for county performance measurement, going forward. The ACPA could also be
  a basis for future performance-based grants (ICR, para 57).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Program invested in addressing environmental and social safeguards capacity gaps identified at the
   county level. During implementation, after encountering some safeguards issues, the program collaborated
   with NEMA and CAJ with the following outputs: (i) County Environmental Committees were established and
   became operational; (ii) NEMA established cooperation with the counties; (iii) compliance with the
   Environmental Management Coordination Act was achieved; (iv) access to information (ATI) frameworks in
   47 counties was achieved; (v) Integrity Assurance Officers in 44 counties were appointed and trained; (vi)
   CAJ supported the county governments on ATI and GRM; and (vii) the GRM guidelines for counties were
   developed.

   The compliance with environment and social safeguards requirements by Counties improved substantially
   over time. The number of counties that met environment and social safeguards requirements increased
   from 38 (ACPA1) to 43 (ACPA2) and to 45 (ACPA3) out of the total of 47 counties. Compliance with NEMA
   guidelines ensured that program’s investments had low negative environmental impacts (ICR, para 59-61).

   At restructuring, some challenges were identified in the county GRM practices and systems. To address
   those, the following measures were taken: (i) inclusion of GRM capacity building activities in the program’s
   plans; (ii) increasing the flexibility in the complaints handling systems vs. the previous strict complaint
   handling requirements; and (iii) incorporating flexibility to the means of verification of the GRMs based on
   the practice in the counties (ICR, para 62).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The program encountered the following fiduciary challenges: (i) availability of program funds at the County
   Revenue Fund that were holding the funds; (ii) lack of coordination on training by MDAs; (iii) delayed

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



   submission of the implementation status reports to MoDA by one-third of the counties; and (iv) delays with
   the transfer of the funds to counties. These issues were resolved by: (i) the introduction of a Special
   Purpose Account per county to ring fence program funds; (ii) collaborative preparation of capacity building
   plans by the MDAs; and (iii) withholding DLI allocation until the counties submitted their progress reports
   (ICR, para 64).

   The program encountered some fiduciary compliance issues. First, audit reports for MDAs were
   continuously late. Some of the audited financial reports lacked disclosures making it hard to identify
   program’s eligible expenditures in the financial statements. Some audits had limited expenditure data.
   Second, fiduciary review of the program activities in the counties by the Internal Auditor Department was
   only conducted once, although the requirement was to do it annually. To resolve these issues, the program
   introduced a Statement of Expenditure for expenditure tracking. Some MDAs complied with this new
   requirement while others did not, as this was not an original program requirement (ICR, para 65).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                               This review assessed quality at
                                                                               entry as moderately satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               for the reasons mentioned in
                                                                               Section 7a.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


11. Lessons

Several lessons are drawn from the ICR:

- Ownership of the PforR reforms by national and subnational governments is vital for its
success. The PforR was designed based on the government program of devolution and on the
identification of the main areas where support was sought by the government. This ensured the
PforR's strong collaboration on implementation and expectations for sustainability.

- PforR coordination needs to be sufficiently incentivized in its design. The PforR appraisal
dedicated no resources to support the lead ministry to coordinate all involved agencies, negatively

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



affecting the PforR implementation. At MTR, a correction was made, and a separate sub-DLI was
created for that purpose. This is a lesson for the future: PforR coordination needs to be sufficiently
financed.

- Annual performance assessment capacity within the government needs to be developed.
While the PforR chose to hire a private firm for performance assessments, it is critical to build
government capacity for the monitoring of government performance after the PforR closure. Future
PforRs could start with an outsourced ACPA arrangement, but then transition to a government-led
performance assessments before project closure.

- National level agencies mandated with environmental and social safeguards need to be
identified and supported to implement capacity building and oversight. The PforR involved
extensive infrastructure investments requiring a safeguards capacity at county level. However, at
appraisal, two government institutions (NEMA and CAJ), mandated with safeguards, were not
included in the PforR capacity building activities. That shortcoming was corrected during
implementation. Future PforRs involving infrastructure investments may need to include sustained
capacity building of such institutions.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR delivers relevant and valid information, substantial evidence, and good analysis. The ratings are
supported by the narrative. The quality of evidence is adequate: the sources are credible, referenced, and the
presentation of evidence is clear. The annexes are put together as appropriate. The analysis is valid, with the
exception of the shortcoming (1) described below. However, results orientation is limited: the ICR was not able
to present outcome level results, mainly because of the deficiencies of the RF (shortcoming (2) below). Also,
the TOC in the ICR is lacking project outcomes, with the exception of the final outcome of improved institutional
performance; it is also unclear in the TOC how institutional improvement was supposed to be achieved. The
lessons are useful; they are based on the PforR’s own experience, yet they allow for higher-level conclusions.
The ICR is internally consistent, follows the guidelines, and is concise and clear.

Two main weaknesses of the ICR are as follows:

    1. The ICR failed to evaluate national and county level results separately, under two different objectives.
       Such evaluation would be logical because the TOC (ICR, page 6) presents three PforR outcomes: (i)
       counties have strengthened institutional performance as demonstrated in the ACPA; (ii) strengthened
       institutional capacity at the national level; and (iii) Increased compliance of counties to MPCs. While
       outcomes (i) and (iii) can be combined for evaluation purposes, outcome (ii) is distinctive, as defined by
       the PDO.
    2. The ICR’s evaluation of the M&E design has limitations: it did not describe the RF deficiency in
       monitoring national level capacity building activities. Specifically, it did not mention that the indicators
       were at the input level only, while no outcome or output level indicators (improved performance of the

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Kenya Devolution Support Project (P149129)



   agencies or changes in agencies’ practices) were used; and it did not state that the targets for these
   indicators were non-quantitative (the “Yes”-“No” unit of measurement).



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                               Page 20 of 20
