     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022820

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P161348                                    Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2830                                  28-Mar-2023                                           7,620,318.77

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2018                                31-May-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             9,489,203.65                                               0.00

 Actual                                         7,620,318.77                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Leonardo Alfonso Bravo     Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to enhance the corporate governance and operational efficiency of the
   supported Afghan state‐owned banks, thereby contributing to their improved financial soundness and
   outreach. (Financing Agreement Page 4). The PDO formulation was identical in the PAD.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



   For the sake of the analysis, the PDO is parsed into two Objectives; 1) to enhance the corporate governance
   of the supported Afghan state-owned banks; and 2) to enhance the operational efficiency of the supported
   Afghan state-owned banks.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project had three components:

   i) Component 1: Improving MOF’s Ownership Role and the Corporate Governance of State Banks.
   This component aimed to support the MoF and the SOBs to address the governance challenges through
   technical assistance. This component was to strengthen the MOF’s ownership functions of SBs through: (i)
   establishing a dedicated oversight unit including its relevant policies and procedures; (ii) developing a
   nomination process for board of supervisors; (iii) building institutional capacity within MOF to exercise
   ownership functions of state banks; (iv) establishing a reporting and monitoring systems; and (v)
   developing corporate governance policies, procedures, and guidelines; and (b) to the MOF, DAB, and SBs
   to strengthen the corporate governance of SBs through, inter alia: (i) implementing recommendations of a
   comprehensive corporate governance assessment; (ii) developing and implementing internal policies and
   procedures; (iii) establishing board processes and training.

   ii) Component 2: Institutional Development, Business Strategy, and Information Technology of State
   Banks. This component aimed to support a full-scale re-engineering of almost all the banks’ operations,
   based on a defined mission and business strategy. This component was to

   (a) strengthen and modernize SBs through, inter alia: (i) development of a business strategy for each SB;
   (ii) provision of strategic management support; and (iii) conducting a diagnostic assessment of information
   technology infrastructure and developing an information technology strategy for SBs;

   (b) support institutional development and business model through, inter alia: (i) provision of consulting
   support for the consolidation of BMA and NKB, including addressing the legal and regulatory aspects of the
   merger process; and (ii) implementation of the approved business strategy for SBs; and

   (c) support modernization of information technology infrastructure and business process of SBs through: (i)
   upgrading of core banking systems and automation of service delivery mechanisms; (ii) setting up a modem
   data center; and (iii) capacity building for SB staff responsible for information technology.

   iii) Project Implementation and Monitoring. This component was to support the monitoring and
   coordination of Project activities and to develop a monitoring and evaluation system to assess the
   implementation progress.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   This Project was approved by the World Bank’s Board on March 28, 2018 with a commitment amount of
   SDR27.5 million (US$40 million equivalent) and the project became effective on April 10, 2018. At the
   request of the Afghani government, SDR20,328,158 (73.8 percent) was cancelled in June 2020 to release
   funds for the emergency response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of February 28, 2021, the project had
   disbursed SDR5,428,058.74, or 75.7 percent of the amount available following the cancellation, with the
   undisbursed balance remaining SDR1,743,786.26. The original closing date was March 28, 2023 and the
   actual closing date was May 31, 2021, i.e. the project closed 22 months (nearly 2 years) earlier than
   originally planned.

   Since the project experienced substantial implementation delays and over 73 percent of its funds were
   cancelled in June 2020, on February 28, 2021 the Ministry of Finance officially requested the World Bank to
   cancel the undisbursed balance and closed the project early through a project restructuring. The request
   also included a two-month disbursement grace period post-closure. Subsequent engagement with MOF
   indicated the need to maintain the standard grace period of four months to mitigate the risks related to
   potential delays.

   At approval, the costs for component 1 was $7 million, for component 2 $30 million and for component 3 $3
   million. At evaluation only $3.6 million were disbursed in total, and the rest was cancelled as requested by
   the Government.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal the three State Owned Banks (SOB) in Afghanistan represented about 27 percent of banking
assets, 27 percent of deposits and 6 percent of the total loan portfolio in a country where the banking sector
was dominated by private banks. Credit to the private sector was very low (less than 4 percent of GDP) as
the banking sector was more focused on government securities and credit risk was extremely high. The
three SOBs, New Kabul Bank (NKB), Bank Mellie Afghan (BMA) and Pashtany Bank had mainly focused
their assets on government securities as the loans represented less than 8 percent of total assets of BMA
and zero percent in the other two SOBs. BMA and Pashtany Bank suffered severe equity losses as the
result of poorly originated, controlled and recovered credit risks. NKB, was the remnant following the bail-
out of depositors in the wake of the collapse of Kabul Bank.

The project design was informed by the Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan’s vision for the
financial sector and the reform of SOBs in particular, as outlined in the long-term strategy for the reform of
SOBs which was approved by the High Economic Council. Through strengthening the Ministry of Finance’s
(MOF) oversight of SOBs and upgrading their operational framework, as well as improving their information
technology infrastructure, the project aimed to foster the stability and operational efficiency of the
institutions and, thereby, enhance financial intermediation in Afghanistan.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



               At appraisal, this project was well aligned with Afghanistan’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The
               project contributed to Pillar 2 of the FY17-20 Country Partnership Framework to support inclusive growth
               through a more stable and efficient financial system. It was also aligned with the 2017-21 Afghanistan
               National Peace and Development Framework
               (ANPDF). The Afghanistan Systematic Country Diagnostic stated that improving the banking sector
               confidence, through enhanced accountability and stronger governance was an essential condition for
               economic stability and would be critical to boosting job creation and growth. Furthermore, the SCD pointed
               to the need to exercise effective regulatory and prudential oversight of the overall financial sector, with a
               focus on enforcement, to help avoid the recurrence of financial crises. In addition, the project design was
               aligned with the IMF‘s Extended Credit Facility, in the domain of fiscal and financial reforms and corporate
               governance to ensure synergies to the reform agenda. The objectives were well aligned with the CPF at
               closure but because of changes in government priorities, the project was closed early in the implementation
               period.

               While Relevance of Objectives was substantial at the time of appraisal with the PDO well aligned to both
               Bank and government priorities and strategies, at closure, relevance was diverted in the latter stages of the
               project due to the substantial change in the Government’s priorities and their changing priorities.

               While the government originally had been interested in modernizing its State Owned Banks, at closure it
               became clear that the ownership and commitment of the government to support this project decreased
               sharply as more than 70 percent of the project was cancelled and resources channeled to other priorities.
               While the importance of the reforms and changes proposed were still essential to the financial sector in
               Afghanistan, the diminished government commitment did mean there were moderate shortcomings to the
               project's relevance. Given this shift, the project's rating for relevance is Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1 was to “enhance the corporate governance of the supported Afghan state-owned banks”.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The original design contained no explicit theory of change as that was not required at the time. The theory of
                             change as outlined in the ICR is clear and convincing and without significant underlying assumptions. Inputs
                             such as financial support and technical assistance were to lead to activities such as the establishment of a
                             dedicated oversight unit including relevant policies and procedures; development of a nomination process for
                             a board of supervisors; building institutional capacity within the MOF to exercise ownership functions of state

                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



banks; establishment of an M&E system, development of corporate governance policies, procedures and
guidelines; development of internal policies and procedures and establishing board processes and training of
board members and staff. These activities were expected to lead to outputs such as the existence of
ownership policy for state banks; an ownership unit, supervisory boards for the three state banks, an M&E
system and internal policies and procedures. The expected outcomes to be derived from these outputs were
the MOF’s improved oversight capacity and effective governance of the state banks in line with the OECD
Guidelines. This was in turn expected to contribute to longer term impacts such as the state bank’s enhanced
contribution to a broader access to financial services, improved financial stability and a more efficient financial
system.

The project team did preparatory work regarding corporate governance but given the early termination of the
project, most of the achievements were mainly at an output level. Most outcomes were either only partly
achieved or not achieved.

Outputs

      Establishment of Ownership Policy for State-Owned Banks (SB). Achieved. The project supported
         development of the ownership policy which defined the purposes and mandate of state banks and
         defined MoF’s requirements for the corporate governance of SBs, the procedures for appointing the
         members to the Boards of Supervisors (BOS), and disclosure and reporting requirements.
        Establishment of Ownership Unit. Mostly Achieved. The project supported establishment of the
         Ownership Unit at the MOF with dedicated staff, albeit consultants, to cover legal, governance,
         banking, and business aspects of SB’s financial operations in accordance with the Ownership Policy.
         At closure, the operational ownership unit was partially operational.
        Strengthening of supervisory boards at each of the three SBs. Partly Achieved. While the project
         initially supported appointment of five members on the SB’s BOS’, as required by the Ownership
         Policy, at project completion only PB was compliant with this requirement. In addition, there was a
         high turnover of directors with prolonged periods of time between new appointments.
        Approval of performance contracts for CEOs of the three SBs. Partly Achieved. The project
         supported the development of performance contracts for the three SB CEOs, including related
         consultation, which resulting in the signing of the three contracts in January 2020. However, the
         indicator was the establishment of Supervisory Boards for the three SBs. At closure, there were
         vacant senior management positions of State Banks.
        SBs’ reporting to the Ownership Unit. Partly Achieved. The project supported the development of the
         reporting framework aimed at standardizing SB’s quarterly reporting. The data provided by the three
         banks was not always provided consistently and included gaps which limited the analysis of their
         performance.
        Development of internal policies and procedures. Not Achieved. With the support of the project, the
         Ownership Unit has also developed the following policies: i) Compensation and Remuneration Policy
         for the Supervisory Board Members of the SOBs; ii) Conflict Resolution Policy; and iii) Reporting and
         Monitoring Framework for SOBs which were important for the governance and oversight of SOBs.
         However, at project closure, these policies were still pending MOF approval.

Outcomes

It is plausible that the achieved and partly achieved outputs would have the potential to improve the MOF’s
oversight capacity and effective governance of the state banks. However, given the early termination of the

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



project and cancellation of the majority of the funds committed (as a consequence of the Government's
request) although some activities were delivered at an output level, the expected outcomes were not fully
achieved.

In addition, due to the lack of capacity in the Ministry of Finance, the overall oversight capacity was not
improved.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2 was “to enhance the operational efficiency of the supported Afghan state-owned banks”.

Rationale
Theory of change
The original design contained no explicit theory of change as that was not required at the time. The theory of
change as outlined in the ICR is clear and convincing and without significant underlying assumptions. Inputs
such as financial support and technical assistance were to lead to activities such as the development of a
business strategy for state banks; strategic management support for state banks; assessment of IT
infrastructure and development of an IT strategy for state banks; consulting support for legal and regulatory
aspects of a merger of the BMA and NKB; upgrade of the core banking system and automation of service
delivery mechanisms; and capacity building of state bank IT staff. These activities were expected to lead to
outputs such as the existence of a business strategy and a business model for the state banks; modernized
state bank institutions in place, completion of the merger between NKB and BMA, and modernized IT
infrastructure and business processes of the state banks. The outcomes to derive from these outputs were
improved operational efficiency and improved financial soundness of the state banks; enhanced outreach and
improved sustainability of the state banks. This was in turn expected to contribute to longer term impacts such
as the state bank’s enhanced contribution to a broader access to financial services, improved financial
stability and a more efficient financial system.

Achievements regarding enhanced operational efficiency, financial soundness and financial outreach of SBs
under Objective 2 of this project were insignificant. There was, however, improvement in certain indicators but
those were not related to the activities of this project and they can therefore not be attributed to the project.



Outputs
Building institutional capacity of banks and supporting IT modernization strategy of SBs and immediate IT
maintenance was not achieved. On the operational efficiency, the re-engineering of SB’s operations based
on defined mission and business strategy was not achieved given that neither the strategy for IT
modernization nor the SB’s business strategy were developed. These strategies were also linked to
disbursement conditions which were not met thus limiting project’s ability to support some of the planned
investments.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



Institutional development and implementation of business plans was partly Achieved. According to the ICR,
a business plan for each State-Owned Bank has been prepared in alignment with the Government Strategic
Vision for State-Owned Banks approved by the HEC in December 2017 and has been approved by their
respective General Assemblies.

Modernization of IT Systems and Business Processes of SBs was not achieved. The project support in this
area was limited to emergency IT infrastructure investments such as renewal of expired licenses,
replacement of obsolete equipment (e.g., servers network equipment, NKB’s core banking system) which
were deemed critical for SB operations and planned during the design stage. The subsequent
commencement of merger activity was continuously delayed due to complex political economy issues.

Outcomes
Improved operational efficiency and improved financial soundness of SBs were not achieved. The financial
soundness indicators showed adequate capital requirements for all three SBs but revealed deterioration in
loan portfolio quality for the one SB engaged in lending activities, although largely in line with the overall
banking sector trend as a result of COVID-19. The earnings of all three banks remained low with two out of
the three SBs experiencing deterioration of the profitability indicators compared to 2016, and liquidity did not
change much during the project implementation period but remained high overall. It is worth mentioning that
both high CAR and liquidity was largely due to the absence of lending, which is supposed to be the core
activity of banks in general. Average adjusted ROE was 9.17% at completion, slightly lower than the 10%
expected but higher than the 3.4% baseline. In terms of efficiency (average adjusted operating income
margin), it reached 68% at evaluation, slightly higher than the 65% of the baseline but lower than the 77%
expected. In terms of SBs meet the central bank's minimum capital requirements it reached 62.34%, lower
than 100% expected but higher than the 33% at appraisal. However, the level of ROE, efficiency and capital
requirement at evaluation can’t be plausibly be attributed to the activities of this project, especially with the
early termination of the project.

Enhanced financial outreach or improved sustainability of the state banks were not achieved. The project did
not facilitate increase in SB’s lending activities. Despite a growth in the deposit base, the lending base had
decreased. There was only a slight increase in branches network for all three SBs. Both the total number of
branches and the number of ATMs seemed inadequate compared to the size of the country. The number of
SBs clients served decreased from 2.2 million at appraisal to 1.9 million at evaluation, significantly lower than
the 3.2 million expected. In terms of client satisfaction rate (disaggregated by gender) there was no data at
evaluation. The same happened with savings in staff time. Increase in the number of Digital Financial
Services users in SBs (disaggregated by gender) it reached 7.5%, that was less than half of the 15%
expected but higher than the 0 of the baseline.

At closure, the governance of SOBs were not in line with original expectations. Some intermediate outcomes
such as improved operational efficiency, financial soundness and sustainability of the SOBs would have
needed full and long-term commitment of the government and the willingness to reform the SOEs. Given the
changes in the government’s priorities and early project closure, those outcomes were not achieved.



Rating
Negligible



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is Modest as the none of the objectives were achieved as the project first faced significant
                            delays and then early closure due to political issues. Most of the project committed funds were cancelled at
                            the Government's request. Some of the expected outputs were achieved or partly achieved, but no significant
                            results at outcome level were reported. According to the ICR the project achieved one (1) out of the four (4)
                            PDO indicators and one (1) out of eight (8) intermediate results indicators based on the most recent results
                            framework’s update as of March 31, 2021.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   There was no ERR or FRR calculated by the ICR team. As the project only had a qualitative economic and
   financial analysis at project design it was not possible to assess the net economic benefits by re-calculating the
   net present value and economic rate of return.

   This was a US$40 million project of which about 73 percent of committed funds were cancelled early as
   requested by the government. Consequently, most of the planned activities had to be compressed or dropped
   such that the possibility of reaching the original objectives was very low.

   There were several factors that affected the implementation of this project, including the political economy of the
   reform of state-owned banks. There was high turnover of key counterparts (i.e., four Ministers of Finance), inter-
   agency coordination, and shifts in government policy all of which were under the government control and which
   resulted in considerable implementation delays. Political risk and security instability in Afghanistan along with
   COVID pandemic affected the implementation of this project.

   As there was a very early cancellation of most of the funds, the project failed to achieve a return that was higher
   than the opportunity cost of capital as most outcomes and impacts were not achieved. As a consequence of the
   early cancellation, the resources and inputs could not be fully converted into results.


   Efficiency Rating
          Modest


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                        Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While the project remained substantially relevant to Afghanistan CPF, at closure the relevance was modest due
to the change of governmental priorities. Efficacy was rated Modest as project achievements were limited as
most of the project activities were not completed mainly due to early project closure. The efficiency was rated
modest due to implementation delays and the cancellation of over 70 percent of the originally committed project
funds and ultimately an early project closure. Due of the Taliban take-over, there is a high degree of uncertainty
regarding the sustainability of accomplishments under the project under the new political regime.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

As there was a full takeover of the Taliban regime in 2021 in Afghanistan, there is a high risk that the
originally expected development outcomes will not be achieved even in the mid-term. There is a high
likelihood that the political changes in Afghanistan due to the Taliban takeover will continue to be detrimental
to the ultimate achievement of the operation’s development outcome.

The severity of the political risk effect on development outcome is considered to be high while the
adaptability of the operation’s design to withstand the change is considered minimal due to the significant
change in political environment in Afghanistan in recent years. Uncertainties in terms of political risk and
government ownership and commitment faced by this operation are expected to remain in the mid-term.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was designed to fit the context and priorities of the country and its financial sector after the
  banking crisis as a consequence of the failure of Kabul Bank. The government identified the
  macroeconomic risks derived from the state banks’ poor performance and weak operational structures as
  main development problems to be addressed, and wanted to mitigate these risks by strengthening the
  financial sector and enhance financial intermediation. At appraisal, engagement with the three SOEs was



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



  appropriate but the plan to address corporate governance and operation efficiency of the banks was
  highly ambitious and difficult to implement, especially in a fragile context such as Afghanistan.

  The project design was based on analytical work and engagement with the government since 2016. The
  Afghanistan banking sector review assessed the existing legal and regulatory framework for banks in the
  country and covered various aspects including: i) legal and regulatory framework of banking/financial
  system, ii) corporate governance framework, iii) risk management in Afghanistan’s banking sector and Da
  Afghanistan Bank (DAB) supervision. The review highlighted the need to deal with the legacy problems
  associated with the Kabul Bank crisis, including improving corporate governance and enhance risk
  management of the banks. Some of the recommendations provided by the review, including improving
  the effectiveness of Banks’ risk management systems and establishment of ownership policy for SBs,
  formed the foundation of the design of the project.

  The World Bank team correctly identified political economy and client commitment as the two main risks
  of projects in countries such as Afghanistan. These risks were not fully mitigated (IEG notes, however,
  that it would not be possible for the World Bank to mitigate against such changes in government and
  political environment like the Taliban take-over in Afghanistan), and fully materialized early in the project
  implementation period resulting in cancellation of funds and early project closure.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation and supervision teams provided hands-on implementation support, identified bottlenecks in
 project implementation, and advised the counterparts on strategic and operational issues in a timely
 manner. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic which disrupted implementation and changes in political
 support, the Government decided to cancel the majority of project funds, exacerbating delays caused by
 the political economy constraints.

 There was no formal supervision mission resulting in issuance of any Aide Memoires between March 2020
 and April 2021. The political situation (several changes on the Government in a short period of time and
 then the fall of the Government itself) delayed the implementation of the merger. The government’s
 priorities shifted partly due to the pandemic which resulted in cancellation of over 70 percent of project
 funds. This required a project restructuring, which could not be completed until the technical approach for
 the merger had been agreed. The project did not have a mid-term review which was originally planned in
 September 2020, due to the previously mentioned cancellation which took place in June 2020. All the Aide
 Memoires and ISRs were comprehensive and addressed the key issues, as well as list of activities to be
 followed up as next steps. Despite the fact that the Bank team could not travel to the country in person
 following the outbreak of the pandemic, the TTL kept frequent communication with the counterparts
 virtually, both with the MOF officials and project management team, as well as with the key stakeholders.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There was no explicit theory of change (ToC) at project design as this was not a requirement at the time of
 project design. The ICR provided quite a good Theory of Change. The project’s results framework identified
 multiple PDO- and intermediate outcomes indicators and most of them revisions. In addition, some of
 the indicators did not match some of the long-term outcomes of the project. For example, the operational
 efficiency of SBs was measured by the system uptime, which was an indicator to measure efficiency of the
 IT systems rather than the operational efficiency of the SBs. Intermediate indicators were not well aligned
 with mid-term outcomes as the project aimed to enhance the IT infrastructure but the ultimate objective was
 to improve the operational efficiency in general, not just the IT system efficiency.

 Overall, the project could have benefited from a explicit theory of change that specified the number of
 planned interventions that lead to desired outcomes, as well as the causal link among the inputs, activities,
 outputs and outcomes. An incremental results framework where implementation and indicators were built in
 phases from the outset or with revisions considered during implementation could have been more
 adequate for these type of complex projects that depend of previous reforms. See Lesson 1. in the
 Lessons section.



b. M&E Implementation
  Although the results framework was regularly updated during the implementation missions, the quality of
  the reported results was weak. Some of the results reported in the results framework contradicted the
  information from the Ownership Unit which reported that all SBs had met the minimum capital
  requirements by DAB. These contradictions may be attributed to misunderstanding of the indicators
  and/or data quality, overall casting doubt in the reliability of some of the reported information.
  Achievement of some of the indicators was difficult to interpret and verify by the project team as they
  were self-reported by SBs.

  Parts of the M&E implementation plans were not fully realized due to early project closure. While the
  project did regularly report on the results framework as reflected in ISRs, the first and only
  comprehensive SBs performance Report was prepared only in early 2021 (for Q3 2020). Further, a
  beneficiary mechanism was supposed to be integrated into the project through an indicator on citizen
  engagement as well as client’s satisfaction of services provided by SBs and this did not happen.



c. M&E Utilization
  There was no evidence of utilization of monitoring data collected under the project other than for the
  purpose of project reporting. There was no information on whether the data was relevant to any


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



  decisions or resource allocations during project implementation. Further, towards the end of the project
  an M&E framework was established with the vision to provide quarterly monitoring of these SBs, but this
  was not implemented due to the political and humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   There is no explicit information in the ICR as to whether any of the Safeguard Policies were triggered by the
   project, nor is there any information on compliance. However, the information included in the ICR does
   presume that no policies were triggered.

   As the three SOBs had a very small proportion of their assets composed of loans, there were limited
   environmental or social risks associated. In addition, most of the activities conducted by the project had
   limited environmental or social risks. There was no disposal of IT equipment and only maintenance work
   was carried out, which did not have any environmental impact.

   As there was no merger of any of the three SOBs, there were no redundancies as initially expected. At
   project closure, no client survey was conducted because of early termination and the client satisfaction rate
   was not captured either by the ISR or by the SB performance report conducted by the ownership
   unit. Implemented project activities focused on structural reforms related to corporate governance,
   procurement of IT and preparation for the merger, but no activities interfacing directly with SB employees or
   the wider population were observed given the nature of the project. None of the SOBs adopted the GRM at
   evaluation. The project developed a conflict resolution policy aimed at institutionalizing complaints handling
   in each of the three SOBs as part of social safeguards requirements which was not implemented due to
   early closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Government’s Financial Management capacity was low in terms of reporting,
   internal control procedures, planning and budgeting. As a consequence of the above, there were delays in
   completing the agreed Financial Management (FM) actions during the last two years of implementation
   and the project’s FM rating was downgraded. The project was compliant with the financial reporting and
   had been submitting most of the Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs) on time.

   The task team made an effort to support the project to address the issues in order to improve fiduciary
   performance. The audited reports were reviewed on time, and action plans were agreed to implement audit
   recommendations. All fiduciary issues were tracked through the Bank’s Compliance Management System
   during the last year of implementation. Over the three years of project life, the World Bank conducted three
   FM supervision reports that were filed in the World Bank’s system.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



   Procurement. Procurement guidelines were followed. The project experienced significant delays in the
   procurement on key functions from the beginning of the project. Considering cancellation of the majority of
   project funds, there were no new procurements in 2020 and 2021 with the exception for one procurement
   activity for the engagement of the consultancy firm in support of the merger of NKB and BMA. In those
   years due to early cancellation, all other planned procurement activities were either canceled or procured,
   though some of the payments were still pending for three activities at project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from the ICR with some modifications by IEG:

Lesson 1. Projects supporting corporate restructuring may benefit from a streamlined results
framework. When there are high number of PDO- and intermediate outcome indicators, it may be
challenging to implement and report on all of them, especially when these depend on other structural
reforms. A streamlined and incremental results framework with fewer indicators directly relevant to
project interventions focusing on structural reform, may be beneficial.

Lesson 2. Close coordination of international development partners and leveraging of parallel policy
reform operations may enhance the success of a project. Also, when doing reforms of SOEs, a close
coordination with the IMF may be beneficial in terms of establishing macroeconomic stability and
laying foundations for structural reforms, resolution and privatization of SOBs. this could also
facilitate coordination of measures to address corruption, to strengthen banking system, and to build
a sound and effective financial sector that can facilitate private sector activity.

Lesson 3. Frequent change of counterparts during project implementation and lack of needed
political will to reform the politically complex banking sectors may derail the implementation of
expected reforms. Even when World Bank teams have high-level political support at preparation

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Modernizing Afghan State-Owned Banks (P161348)



stage, political changes and those of leadership at the Ministry of Finance may weaken initial
support, especially when there are coordination issues.

Lesson 4. Weak institutional knowledge capacity and retention due to staffing structure may
jeopardize the implementation and roll out of expected reforms. If capacity is not built within the civil
service (but only through consultants), this may jeopardize institutional capacity building. Once the
consultants leave at project closure there could be lack of technical capacity in the Ministry of
Finance to sustain M&E or oversight activities after a project is implemented. Once a project is
implemented, there has to be clear Ownership by civil servants with the capacity and willingness to
continue what was implemented and who can benefit from on-the-job trainings, ensuring a proper
handover from the consultants by the end of the project and post implementation



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR document was concise and the quality of analysis and level of evidence was adequate. The ICR was
consistent with the guidelines and explained well what happened after the cancellation of the majority of funds
committed and why this was the main reason for not achieving expected outcomes and impacts of this project.
The ICR was candid about the reasons for cancellation and the lack of achievement of outcomes and impacts.
The ICR provided a clear and convincing Theory of Change and had good internal consistency. The lessons
were based on evidence.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 14
