     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0023050

1. Program Information



 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Rwanda                            Energy & Extractives

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                 Approved Operations
 3                                  4

 Operation ID                       Operation Name
 P162671                            Rwanda Energy DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                  Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61560                         30-Jun-2019                                       125,308,920.12

 Bank Approval Date                Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Dec-2017                       30-Jun-2019
                                   IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                    125,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                     125,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                 125,308,920.12                                           0.00




P166458_TBL
 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Rwanda                            Energy & Extractives

 Operation ID                      Operation Name
 P166458                           Rwanda Energy Sector DPO2 ( P166458 )




                                                                                        Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61560,IDA-63440                   30-Jun-2020                                         124018048.00

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Nov-2018                           30-Jun-2020

                                       IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        125,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                         125,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                     124,018,048.00                                           0.00



 P169040_TBL
 Country                               Practice Area (Lead)
 Rwanda                                Energy & Extractives

 Operation ID                          Operation Name
 P169040                               Third Rwanda Energy Sector DPO ( P169040 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-63440,IDA-64850,IDA-66290         30-Jun-2021                                         226793939.19

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Aug-2019                           30-Jun-2021

                                       IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        225,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                         225,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                     226,793,939.19                                           0.00



 Prepared by              Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia      Dileep M. Wagle            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                            Page 2 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



a. Objectives

The program document states that the “Program Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed operation is to
enable fiscally sustainable expansion of electricity services in Rwanda.

The proposed operation is built around two pillars: (a) contain fiscal impact of the electricity sector, and (b) improve
the operational efficiency, affordability, and accountability of electricity service.” (PD1, summary page, PD2, p. 3,
PD3, p3, PDSO, summary page). The second pillar consists of four sub-pillars (objectives). Therefore, to assess the
program, the review defines its objectives as:

PDO1: Contain the fiscal impact of the electricity sector

PDO2: Transition to least-cost and low-carbon energy mix

PDO3: Increase access to affordable and reliable electricity services

PDO4: Improve the accountability and the transparency of REG

PDO5: Improve the operational efficiency and the quality of electricity services
b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Development Policy Credits (DPC) had two policy areas: (a) fiscal impact of the electricity sector and (b)
operational efficiency, affordability, and accountability of electricity service.



Fiscal impact of the electricity sector. This pillar covered adjustments in electricity tariffs, projections of
revenues for and fiscal transfers to the Rwanda Energy Group (REG) consistent with the government’s budget
envelope, and adoption of options by the Ministries of Infrastructure and of Economic Planning and Finance to
achieve fiscal sustainability in the electricity sector and contain fiscal transfers to the sector.

The present organization of the sector derives from reforms carried out in 2013, when the Electricity, Water, and
Sanitation Authority (EWSA) was split, and the Rwanda Electricity Group (REG) took over the electricity utility
functions. REG became the holding company of two subsidiaries created after the reforms: (a) EUCL, an electric
utility mandated to operate the country’s publicly owned generation, transmission, and distribution assets;
provide customer service; and develop the distribution network in the already electrified areas and (b) EDCL, an
asset development company mandated to develop new generation plants and expand the distribution grid to
provide electricity access to new areas. This split allows for clear financial accountability between energy
development (nonrevenue) and utility operations (revenue-generating electricity business). The utilities are
owned by the government but are governed under company law as opposed to public service law. MININFRA
has the policy setting mandate, and the Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Authority (RURA) regulates the sector and
approves electricity tariffs (Source: World Bank Report No- 120612-RW, p. 14)

Operational efficiency, affordability, and accountability of electricity service. This pillar covered aspects of
least-cost development for the electricity program and low-carbon energy mix, access to affordable and reliable
electricity services, accountability and transparency of REG, and operational efficiency and quality of electricity
services. This pillar covers PDO2, PDO3, PDO4 and PDO5.



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The program consisted of three development policy credits for US$125 million each and one supplemental
credit for US$100 million. The credits were approved on December 1, 2017 (DPC1), November 15, 2018
(DPC2), August 29, 2019 (DPC3) and May 1, 2020 (supplemental). The credits closed on June 30, 2019, June
30, 2020, and June 30 of 2021 as planned.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Government strategy

 Rwanda progressed rapidly in developing its energy sector during 2007-2017, and access to electricity,
 installed generation capacity, private sector participation, and quality, reliability, and efficiency of supply
 improved substantially. The achievements were part of the government’s Vision 2020 document (revised
 2012) and its First and Second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategies (EDPRS I, EPRS
 II) of 2008-2012 and 2013–2018, which set ambitious targets for the sector. The National Strategy for
 Transformation (NST1) (2017–2024) revised the target dates for the country to become a lower- and upper-
 middle income country and continued the ambitious electrification program with the goal of achieving
 universal access to electricity by 2024. Energy access was a central part of the plan to achieve Rwanda’s
 goals of more inclusive growth and development. The four documents provide the context for the sector’s
 development and the WBG programmatic series.

 Bank strategy

 The WBG had supported the government’s program of electricity expansion and the programmatic series was
 an additional step in that support. Electricity was Objective 1 of Pillar 1 (Accelerating economic growth that is
 private sector driven and job-creating) of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Rwanda for FY2014–18
 and Objective 3 (Expanded access to infrastructure and the digital economy) of the Country Partnership
 Framework (CPF) for FY2021-26. The CPS viewed the energy sector as enabling private sector investment
 and improving social welfare while the CPF stressed the need to carry out policy reforms to reduce the high
 costs of electricity and the unreliability of the service, which constrained private sector development. The
 program was part of a package of WBG interventions aimed at expanding electricity supply and achieving
 universal access to it at affordable prices; by supporting these goals, the DPO program supported the twin
 goals of reducing poverty and improving prosperity. The program was also consistent with the WBG Strategy
 for the energy sector (2013), which sought to help countries have reliable and affordable energy services.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 1. Number and List of Prior Actions


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



Objective 1: Contain the fiscal impact of the electricity sector

      PA#1 – Revenue assessment. The REG Board of Directors approved the assessment of the current
         revenue requirement of REG and its affiliate companies contained in the REG Strategic Plan 2017–
         2026 and started an independent review of said assessment.
        PA#2 – Revenue assessment. REG has approved the results of an efficient revenue requirement
         (ERR) study, piloting the use of efficiency benchmarks in the determination of the revenue
         requirement trajectory towards cost-recovery.
        PA#3 – Electricity tariff reforms. RURA [Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Authority] has implemented new
         electricity tariffs effective August 13, 2018, introducing new tariff categories and rationalized tariffs for
         selected consumers.
        PA#4 – Fiscal transfers projections. MININFRA [Ministry of Infrastructure] and MINECOFIN [Ministry
         of Finance and Economic Planning] have jointly (a) adopted options to achieve electricity sector fiscal
         sustainability and contain budget transfers to the electricity sector in the medium term and (b)
         submitted the results to the Economic Cluster.
        PA#5 - Fiscal transfers projections. The Economic Cluster has approved a medium-term trajectory for
         fiscal transfers to REG and measures to stay within the budget envelope, including a financing plan
         for national electrification prioritizing private financing for off-grid solutions, a commitment to
         implementing the quarterly tariff adjustment, and a decision to pursue a partial listing of EUCL [Energy
         Utility Corporation Limited] on a stock exchange.

Objective 2: Transition to least-cost and low-carbon energy mix

      PA#6 – REG investment plan. The REG Board of Directors approved the outline of the Sector
         Development Investment Plan, which is based on the LCPDP [Least-cost Power Development Plan].
        PA#7 – REG investment plan. MININFRA adopted a resolution requiring the LCPDP to be updated on
         an annual basis by REG.
        PA#8 – RDB and investment department capacity. The Rwanda Development Board (RDB)
         strengthened the capacity of its Strategic Investment Department (SID) through (i) organizational
         restructuring of said department; (ii) the appointment of at least one PPP [Public-Private Partnership]
         analyst; and (iii) the certification on PPP matters of at least two staff of the SID.
        PA#9 – PPP Law and competition in electricity sector. The RDB has approved guidelines for
         implementation of the PPP Law of 2016, which mandates competitive procurement of private sector-
         owned electricity infrastructure, with the exception of mini-grids that do not require off-taker
         agreements with the public sector.
        PA#10 – Energy Sector Strategic Plan. MININFRA has adopted an updated Energy Sector Strategic
         Plan (ESSP), covering the period 2017/18–2023/24, which is consistent with the LCPDP and the
         NEP.
        PA#11 – Power planning and GHG emissions. MININFRA has approved an updated LCPDP
         methodology that, inter alia, incorporates, the government’s GHG emission reduction commitments.
        PA#12 – Containing costs and subsidies and sharing risk with private producers. REG has approved
         new standard PPA [Power Purchase Agreements] clauses and a standardized risk allocation matrix
         applicable to all future IPPs [Independent Power Producers] to ensure adequate risk sharing between
         REG and the private investors.




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



      PA#13 – Containing costs and subsidies and cross-border electricity trade. RURA has completed a
         review of its regulatory framework for cross-border electricity trade, which concluded that its grid code
         and licensing regulations are compatible with electricity trade in the East Africa Power Pool.

Objective 3: Increase access to affordable and reliable electricity services

      PA#14 – The REG Board of Directors (i) approved the technical audit of the Government’s approach
         to electrification; and (ii) submitted it to MININFRA for its approval.
      PA#15 – Electricity tariffs. RURA adopted a new electricity tariff schedule, which includes, inter-alia,
         time-of-use incentives, demand charges for large consumers, lifeline tariffs for low volume electricity
         consumers below 15 kWh.
        PA#16 – Connections policy. MININFRA approved a new connection policy that eliminates up-front
         payment of the full connection fee and allows said connection fee to be paid over time.
        PA#17 – Standards for solar systems. The Rwanda Standards Board issued and published in the
         Official Gazette the national standards consistent with the standards developed by the International
         Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) for solar systems and the MININFRA approved the Guidelines on
         Minimum Standard Requirements for Solar Home Systems to Support Off-Grid Standards
         Enforcement.
        PA#18 – National Electrification Plan. REG has approved the NEP [National Electrification Plan],
         which identifies principles for investments to achieve universal access by 2024 and close the gender
         access gap and submitted it to MININFRA for approval.
        PA#19 – On and off-grid solutions – investments. MININFRA has (a) adopted procedures for
         implementing investments in on-grid and off-grid electrification; and (b) approved a grid extension plan
         prepared in full accordance with the least-cost options.
        PA#20 – Off-grid solutions – guidelines. MININFRA has approved guidelines setting minimum
         requirements for off-grid solutions that are consistent with international best practice to ensure that
         off-grid solutions remain affordable in Rwanda.
        PA#21 – Off-grid solutions – incentives. REG has approved an incentive scheme to make off-grid
         solutions affordable for low-income households.
        PA#22 – Regulations for mini-grids. (a) RURA has updated the simplified licensing framework for
         mini-grids that do not require an offtaker agreement with the public sector; (b) RURA has issued and
         published the technical specifications for mini-grids; and (c) MININFRA has approved the investment
         guidelines for mini-grids.

Objective 4: Improve the accountability and the transparency of REG

      PA#23 – Financial accountability-International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The REG Board
       of Directors (i) endorsed the shift to consolidated financial reporting of REG and its affiliates and the
       revision of the chart of accounts, compliant with IFRS requirements; and (ii) approved the roadmap
       towards compliance with IFRS.
      PA#24 – Financial accountability-IFRS standards. The financial statements of EUCL for the year
       ended June 30, 2018, have been prepared according to IFRS and audited by an independent auditor.
      PA#25 – Financial accountability-IFRS standards. REG has completed its transition to IFRS, as
       evidenced by the unqualified opinion of the independent auditor on the financial statements of both
       REG and EUCL;



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



      PA#26 – Financial accountability-transparency. The REG Board of Directors has mandated the
         external audit and publication of the financial statements of REG, EDCL (Energy Development
         Corporation Limited) and EUCL financial statements within the first quarter of the following financial
         year.

Objective 5: Improve the operational efficiency and the quality of electricity services

      PA#27 – REG metering. The REG (i) initiated piloting the use of bulk metering to accurately measure
         systems losses; and (ii) approved the plan for commercial losses reduction of EUCL.
        PA#28 – REG CEO and CFO. MININFRA piloted the use of competitive international hiring of key
         staff in REG by (i) completing the competitive hiring of the new REG CEO; and (ii) initiating the
         competitive hiring process for the appointment of a new REG CFO.
        PA#29 – REG and quality of service. REG has approved a strategy and the related operational
         procedures for improving commercial customers’ quality of service and the general quality of
         electricity supply.
        PA#30 – REG and GIS use. (a) REG has fully staffed the GIS [Geographic Information System] unit;
         (b) REG has revised the operational procedures for new connections to include GIS data collection for
         all new connections; (c) REG has approved the piloting of GIS data in the identification of grid faults
         and complaint resolution.
        PA#31 – REG, corporate planning and human resources. REG has adopted operational procedures
         for efficient corporate planning and HR [Human Resources].
        PA#32 – REG and customer billing. REG has fully transitioned to automated customer and bill
         management using its new Integrated Business Management System (IBMS).

2. Assessing Relevance of Prior Actions

Objective 1: Contain the fiscal impact of the electricity sector

      PA#1, PA#2, PA#4, PA#5. Revenue assessment and fiscal transfer projections. The relevance of
         PA#1, PA#2, PA#4, PA#5 is Satisfactory.

Electricity tariffs did not keep up pace with the expensive additions to generating capacity and with the public
investments program that expanded transmission, distribution and streetlighting. As a result, the sector
needed fiscal transfers to sustain its operational costs and investments; transfers reached 1.9 percent of
GDP at the time of preparing DPO3 (August 2019) and were expected to exceed 4 percent of GDP by
FY2020/21. Under these conditions, the sector’s expansion could deteriorate the country’s fiscal stability and
stall its growth. To address these issues, it was necessary to seek that tariff revenues pay for the full cost of
service and that such cost must reflect operational efficiency to prevent consumers from paying for wasteful
expenditure; because it would take time to achieve these goals and while tariffs reflect the full cost of service
the government’s transfers to the sector would have to be affordable and socially acceptable. The program
sought to help achieve these goals by supporting (a) a sound assessment of future revenues under efficiency
benchmarks while piloting the use of benchmarks (PA#1, PA#2), (b) the adoption of options to achieve fiscal
sustainability in the electricity sector (PA#4) and (c) adoption of measures to stay within budget after the
Economic Cluster approves a medium-term trajectory for fiscal transfers to REG, including a commitment to
implementing quarterly tariff adjustments and partially listing the Energy Utility Corporation Limited (EUCL) on
a stock exchange (PA#5).



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



      PA#3, PA#5 – Electricity tariffs. The relevance of PA#3, PA#5 is Satisfactory.

The previous discussion highlighted the need to raise electricity tariffs to reduce the sector’s potential deficit
and the fiscal transfers to finance it. The increase in tariffs should be consistent with the expected transfers to
the sector in the medium term. PA#3 referred to a tariff adjustment which raised the average cost recovery
level, introduced new tariff categories, and rationalized tariffs for selected consumers. PA#5 referred to future
quarterly tariff increases which capture the fiscal trajectory of the transfers to the sector approved by the
Cabinet.

Objective 2: Transition to least-cost and low-carbon energy mix

      PA#6 - PA#11. The relevance of PA#6, PA#7, PA#8, PA#9, PA#10, and PA#11 is Satisfactory.

Prior to the third DPO, the government’s approach to building electricity infrastructure was to negotiate
agreement based on unsolicited proposal [i.e., no open bidding]. Since most of the newly procured
generation capacity was through independent power plants constructed by private parties, the uncompetitive
procurement of electricity drove up the power purchase tariffs faced by the Government. This approach
resulted in a higher financial burden for the government because it was inconsistent with least-cost planning
and did not take into account demand conditions nor risk-sharing between private investors and the Rwanda
Energy Group. The second DPO started addressing these problems by supporting the approval of new
guidelines for implementing the Public-Private Partnership [PPP] Law of 2016, which mandated the
competitive procurement of private sector-owned electricity, except for mini-grids that do not require offtake
agreements with the public sector. The changes brought transparency and competition into procuring
privately-owned generation capacity at least-cost. Having laid the groundwork for competitive bidding and
selecting lowest cost projects, it was still necessary to: (a) have an outline of the investment plan for the
sector based on the least-cost solution (PA#6); (b) update the least-cost plan every year (PA#7), (c) build
capacity in the investment department of the Rwanda Development Board (PA#8); (d) approve guidelines for
implementing the PPP Law (PA#9); and (e) adopt of a six-year energy sector strategic plan for the period
FY2017/18-FY2023/24 (PA#10). Having gained some experience in preparing least-cost development plans,
the government revised the methodology to prepare them, and incorporate reductions in greenhouse gases
compatible with its commitments with the Paris agreement (PA#11).

      PA#12. The relevance of PA#12 is Satisfactory.

The 2014 reforms to the sector managed to attract direct investment of over 20 independent power producers
(private developers) which brought a large increase in capacity which the private sector financed in large part.
The new investments in electricity generation were, in general, implemented through directly negotiated deals
which prevented the country from getting the benefits of transparent, competitive processes. To address the
problems created by these deals and to ensure that the investments for all the segments of the electricity
supply chain (generation, transmission, and distribution) are procured through competitive processes, REG
issued a new document that defined its future relations with IPP and the rules governing the power-purchase
agreements (PPA) with them. The changes represent a new institutional arrangement and structure which is
expected to improve risk management between the government and the IPP. PA#12 supported these
changes.

      PA#13. The relevance of PA#13 is Satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



Rwanda is a member of the Eastern Africa Power Pool (EAPP), a regional institution established in 2005 to
coordinate cross-border power trade and grid interconnection among nations of the Eastern Africa region.
The EAPP currently has eleven (11) members and four synchronized networks (or interconnected “clusters”),
of which Rwanda belongs to one, the Rwanda–Burundi–East DRC network. The pool seeks to facilitate and
secure power supply to the Eastern Africa Region at the lowest possible cost. To access this pool Rwanda
had to verify that its regulatory framework does not constitute a barrier to electricity trade and that its grid
code and licensing regulations allow it to trade electricity in the EAAP. With the rules for access verified,
Rwanda can benefit from buying cheaper energy from its partners. PA#13 supported this process.

Objective 3: Increase access to affordable and reliable electricity services

To achieve the goals of its National Strategy for Transformation the government sought to ensure that
electricity production expanded according to plan, at the lowest cost possible and that poor people, especially
those in rural areas, could afford it. These goals could be achieved using off-grid solar solutions, whose
costs had fallen sharply and could reach poor areas where the costs of expanding the grid and the tariffs to
recover them would be high and unaffordable to poor households. The government plans envisaged that off-
grid solutions affordable to low-income households would reach 48 percent of the population.

      The relevance of PA#14 is Satisfactory.

The strategy required to use new ways of producing and supplying electricity to consumers. To achieve that,
REG, the implementing agency, and the Ministry of Infrastructure had to approve the strategy. PA#14
reflected this process, which consisted of REG’s Board of Directors approving the technical audit of the
Government’s approach and then submit it to MININFRA.

      The relevance of PA#15, PA#16 is Satisfactory.

Demand side issues. Two prior actions addressed them. PA#15 supported changes in the level and structure
of electricity tariffs which sought to ensure that consumers use electricity efficiently and poor people have
access to it. The changes included, among others, charges for large consumers, lower tariffs for customers
using less than 15 kwh, and incentives for time-of-day use. PA#16 addressed the affordability of connection
fees by poor households, which lacked access to credit and could not afford to pay it in one tranche; PA#16
supported authorizing the payment in installments, making it possible to pay the fee.

      The relevance of PA#17-PA#22 is Satisfactory.

Supply side issues. Several prior actions addressed these issues. These can be split in two. The first group
(PA#17, PA#18) addressed the standards for solar systems –which Rwanda lacked and were necessary for
its solar energy policy to succeed. PA##17 supported establishment of national standards consistent with
international ones. PA#18 supported REG approving a National Electrification Plan meeting these new
standards and submitting them to MININFRA for approval. These standards had to guarantee access for
all by 2024, and close the gender access gap.

The second group (PA#19-PA#22) addressed off-grid energy issues: implementing investments, incentives,
regulations for mini-grids and guidelines for standards to be met. PA#19 sought to ensure the sustainability of
the off-grid market by supporting the government’s adoption of procedures for implementing investments in
on- and off-grid electrification and the approval of an investment plan adhering to the least-cost option.
PA#20 sought to ensure that off-grid solutions are affordable and meet requirements consistent with

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



international best practices. PA#21 sought to provide incentives for off-grid energy producers to ensure that
they deliver affordable energy to low-income households. PA#22 sought to simplify the regulations for mini-
grids that lack an offtake agreement with the public sector and to ensure that investment and technical
specifications guidelines are clear.

Objective 4: Improve the accountability and the transparency of REG

REG’s expenditures exceeded its revenues, making it financially dependent upon the government, donors
and limited commercial loans to cover its operational deficit and finance its investment program. Rwanda was
able to get private finance for electricity generation with REG’s commitment to buy it and the government
guaranteeing REG’s payments with sovereign guarantees. There were also other problems: (a) REG’s two
subsidiaries used different accounting methods (cash basis in EDCL, accrual basis in EUCL); (b) REG did not
publish the financial statements of its subsidiaries and (c) REG’s financial statements did not meet
international financial reporting standards. The problems meant that REG lacked the financial means and the
agility to respond well and promptly to meet the needs and demands of the government’s ambitious
expansion program. To address these issues, it was necessary to improve REG’s financial condition –
covered under objectives 2 and 3– and to bring its financial statements up to international standards, to raise
REG’s financial transparency and accountability.

      The relevance of PA#23-PA#26 is Satisfactory.

The prior actions sought to create the conditions for improving REG’s transparency and accountability. For
this, it was necessary to have:

      REG’s Board of Directors approve the (a) shift to a consolidated reporting of REG and its affiliates
       accounts, (b) revisions to its chart of accounts and (c) roadmap towards compliance with international
       financial reporting standards. PA#23 supported these changes.
      An independent auditor to audit EUCL financial statements prepared and reported using IFRS. PA#24
       supported this result.
      REG complete its transition to IFRS, which would be demonstrated by the unqualified opinion of the
       independent auditor regarding REG and EUCL statements. PA# 25 supported this result.
      REG’s Board of Directors mandate the external audit and publication of REG’s, EDCL’s and EUCL’s
       financial statements within the first quarter of the following financial year. PA#26 supported this
       decision.

Objective 5: Improve the operational efficiency and the quality of electricity services

REG and its two affiliates, EUCL and EDCL, had problems in their operational performance. EUCL’s total
electricity losses were high, resulting in substandard services, high generation costs, a large financial burden
for the treasury, and inability to finance the expansions in generation and transmission with its own
resources. Among the reasons for these problems were weak managerial capacity and inadequate
information systems which could not monitor system’s losses and failures, preventing the companies from
correcting them.

      The relevance of PA#27-PA#32 is Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



 Improving service required adopting new procedures and introducing technological advances for REG to
 trace a roadmap for improvement. The prior actions sought to support:

       Improving data collection on losses and having strategies to improve performance based on good
        quality data. PA#27 supported this effort through the use of bulk metering (in a pilot phase) and
        preparing a plan to reduce EUCL’s commercial losses.
       Improving the quality of REG’s senior management by institutionalizing its selection through an
        international competitive hiring process. PA#28 supported this effort through a pilot process with the
        hiring of REG’s Chief Executive Office and, after a successful selection, applying the same process
        for REG’s new Chief Financial Officer.
       REG: (a) adopting procedures for improving the quality of service to commercial consumers and
        overall quality of electricity supply (PA#29); (b) using geospatial planning to identify consumers and
        locations with network faults to resolve problems promptly (PA#30); (c) adopting operational
        procedures to improve the efficiency of its corporate planning and human resource management
        (PA#30); and (d) using its new Integrated Business Management System (IBMS) for the automatic
        management of bills and customers (PA#32).



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Rationale

Objective 1: Contain the fiscal impact of the electricity sector

      RI#1 from prior actions #1, 2, 4, 5. The relevance of RI#1 is Moderately Satisfactory.

Containing electricity subsidies as percentage of GDP imperfectly measures the effort to stem the amount of
resources sent from the central government to REG. The ratio can fall because GDP grows while nominal
transfers do not change, or nominal transfers fall while GDP remains constant; the second case constitutes a
more serious effort at containing the fiscal impact of the electricity sector than the first one. A second point to
note refers to using “electricity subsidies” to identify the indicator, which could be confused with subsidies to
consumers or producers instead of “fiscal transfers”. The ICR makes clear that “subsidies are defined as budget
transfers to the sector” (par. 63); the program documents also explain that they refer to budget transfers. The
indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

      RI#2 from prior actions #3, 5. The relevance of RI#2 is Satisfactory.

The indicator measures whether authorities raised electricity tariffs, independent of the amount. A rise in tariffs
reflects on REG’s operating income, deficit, surplus, and on its needs for fiscal transfers. With RI#1 the indicator



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



measures progress towards achievement of the objective. The indicator can be measured and the information
can be obtained.

Objective 2: Transition to least-cost and low-carbon energy mix

      RI#3 from prior actions #6 - 13. The relevance of RI#3 is Satisfactory.

The indicator measures if new electricity generation and transmission projects meet the least-cost criteria of the
power development plan, are procured under competitive conditions, and comply with the rules and conditions
established in the PPP law. The indicator can be measured, and the information can be obtained.

Objective 3: Increase access to affordable and reliable electricity services

      RI#4 from prior actions #14 - #22. The relevance of RI#4 is Highly Satisfactory.

The indicator captures well the coverage of electricity services at the national level. The indicator can be
measured and the information can be obtained.

      RI#5 from prior actions #14 - #22. The relevance of RI#5 is Highly Satisfactory.

The indicator measures well the coverage of electricity services in rural areas. The indicator can be measured
and the information can be obtained.

Objective 4: Improve the accountability and the transparency of REG

      RI#6 from prior actions #23-26. The relevance of RI#6 is Satisfactory.

Publishing independent audits of REG, EDCL and EUCL that meet international financial reporting standards
raises transparency and contributes to improve accountability. The indicator can be measured and the
information can be obtained.

Objective 5: Improve the operational efficiency and the quality of electricity services

      RI#7 from prior action # 23 – 26, 31. The relevance of RI#7 is Highly Satisfactory.

The indicator measures well the gains in efficiency in the electricity sector. The indicator measures the reduction
of losses as percent of supply. The indicator can be measured and the information can be obtained.

      RI#8 from prior action # 29 -32. The relevance of RI#8 is Highly Satisfactory

The indicators measures well the gains in the quality of electricity services in Rwanda. One measures the
average duration of interruptions (SAIDI) and the other measures the average frequency of interruptions (SAIFI).
They are used internationally to measure quality of service. The indicators can be measured and the information
can be obtained.

      RI#9 from prior action # 29 - 32. The relevance of RI#9 is Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



The indicator measures if the survey was carried out but does not inform how customers feel about the quality of
electricity services. The indicator can be measured and the information can be obtained.

                                  Summary Table on Results Indicators
                                                                                             Most
                                                                                Actual      recent
  RI description                          Baseline    Target                                             RI
                                                                  Actual change in           value
   (assigning a Associate        RI      (including (including                                        achieve
                                                               value as of RI relative available
 number to each d PA(s) relevance units and units and                                                  ment
                                                               target date to targeted (if not
         RI)                                date)      date)                                           rating
                                                                               change       target
                                                                                             date)
Objective 1: Contain the fiscal impact of the electricity sector
RI1. Contain
                                                               0.9% FY2
electricity
                   PA1, PA2,            1.4% in    =<1.5%      020/21
subsidies as                 MS                                              3 times                  High
                   PA4, PA5             FY2016/17 FY2020/21 (ICR, Table
percentage of
                                                               6)
GDP
                                                               No.
RI2. Implement                                                 Postponed
                                        No         Yes
quarterly tariff   PA3, PA5 S                                  after full    n.a.                     Negligible
                                        FY2016/17 FY2020/21
adjustment                                                     tariff review
                                                               in 2022
Objective 2: Transition to least-cost and low-carbon energy mix
RI3. Ensure all
generation and
transmission
projects initiated
or accepted by
the government
                                                               Yes
over the past 24                        No         Yes
months are         PA6-PA13 S           September December                   n.a.                     High
                                                               June 30,
consistent with                         2017       2021
                                                               2021
the LCPDP and
comply with the
PPP Law and
competitive
procurement
procedures
Objective 3: Increase access to affordable and reliable electricity services
RI4. Expand        PA14 -    HS         a. 40.7 % a. 61%       a. 65%        a. 1.2 timesa. 74.5%     Substanti
electrification    PA22                 nationwide nationwide overall                    nationwide   al
rate nationwide                         (29.7% on- –(38% on- (47% on                     (51% on
(percentage of                          grid and   grid and    grid; 18%                 grid; 24%
households)                             11% off- 23% off- off grid) 2/ b. 18%            off grid)
                                        grid)      grid




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



                                        October    December FY2020/20                 September
                                        2017       2020     21                        30, 2022



                                        b. 21%
                                        among
                                        female-    b. 42%     b. 24.8%
                                        headed     among      among
                                        households female-    female-
                                        2016       headed     headed
                                                   households households
                                                   2019
                                                              November
                                                              2017
RI5. Expand
                                      16 percent                                     38 percent
electrification
                                                  25 percent 37 percent
rate among rural PA14 -
                            HS                    December               2.3 times                High
households         PA22
                                                  2020       2020 1/
(percentage of
                                      June 2017                                      2020 4/
households)
Objective 4: Improve the accountability and the transparency of REG
RI6. The
independent
audits of REG,
                                       No          Yes
EDCL, and EUCL
are in compliance
                    PA23 -
with IFRS, without           S                                Yes 5/                               High
                    PA26
qualifications and
                                       September December
published within
                                       2017        2020
the first two
quarters of the
following year
Objective 5 Improve the operational efficiency and the quality of electricity services
                                                                                       18.2%
RI7. Reduce total                      22 percent 19 percent
                                                              19.4
electricity sector PA27,
                                                              percent                              Substanti
losses as a         PA28, PA3HS                                           0.87 times
                                                              March                                al
percentage of       1
                                                              2020                     07/2021 -
electricity supply                     FY2017/18 FY2019/20
                                                                                       06/2022
RI8. Reduce         PA29 -   HS        a. SAIDI: a. SAIDI: a. 17.2        a. 1.6 timesa. 18.2      High
average duration PA32                  44 hours 28 hours hours 1/                      hours
of interruptions                                                          b. 2.8 times
(SAIDI) and                             b. SAIFI:                                      b. 44 hours
average                                265
frequency of                           hrs.    201 b. SAIFI: b. 37 hours               Both
interruptions                          7           183.4                               for 07/202
(SAIFI):                                           hours 2020                          1 - 06/2022

                                                                                                Page 14 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



                                                                             1/



                                                                             2020 both
  RI9. Implement                                        No           Yes
  and publish                                                                                         Yes
                  PA29 -                                                                                          Substanti
  annual customer                           MS
                  PA32                                                                                            al
  satisfaction                                                                                        FY2020/21
  survey                                                2017         2020
  Sources:

  1. The World Bank, Implementation and Completion Results Report on a Series of Four Credits to the Republic of
  Rwanda, Report No: ICR00005690, June 7, 2022

  2. Rwanda Energy Group Ltd Consolidated Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements for the Year Ended
  30th June 2021, for RI4, RI6, RI7, RI8

  3. https://www.reg.rw/what-we-do/access/#:~:text=Electricity%20access,grid%20systems%20(mainly%20solar).

  4. RI5, Access to electricity, rural
  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.RU.ZS?end=2020&locations=RW&start=2012

  5. The Annual Report of REG for the year ended 30th June 2021 is available online on REG’s website. The report
  includes the performance of EUCL and EDCL (https://www.reg.rw/public-information/reports/). There are also the
  independent reports for EUCL and EDCL.




  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Contain the fiscal impact of the electricity sector

               Rationale
               Under this objective, the program supported interventions to assess future revenues of REG, project future
               fiscal transfers to REG and raise electricity tariffs to contain the fiscal impact of the sector’s losses.



                                                                                                               Page 15 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



The expected results were to: (a) contain electricity subsidies to less than 1.5 percent of GDP and (b) raise
electricity tariffs. Raises in electricity tariffs were postponed until their revision in 2022. Electricity subsidies to
REG fell to 0.9% of GDP in FY2020/21. The achievement was negligible for electricity tariffs and high for
reducing subsidies. The combined achievement of the results is rated substantial, since the purpose of the
program was to contain the fiscal impact of the sector, which was achieved. PA#1-PA#5 covered this
objective.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Transition to least-cost and low-carbon energy mix

Rationale
Under this objective the program supported interventions aimed at preparing an investment plan for REG,
building capacity in MININFRA –overseer of REG–, introducing competitive practices in procuring electricity
from independent power producers and in sharing the risks of electricity production with private producers,
which the State used to absorb before these reforms.

The expected result was to have all generation and transmission projects initiated or accepted by the
government to meet the standards set in the least-cost power development plan and comply with the
conditions on competitive procurement established in the public-private-partnership law. As of December
2021, there had not been projects procured and the new projects planned for 2021 were consistent with least-
cost power and competitive procurement procedures. The achievement of the result is rated high. PA#6-
PA#13 covered this result.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Increase access to affordable and reliable electricity services

Rationale
Under this objective the program supported interventions geared to create the conditions for expanding the
on-grid and off-grid solutions to the energy system. For that purpose, the government’s approach to

                                                                                                         Page 16 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



electrification was audited and submitted to MININFRA for its approval, REG approved a national
electrification plan, and the standards and incentives to build off-grid solutions were defined; the actions were
carried out in agreement with the least-cost options for developing the sector.

The expected result was to increase both the nationwide electrification rate to 61 percent and the rural
electrification rate to 25 percent by December 2020. The nationwide rate rose to 75 percent by September 30,
2022, and the rural rate rose to 38 percent in 2020.The achievements of the two results are rated high. In
addition to these results, the program also expected to increase the electrification rate among female-headed
households to 42 percent, but by the end of 2019 (most recent data) the rate had risen to 25 percent. The
achievement of this result is rated modest. The combined achievement of the three results is rated
substantial. PA#14-PA#22 covered these results.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve the accountability and the transparency of REG

Rationale
Under this objective the program supported interventions to raise the standards for REG’s financial
accountability and to improve the transparency of its financial accounts. To achieve these goals, REG and its
subsidiaries (EDCL and EUCL) had to adopt international financial reporting standards to report the results of
their operations, which had to be audited and unqualified and published.

The expected result was to have the reports published within the first two quarters of the following year. The
Annual Report of REG -which includes the results for EDCL and EUCL– for the year ending June 30th, 2021
is available in REG’s website; the website also has the separate reports for EDCL and EUCL. The
achievement of this result is rated high. PA#23-PA#26 covered these results.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
Improve the operational efficiency and the quality of electricity services



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 23
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)




                  Rationale
                  Under this objective the program supported interventions to measure electricity losses accurately, hire top
                  quality managers for REG using competitive international recruiting, automate customer billing and its
                  management, and use modern tools such as geographic information systems to identify grid faults and solve
                  customer complaints.

                  The expected results were to implement and publish an annual customer satisfaction survey and to reduce
                  the share of electricity supply lost from 22 percent to 19 percent and the average duration and frequency of
                  interruption from 44 and 265 hours to 28 and 183 hours. Electricity losses fell to 18.2 percent and the average
                  duration and frequency of interruptions fell to 18.2 and 44 hours; their achievement is rated high. A survey
                  was done in 2020, but it is unclear if others were done in 2021 and 2022; it is unknown if the consumers are
                  satisfied with the quality of service. The overall rating for the results in this objective is substantial.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The program had prior actions and most results indicators of satisfactory relevance. Its overall level of
achievement was satisfactory. Since efficacy was Satisfactory for four objectives and Moderately Satisfactory
for one, overall efficacy is rated Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With relevance of prior actions rated as substantial and efficacy rated satisfactory, the overall outcome rating is
Satisfactory.


a. Rating


                                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The outcomes achieved are likely to be sustained but they are not free from risk. The risks arise from the impact
of: (a) a slowdown in domestic and international economic activity; (b) political constraints to increasing tariffs to
enable REG to finance its expansion plans and reduce its dependence on fiscal transfers. The economic
slowdown could reduce REG’s and government revenues, making it difficult to close the gap between REG’s
growing financing needs and the government’s goal of containing fiscal transfers to REG. The inability to
increase tariffs would have a similar impact as the economic slowdown: it would increase REG’s reliance on
fiscal transfers and imperil fiscal stability if the government pursues its electrification policy no matter the cost.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The WBG designed a coherent program with a sound and logical results chain and framework. The design
reveals a substantial knowledge of the country and of the sector’s problems. The design built on knowledge
gained and lessons derived from closed and ongoing WBG investment project finance operations in Rwanda.
The design also built on analytical work that provided the support for most of the prior actions and the results
indicators of the program; some of the prior actions and results indicators were refined or modified as the
program advanced to make them more precise and useful to assess its impact. From that knowledge the WBG
derived the policies that had to be implemented through a series of development policy operations, which had a
medium–term policy reform horizon. The results indicators were realistic and achievable, could be measured,
the information could be obtained, and in most instances measured well the achievement of objectives.

The WBG innovated in the way it approached the design by making projections about the potential fiscal risks of
the sector’s expansion before the risks materialized. It also included important triggers on the basis that they
could be refined when defining the prior actions for subsequent operations and collected data for the results
target before the next operation.

Some minor shortcomings in the design had to do with the baseline and target values for the system losses and
national electrification goals and to arrangements for collecting data to verify the results.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

                                                                                                       Page 19 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)




The results framework guided the supervision of the program. Because implementation problems were minimal,
the operations were executed quickly, enabling the team to remain focused on the program and the successive
operation. The implementation activities allowed the WBG to strengthen some prior actions of the new
operations, introduce new prior actions to reflect the objective of electrification on the least-cost plan, and
dropped planned prior actions (i.e., triggers) that had already been carried out (i.e., triggers 2.3, 2.6, 2.9, 3.10,
3.11), a decision which helped strengthen the program’s design and performance.

The COVID-19 pandemic prevented carrying out the household survey which was to provide the information for
the coverage of electricity in female-headed households. The information was obtained from the Demographic
and Health Survey carried out before the COVID-19 pandemic started.

The WBG followed program implementation closely. Two implementation status reports (06/11/2018 and
1/11/2019) informed well about the program’s advances and the results achieved.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank performance was satisfactory both in the operation's design and in the implementation phases.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The expected net impact of tariff increases on the poor was to be very small, in most cases because of the low
level of electricity consumption in households. This was the result of a new tariff schedule which included a
lifeline tariff for households consuming less than 15 kWh, which represents a cross-subsidy from high- to low-
income consumers. Also, the policy of paying for connections in installments facilitated the access to electricity.



b. Environmental

The program document did not foresee actual environmental impacts. The program supported the expansion of
off-grid electricity which encouraged the use of solar panel technologies and the ICR notes that the

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



environmental effect of handling solar panels and batteries is being handled by the Renewable Energy Fund
project.



c. Gender

The only impact reported refers to the percentage of female-headed households with access to electricity
services in results indicator 4. The access to electricity is likely to have benefitted women in particular, since it
saved them time in chores such as gathering firewood, freeing their time for rest or more productive activities.



d. Other

The DPO series supported Rwanda to reinforce, broaden, and advance institutional reforms in a deeper and
systematic manner, a task that the WBG had started years earlier with several investment projects in the sector.
These advances are reflected in the quality of its regulatory framework, which the African Development Bank
(AfDB) measures through its Electricity Regulatory Index (ERI). In the 2021 survey of the AfDB, Rwanda
appears ranked in 10th place among 45 countries in the capacity of the regulatory authorities to carry out their
functions, and 6th in the composite index of regulatory governance and regulatory substance index. Rwanda still
has some room for improvement on the impact of its regulations; in the regulatory index for outcomes, which
measures the impact on utilities and sector, Rwanda ranks 20th among the 45, because of the continuation of
subsidies, low-cost recovery and the absence of a schedule for achieving full cost recovery tariffs.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR informs well about the program’s design, implementation and achievements. Its evidence is adequate
to support the achievements reported, and Annex 5 lists the analytical work used in the program’s design. Some
tables in the main text lack sources or the source is so generic (e.g., World Bank) that it is of little value. Section
III.B on efficacy could have been shorter if it had limited its discussion to the quality and relevance of the results
indicators. The report uses the evidence presented to derive its lessons, which could have been shorter,
sharper, and to the point.

The analysis supports the conclusions about the results achieved. Its analysis of prior actions overestimates
their relevance, rated highly satisfactory in most cases. The case of tariff increases (PA3 and PA5) illustrates the
problem. The ICR rates highly satisfactory their relevance. The program documents did not define the amount
by which tariffs would increase, making it difficult to relate this action to a reduction in the fiscal transfers to
REG. Because the overall rating for the achievement of objectives is constrained by the ratings for results
indicators, the overstated ratings of prior actions did not affect the final program rating, which concurs with the
rating of this review. Despite these observations, the review concludes that the report assesses well the
program’s performance.

Other comments are:


                                                                                                        Page 21 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



      Table 5 on PA for Pillar B4 (Objective 5 of ICRR) is missing PA 2.10 of the program document (PA#31 of
       this review).
      The text in paragraphs 49 and 57 indicate that there is some confusion about how to determine
       relevance of prior actions.
      The text in par. 78 does not present a logical reason to rate indicator RI6 (B4 of program document)
       highly satisfactory.
      Section IV.A. under Bank Performance is titled Other Unintended Outcomes and Impacts.

Annex 2 on staff time and costs of program preparation and supervisions is unclear. It is not possible to know
how much it cost to carry out the four operations.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The most pertinent lessons from the ICR are:

      Financial imbalances in power companies are likely to turn into financial crises if the problems in the
       sector are not diagnosed and their causes addressed on time. A signaling device of potential problems
       can be the gap between the average cost of supplying one kWh of electricity and the average revenue
       from its sale and the high cost of an investment pipeline aimed at closing a deficit created in part from
       low levels of cost recovery.
      Reforms affecting multiple sectors or parties are likely to be better designed and to succeed if the
       affected parties participate in diagnosing the problems, identifying their causes, and in designing and
       executing the solutions. For example, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning finances the
       capital expenditures and operating costs and the Ministry of Infrastructure is responsible for the energy
       sector. The two ministries worked together to define a trajectory of fiscal transfers for the medium-term
       while sector reforms were implemented toward full-cost recovery.
      Reform proposals that have a larger societal impact are unlikely to succeed if there is no buy-in of them
       at high levels of government. After defining the fiscal transfers mechanism, the Ministries of Finance and



                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rwanda Energy DPO (P162671)



        Infrastructure jointly sought approval from the Cabinet’s Economic Cluster, building a sense of shared
        ownership of the policy which contributed to institutionalize the reforms in the sector.
       Supplying electricity to the poorest 40 percent of households is a daunting challenge in low-income
        countries. The experience of the program in Rwanda shows that affordability by households was the
        main constraint to the expansion of off-grid connections. The wide range of proposed reforms (e.g.,
        investment incentives, subsidies, minimum technical standards, lighter regulation, financing mechanisms
        for connections) was insufficient to overcome that constraint and achieve the program’s coverage goal.
        Therefore, to assess the realism of the program’s goals it may be worthwhile to carry out surveys of
        potential beneficiaries to elicit their true demands, search for non-traditional solutions, innovate on what
        could be done to achieve the stated goals, and research the experience of programs in other countries
        that succeeded in their aims.

IEG offers the following lesson derived from points raised in the ICR:

The experience of the program in Rwanda shows that there is room to innovate and not follow usual World Bank
practice. First, using projections for electricity demand and the associated revenue can help identify potential
risks for the program and design mechanisms to prevent the risks before they materialize. Second, adopting a
flexible approach to select and refine prior actions during the program’s life and base them on information
collected during implementation can help give more precision and relevance to the prior actions and to the
results targets.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
The four credits constitute a good example of a well prepared program aimed at improving the performance of
the electricity sector.




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 23
