     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0021818

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P154291                                    Indonesia Energy Sector DPL

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-85570                                 30-Jun-2016                                        500,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Dec-2015                                30-Jun-2016

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                        500,000,000.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Paul Holden                 Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Development Policy Loan (DPL) aimed to address key energy sector challenges through institutional and
   policy reforms under four objectives: Reducing the fiscal cost of electricity provision; Improving the investment
   climate in the energy sector; Removing constraints to renewable energy expansion; and expanding access to
   modern reliable energy (program document (PD), p. 6).




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas

    There were four pillars under the program. They were:

    Pillar One: Reducing the fiscal cost of electricity provision: This pillar focused on reducing subsidies
    that were draining the budget and revising tariffs to ensure that they reflected the cost of electricity
    generation by the State Electricity Company (PLN), the financial condition of which had been weakened by
    selling electricity below cost. This was to be addressed by (i) phasing out subsidies for larger companies
    and high electricity consuming residential customers; (ii) indexing electricity tariffs to oil prices, the
    exchange rate and the rate of inflation for users identified in (i); and, (iii) improving the operational
    efficiency of the PLN through subjecting it to performance-based regulation, rather than cost plus
    regulation.

    Pillar Two: Improving the investment climate in the energy sector: This pillar was to be achieved by
    promoting the development of domestic sources of natural gas, the reserves of which were the third
    largest in the Asia/Pacific region. This would be done by improving the infrastructure for the delivery of gas
    to domestic users, improving the framework for natural gas contracting, and strengthening the regulatory
    processes to encourage investment in gas processing, transporting and storing.

    Pillar Three: Removing constraints to renewable energy expansion: This pillar focused on reducing
    environment costs from the use of fossil fuels to generate energy by facilitation of new investments in
    renewable energy. This was to be achieved by: (i) providing for production bonuses for converting
    geothermal energy to electricity; and (ii) reviewing existing schemes for promoting market-based
    mechanisms for developing renewable energy to encourage renewable energy production.

    Pillar Four: Expanding access to modern reliable energy: This pillar focused on providing access to
    reliable electricity for the 39 million people who did not have connections to electricity and to increase the
    dependability for those who had unreliable connections. This was to be achieved by improving the
    institutional and pricing structure in rural areas through developing and financing a clear roadmap and
    action plan to extend and improve electrification.



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   The first DPL in the amount of USD500 million was approved on December 1, 2015. It became effective on
   January 4, 2016. The original closing date was June 30, 2016 and the actual closing date was September
   9, 2018. The actual amount disbursed was USD500 million. There was to have been a second operation.
   This was initially postponed and then cancelled due to changing government priorities.

   The DPL series was prepared in conjunction with parallel financing from the Asian Development Bank
   (which provided USD 1 billion), the French Development Agency (which provided USD250 million) and the
   German Development Bank, which provided USD200 million and Euro200 million) that also provided policy
   based financing to support government reforms in the energy sector. The development partners continued
   with their assistance after the World Bank cancelled the second operation.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


   The objectives of the DPL were based on the energy sector objectives in the Government’s National
   Medium-Term Development Plan for 2015-2019. The objectives were also consistent with the World Bank
   Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2016-2020, which stated (p. 26) “Investment in energy will be
   critical for supplying an expanding economy and for increasing coverage to 60 million Indonesians without
   reliable access to electricity.” The CPF also pointed out that the subsidies in the sector, equivalent to 0.6
   percent of GDP were unsustainable. The objectives with respect to renewable energy addressed the need
   to reduce environmental costs identified in the CPF. The objectives of the DPL were also consistent with
   those identified in analytical work that suggested reform to the legal and regulatory frameworks for pricing
   electricity and for developing alternative generation techniques, particularly geothermal power.

   The objectives remained relevant at closure, with continuing need for reforms both to access to electricity
   and to alternative energy production.

  The objectives remained relevant at closure, with continuing need for reforms both to access to electricity and
  to alternative energy production.




  Rating
  Substantial

b. Relevance of Design


   Reducing the cost of electricity generation in order to increase the fiscal sustainability of the sector was to
   be based on prior actions that resulted in:
   ·   Phasing out electricity subsidies for larger businesses and consumers;
   ·   Indexing electricity tariffs for larger users to the costs of inputs – the indexing adjustments were later
   extended to some smaller users based on their income;
   ·   Improving regulation away from a cost-plus basis to a performance basis as well as basing budget
   support to the PLN on revenue requirements and approved tariffs.

   The causal chain between the prior actions and the objectives was plausible and based on extensive
   analytical work including the Systematic Country Diagnostic, the CPF and Advisory Services and
   Analytics. The links between these actions and improving the fiscal sustainability of the sector are clear.

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)




To improve the investment climate in the electricity generating sector, the policies adopted through the
prior actions were directed at:
·    Reducing the uncertainty surrounding gas contract renewal by better management of the process, in
order to promote investment in gas production;
·    Streamlining the regulatory process for issuing of licenses to independent power producers (IPP) for
land use and new projects. The PD (p. 26) indicates that the average time to obtain a license was 600
days

These actions addressed the binding constraints regarding uncertainty that adversely impacted investment
by independent power producers in the sector, with a clear causal chain running from actions to the
desired outcome. The PD (pp.25-26) describes the obstacles for IPPs in obtaining licenses.

To promote the production of renewable energy, the conditions for this type of investment were improved
through the passage of a new Geothermal Law. The law removed geothermal energy production from
being defined as a mining activity, which in many cases prohibited geothermal development in
conservation areas. It also clarified which agencies had regulatory authority over this type of investment
and allocated production bonuses to local communities where the geothermal projects were located. The
PD (p. 27) describes “the many institutional, regulatory and tariff constraints” hindering the development of
geothermal power, including environmental issues related to development in conservation areas and
overlapping ministerial responsibilities.
The causal chain relating the objectives to the prior actions was clear – uncertainty regarding the
development of geothermal projects had been identified as a constraint in a number of areas, including
which government agencies, laws and regulations applied to the investment.

With regard to improving access to electrification, there were no specific prior actions in the first operation,
but a required trigger for the second operation was that the government develop a coordinated national
approach in the areas of institutional responsibility, financing and planning, which would then have
required specific actions in order to achieve results. Nevertheless, there was an indicator for electrification
in the first operation.

Possible improvements to the causal chain might have included specific targets for private sector
operators to enter or expand their capacity in supplying electricity to the grid. There could also have been
attention to the ownership/operation of the distribution network, which was dominated by PLN (PD p. 51).
Best practice competition policy in the electricity sector frequently suggests that generation functions be
separated from distribution functions. However, in the light of subsequent developments that led to the
cancellation of the second operation, supporting these reforms with prior actions, while highly desirable,
might have been a “bridge too far”.

A further drawback in design was the complicated implementation arrangements discussed in the Bank
Performance section below.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



Reducing the cost of electricity generation in order to increase the fiscal sustainability of the sector
was to be based on prior actions that resulted in:
·     Phasing out electricity subsidies for larger businesses and consumers;
·     Indexing electricity tariffs for larger users to the costs of inputs – the indexing adjustments were
later extended to some smaller users based on their income;
·     Improving regulation away from a cost-plus basis to a performance basis as well as basing
budget support to the PLN on revenue requirements and approved tariffs.

The causal chain between the prior actions and the objective was plausible and based on prior
analytical work including the Systematic Country Diagnostic, the CPF and Advisory Services and
Analytics. The links between these actions and improving the fiscal sustainability of the sector are
clear.

To improve the investment climate in the electricity generating sector, the policies adopted through the
prior actions were directed at:
·    Reducing the uncertainty surrounding gas contract renewal by better management of the
process, in order to promote investment in gas production;
·    Streamlining the regulatory process for issuing licenses to independent power producers (IPP) for
land use and new projects. The PD (p. 26) indicates that the average time to obtain a license was 600
days.

These actions addressed the binding constraints regarding uncertainty that adversely impacted
investment by independent power producers in the sector, with a clear causal chain running from
actions to the desired outcome. The PD (pp.25-26) describes the obstacles for IPPs in obtaining
licenses.

To promote the production of renewable energy, conditions for this type of investment were improved
through the passage of a new Geothermal Law. The law removes geothermal energy production from
being defined as a mining activity which in many cases prohibited geothermal development in
conservation areas. It also clarified which agencies had regulatory authority over this type of
investment and allocated production bonuses to local communities where the geothermal projects
were located. The PD (p. 27) describes “the many institutional, regulatory and tariff constraints”
hindering the development of geothermal power, including environmental issues related to
development in conservation areas and overlapping ministerial responsibilities.

The causal chain relating the objectives to the prior actions was clear – uncertainty regarding the
development of geothermal projects had been identified as a constraint in a number of areas,
including which government agencies, laws and regulations applied to the investment.

With regard to improving access to electrification, there were no specific prior actions in the first
operation, but a required trigger for the second operation was that the government develop a
coordinated national approach in the areas of institutional responsibility, financing and planning, which
would then have required specific actions in order to achieve results. Nevertheless, there was an
indicator for electrification in the first operation.

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)




Improvements to the causal chain might have included specific targets for private sector operators to
enter or expand their capacity in supplying electricity to the grid. There could also have been attention
to the ownership/operation of the distribution network, which was dominated by PLN (PD p. 51). Best
practice competition policy in the electricity sector frequently suggests that generation functions be
separated from distribution functions. However, in the light of subsequent developments that led to the
cancellation of the second operation, supporting these reforms with prior actions, while highly
desirable, might have been a “bridge too far”.

A further drawback in design was the complicated implementation arrangements discussed in the
Bank Performance section below.

The second operation

The planned second operation was initially postponed by 24 months as a result of changes in reform
priorities following the accession of a new Minister of Energy in 2016 who supported strongly the new
priorities. These had changed the focus from market-based reform through increased private sector
investment, particularly with respect to renewables, towards faster electrification and “affordability”
(ICR p. 5). New policies adopted from 2016/2017 onwards included initially freezing electricity
purchase prices and subsequently through basing pricing on the previous year average cost of energy
by location. The energy mix favored coal-fired generation at the expense of renewables. Further
market intervention by the government included capping the domestic price of coal below international
prices and introducing new regulations on the pricing of natural gas, including LNG. Overall, the goal
of reducing the fiscal drain from the electricity sector was compromised. Furthermore, the focus on
rapid electrification resulted in increased reliance on PLN, at the expense of private sector
involvement in electricity production.


The ICR (p. 12) points out that the DPL instrument provided limited leverage in terms of sustaining
reform in the context of Indonesia for a number of reasons.
·    The amount of the loan was relatively small in proportion to the total budget;
·    The ease with which the government can raise debt financing on international markets;
·    The sensitive issues associated with introducing more market-based mechanisms into the
electricity sector;
·    The focus on SOEs rather than on private enterprise;
·    The confluence of elections with electricity price increases and the corresponding political
sensitivity to the reforms as the elections neared.

The question therefore arises regarding whether the series should have incorporated more political
economy considerations into the design or an alternative instrument should have been considered.
With hindsight, the conclusion is probably that it should have, but at the time the presence of reform
champions within the government made the design of the series, which incorporated sound market
based economic principles appear to be a substantial opportunity in spite of the risks. Furthermore,


                                                                                               Page 6 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



                risk taking under such circumstances should not be discouraged. It is hard to argue that the radical
                change in policy could have been foreseen.

                At appraisal, GDP growth was forecast to average about five percent over the program period (PD p.
                14). Fiscal and monetary policy was expected to be prudent with some risks of higher inflation. In the
                event, the macroeconomic framework was strong. Real GDP growth averaged over five percent
                annually, primarily as a result of investment and inflation averaged 3.5 per cent per annum. Exports
                resumed their growth, which resulted in a current account deficit of less than two percent in the 2015-
                2017 period, although it widened in 2018.
                Overall, the causal chains in each of the sub-objectives/pillars that related prior actions to the
                outcomes were well specified, based on analytical work and accorded with sound international
                practices in the area of electrification.




       Rating
       Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Reducing the fiscal cost of electricity provision

    Rationale
    There were three prior actions under this objective that aimed to reduce the cost to the budget of the
    provision of electricity.

    Prior action 1 (PA-1) required the elimination of subsidies for large and medium sized industrial users and
    eight consumer classes by increasing electricity tariffs. The ICR (p. 6) reports that the subsidies were
    phased out by the end of 2017. The fall in world fuel prices ameliorated any increases in tariffs resulting from
    the phasing out of subsidies (ICR p.16). Additionally, subsidy reduction was also supported by the capping of
    coal prices and the sale price of electricity generated by renewables, but only at the cost of introducing
    market distortions that discouraged investment in renewable generation.

    Tariffs remained frozen thereafter which resulted in a reappearance of subsidies, although the amounts were
    substantially below what had existed before PA-1 was implemented. This resulted in reduced transfers from
    the government budget to the PLN. The target value for the reduction in transfers was 49 percent, with the
    actual amount of 43 percent, although the actual 2013 base on which the reduction was calculated was


                                                                                                              Page 7 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



    found to be 25 percent higher than estimated in the PD, implying that the actual reduction was smaller than
    initially calculated. The target for this indicator was partially achieved.

    The second prior action (PA-2) aimed at linking electricity tariffs to input prices through changes in the
    regulatory framework. A policy based regulatory framework was introduced to determine electricity tariffs for
    large users. Tariffs were automatically adjusted based on changes in oil prices, the exchange rate, and
    inflation. From 2015 onwards these tariff adjustments were to be applied to certain small household users
    and from 2017, to “non-poor” households.

    The third prior action (PA-3) under this objective was the passage of a regulation by the Ministry of Finance
    to change the regulatory framework from a cost-plus basis to one based on PLN’s performance, with targets
    to be set based on controllable costs and revenue requirements. While the Ministry of Finance adopted the
    regulation in 2015, it was not implemented. The results indicator was the implementation of the regulation,
    which did not occur. From December 2017 onwards, tariff adjustments were frozen as reported in the
    discussion of PA-1 above.

    The second indicator for the achievement of pillar one, which related to PA-2 and PA-3 was that the
    performance based regulatory framework would result in tariffs and subsidy calculations being based on
    benchmarks for network losses, thermal plant efficiencies, operation expenses and a productivity
    improvement adjustment. Because PA-3 was not implemented and tariffs under PA-2 were frozen, the target
    for this indicator was not achieved.

    Triggers for the second operation under the first objective were that the government would devise actions to
    improve the allocation of electricity subsidies to low income consumers; an improved tariff structure and that
    performance-based regulation for PLN would be introduced. The freezing of tariff increases in 2017 nullified
    the first trigger and the second trigger was not implemented.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Objective/Pillar 2: Improving the investment climate in the energy sector

    Rationale
    There were three prior actions and two results indicators under this objective that aimed to reduce the
    uncertainty regarding contracting and regulation in the energy sector.

    Prior action four (PA-4) required that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources issue a regulation that
    governed the processes for managing expiring energy production sharing contracts. Uncertainty surrounding

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



    whether contracts would be renewed was reported (ICR p. 7) to be a factor inhibiting investment in the
    sector, which in turn reduced the supply of gas. The indicator target was that PLN entered into new long-
    term agreements for gas supply, with a baseline of zero in 2013 that would amount to 125 million cubic feet
    per day by 2018. The actual amount produced was in excess of 218 million cubic feet per day, which was
    first achieved in 2016, with the higher production being sustained into 2018.

    In order to streamline processes connected with licensing of building rights, land use and location permits
    (PA-5) as well as coordinating licensing procedures for independent power producers (PA-6), new
    regulations were issued that reduced licensing times. Processes for licensing independent power producers
    were delegated to the one stop shop of the Investment Coordinating Board. The results indicator for these
    PAs was that the time to process a gas independent power producer license would decline from 600 days in
    2015 to a target of 300 days by 2016. By July 2018, the time had fallen to 350 days (ICR p. 5) and by the
    end of 2018 it had fallen to 145 days.

    The triggers for the second operation focused on increasing investment in the electricity sector through
    revising the fiscal terms for production sharing contracts, further revising the regulatory framework to
    promote accelerated investment in gas processing, storage and transport, and completing a detailed project
    plan for gas infrastructure development. The fiscal terms trigger for production sharing contracts was met,
    with the terms being applied to all new contracts and contract extensions. The planning trigger related to
    infrastructure was partially met. The priorities related to regulatory measures changed away from
    performance-based regulation so the trigger was not implemented as planned



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Removing constraints to renewable energy provision

    Rationale
    The PD (p. 8) stated that the government was targeting a higher share of renewable energy in Indonesia’s
    electricity generation. To achieve this, improving the framework for geothermal power development (PA-7)
    was prioritized through the passage of a new geothermal law and ensuring that local communities in
    geothermal areas would benefit from payments of a production fee to local governments by geothermal
    companies (PA-8).

    A new geothermal law was passed in 2014. The indicator for the achievement of this objective was that
    geothermal power projects would be developed according to the provisions of the new law. The target date
    for this was 2017. In the event 31 geothermal projects were approved totaling an additional 1475-
    Megawatt capacity compared with the originally installed capacity of 1949 MW. If all investment approval of


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



    IPP projects came to fruition, it would result in 49 percent of geothermal power being produced by the private
    sector. Payments under the geothermal law were made to local governments covering the 2014-2017
    period.

    The triggers for the second operation under this objective related to issuing implementing regulations for the
    Geothermal law and a review of schemes to promote market-based mechanisms to encourage the
    development of renewable energy. The implementing regulations were adopted and some progress was
    made in promoting market mechanisms (ICR p.10).

    However, market mechanisms in geothermal energy production have not been allowed to work fully.
    Significant price distortions were introduced in 2017; electricity prices were frozen; domestic coal prices were
    capped; and renewable energy tariffs were linked to “local average generation”. The latter measure links
    renewable energy prices to the previous year’s average cost of generation by location. In practice this
    means that considerable uncertainty surrounds renewable energy prices, particularly since in many cases
    they have to be negotiated with PLN. The price setting structure favors coal fired generation and
    discourages investment in geothermal renewable energy production.



    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 4
    Objective
     Expanding access to modern reliable energy

    Rationale
    There were no prior actions under this Objective, but a trigger for the second operation was that the
    government issue a coordinated approach to electrification throughout the country that delineated
    institutional responsibilities, funding mechanisms and planning. The trigger was partially achieved using PLN
    as the focal point of a coordinated approach. The first DPL included an indicator, which was an increase in
    the electrification rate from a baseline of 84 percent in 2014 to a target of 93 percent by 2017. The actual
    achievement as reported by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources was 98.3 percent by the end of
    2018, although the ICR (p. 10) reports that many “last mile” problems remain before the ultimate goal of 100
    per cent electrification can be met.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)




5. Outcome

The objectives were substantially relevant in the light of the need to move away from reliance on coal generated
power, the improved efficiency that could be gained from introducing improved regulation and more reliance on
market mechanisms into the energy sector, the need for greater private sector involvement in power generation,
and the necessity of reducing regulatory uncertainty.

Design was sound, based on market mechanisms that if fully implemented would have contributed to improved
productivity in the sector. The question arises with respect to whether the reversals that took place in 2017 and
which ultimately resulted in the cancellation of the second operation could have been foreseen. The PD
acknowledges (p. 41) the complexity of the political environment and the challenges associated with a reform
that reduced “the space for corruption and rent seeking by increasing transparency and reducing discretion”.
There is no mention of mitigating measures in the PD, although it is difficult to determine what these might have
been apart from reducing the ambition of the reform program. Given that a window of opportunity existed
through reformers in government, the risks on balance appear to have been worth taking. Nevertheless, the
cancellation of the second operation and the reversal of the reforms detracted from the achievements of the first
DPL, which led to a Modest rating.

Under efficacy, the rating of the first objective was modest, given that the targets were not achieved and the
freezing of tariffs in 2017 nullified the progress that had been made. Under the second objective, the investment
climate in the energy sector was strengthened by the reduction in uncertainty surrounding contracting and the
rationalization of regulations and licensing. Under the third objective, a number of disincentives to the production
of renewable energy were removed and there was, potentially, a substantial increase in renewable energy
production with the target being achieved. Under the fourth objective, the trigger for the second operation was
partly achieved and the increase in electrification exceeded the target. With regard to efficacy two objectives
were rated modest and two were rated substantial, the overall efficacy rating and the outcome rating is
moderately satisfactory.


a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

By the end of the project, there was a reversal of progress achieved and there remains substantial uncertainty
regarding the future direction of policy in the electricity sector. Although the ICR (p. 22) reports that the Bank
remains engaged through extensive technical assistance and analytical work and is moving forward with
investment projects in complementary areas, the risk to achievements under the first DPL being reversed is
high




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    High

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICRR reports (p. 23) that the Bank mobilized extensive global expertise and experience in electricity
  sector reform from around the world to carry out diagnostics, technical support, and analysis. There was
  deep Bank engagement with the government on policy issues related to the energy sector and close
  coordination with the Asian Development Bank, the German aid agency, and the aid agency of France.
  The TTL confirmed that the World Bank, with input from development partners, was the main architect of
  program design and that this has created a platform for future cooperation.

  The Bank team worked especially closely with high level reform minded officials within the government
  who saw the DPL as an opportunity to reform a sector in which productivity was low and which had
  become a fiscal drain. Furthermore, since the objectives supported by the series were not only relevant
  but also closely aligned with Government priorities, the rationale for the operations was clear. However,
  the series of reforms involved some radical changes that conflicted with powerful vested interests within
  the sector and political considerations overcame technical design issues leading to reform reversal. The
  design of the two-operation series required that these changes occur within a relatively short period of time
  and possibly incorporated too broad a menu of reform. A further issue was that although the engagement
  with the government in planning the first operation drew on extensive in-country experience on the part of
  the World Bank team, the ICR (p. 22) reports that the team composition changed substantially between
  the first and second operations and at least partly explains the problems involved in getting the second
  DPL of the series off the ground.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  In contrast to the preparation of the series and the deep engagement with the government that it involved,
  the ICR (p. 23) reports that there was no documentation of supervision for the first operation, nor were any
  ISRs prepared. Furthermore, the World Bank systems contain no detailed records of the circumstances
  nor negotiations surrounding the cancellation of the second operation in the series, possibly because of
  the changes in the team outlined above. However, contact was maintained through some TA operations
  and the platform established to facilitate cooperation with development partners remains in place.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



  Moderately Satisfactory


8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
  The reforms that underlay the series were initiated by the Government, with a view to increasing the
  productivity of electricity generation and reducing the fiscal drain on the budget. However, a lack of
  continuity at the ministerial level (the ICR reports that there were four different Ministers of Energy and
  Natural Resources over a five year period) led to changes in policy priorities that compromised the
  objectives of the series, in particular the change that led to a focus on more rapid electrification and a
  reluctance to adjust tariffs to reflect costs, which was at least a partial reversal back to the situation that
  existed before the reforms were initiated. The change in priorities to “affordability” implied that there was
  an increased risk of fiscal drains on the budget. In addition, the changes with respect to controlling
  geothermal prices and the capping of coal prices and tariff increases subverted the goal of greater
  alternative energy production.


  Government Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Implementing Agency Performance

   Dividing responsibility for the implementation of the reforms between the Coordinating Ministry for
   Economic Affairs (CMEA) and the Ministry of Finance, while at the same time having the Ministry of
   Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) responsible for the key technical reforms, hampered
   coordination. Moreover, the responsibility for technical reforms was shifted to the portfolio of the
   Coordinating Ministry of Maritime Affairs, which further disrupted program implementation.




  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



  The results indicators were well designed to ascertain the achievement of the objectives. They focused on a
  limited number of key indicators that were relevant in capturing progress of the reforms.

  The Coordinating Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources were
  responsible for collecting data for the results indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The CMEA and MEMR failed to systematically collect and analyze data for the results indicators.
  Furthermore, the World Bank did not note this lapse and there were no records, such as implementation
  status reports or memos to file, noting that results indicator data were not being collected.



c. M&E Utilization
  There were no records of the utilization of the M&E framework



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
  Environmental risks arose that were related to the development of geothermal projects within forest
  ecosystems. The Geothermal Law of 2014 reclassified geothermal projects from being mining activities to
  power development activities. A World Bank TA was provided that gave advice on how adequate the
  regulations were to address the environmental and social impacts of geothermal projects. There were also
  social risks that arose from providing land access for geothermal projects in forest areas. These were partly
  attenuated by providing compensation based on the amount of geothermal energy produced.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
The ICR (p. v) reports that fiduciary risks were rated moderate.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)




d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                               Satisfactory
Risk to Development
                               High                     High                         ---
Outcome
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory      ---
                               Satisfactory
                                                                                     The change in government
                                                                                     priorities that led to the
                               Moderately               Moderately
Borrower Performance                                                                 cancellation of the second
                               Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory
                                                                                     operation compromised the
                                                                                     completion of reforms.
Quality of ICR                                          High                         ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 The design of DPL series should recognize risks arising for political cycles that could result in changes in
priorities as elections approach. In the case of Indonesia, the change in priorities in mid-2016 compromised the
successful completion of the series. Under circumstances when political priorities might change, the prospects
for sustainability could be increased by briefing Parliamentary committees on the reforms. Alternatively, a less
ambitious reform program or one spread out over a longer period of time could increase chances for success

In large middle-income countries that have access to international capital markets, leverage associated with
conditionality in a DPL series may not be strong. The size of a DPL relative to the government budget is
relatively small and alternative financing is available so that the incentive to reform in order to obtain the loan is
not as great as it is in smaller countries. It is therefore incumbent upon DPL teams to ensure to the extent
possible that there are clear prospects for completing the reform program. In Indonesia, reform enthusiasm was
initially strong but waned as reforms proceeded because of political issues and inter-ministerial rivalries.




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Indonesia Energy Sector DPL(P154291)



When designing programs that require complex implementation, a clear line of responsibility is highly desirable.
The complex implementation arrangement in Indonesia, where two ministries were responsible for the overall
program, while a third was responsible for technical implementation hampered overall achievements.

When prospective reforms require substantial changes to existing arrangements and responsibilities, which
might be strongly opposed by vested interests, a longer time horizon for reform might be desirable. In
Indonesia, the program was confronted by opposition to a number of components of the program, particularly
with respect to implementing a performance based regulatory system for PLN.




13. Assessment Recommended?

---

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This is a high quality ICR, which provides a clear narrative of the evolution of the issues from the design phase
through the implementation of the first operation in the series and the factors that led to the cancellation of the
second operation. It describes the strengths and weaknesses of the program clearly. The analysis that it
contains is sound and well done. At 25 pages, it is a succinct document that could serve as a model for other
ICRS



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
