     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023013

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Sao Tome and Principe                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 3                                           3

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P159010                                     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D1500                                 31-Dec-2017                                          4,839,588.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Nov-2016                               31-Dec-2017
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                          4,839,588.00                                            0.00




P161707_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Sao Tome and Principe                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P161707                                   2nd STP Growth and Fiscal Policy DPF ( P161707 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D1500,IDA-D3050                       31-Dec-2018                                              5934071.89

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-May-2018                               31-Dec-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             6,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              6,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          5,934,071.89                                               0.00



 P164321_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Sao Tome and Principe                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P164321                                   STP 3rd Growth and Fiscal DPO ( P164321 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D3050,IDA-D5450                       31-Dec-2020                                              5157358.60

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2019                               31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          5,157,358.60                                               0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Konstantin Atanesyan       Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



a. Objectives

The Sao Tome and Principe (STP) Strengthening Growth and Fiscal Policy Development Policy Financing (DPF)
series consisted of three operations (IDA Grants).

The original project development objective (PDO) as described in the Program Document (PD) for DPF-1
(P159010) and replicated in DPFs 2-3 (P161707, P164321) was “to help the Government introduce growth
enabling reforms in the financial sector, business environment, and infrastructure; generate fiscal resources and
savings; and improve the quality of expenditures” (PD p.vi). The Financing Agreement did not describe the PDO.
The PDO was not revised. The ICR (p. 13) summarized the achievement of objectives under two pillars, breaking
them down into four sub-objectives (financial sector and business environment; infrastructure; fiscal resources
and savings; and quality of public expenditures). This ICR Review (ICRR) generally concurs with such summary,
with a minor modification, splitting the first objective into two - separating the financial sector from the business
environment, with the latter focused on the land registry. For the purposes of this ICRR, the PDOs are as
follows:

PDO 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion

PDO 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system

PDO 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector

PDO 4. Improve domestic resource mobilization[JLK1]

PDO 5. Improve the quality of public expenditures and public spending efficiency

[JLK1]Ideally these should be two distinct objectives, but ok. Rephrase as Improve domestic resource
mobilization and public spending efficiency


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDs for DPFs 1-3 describe two pillars/policy areas, which repeated the original PDO, splitting it into two
pillars:

(i) Pillar A: Introduce growth enabling reforms in the financial sector, business environment, and infrastructure.

(ii) Pillar B: Generate fiscal resources and savings and improve the quality of expenditures.

The PDs outlined the main reform areas, which related to (i) financial sector performance (low profitability and
high share of non-performing loans); (ii) land registration (absence of land information and dispute resolution
systems); (iii) infrastructure (costly and unreliable electricity supply); (iv) fiscal revenues and savings (poor tax
policy and administration and inadequate surveillance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs)); (v) public investment
management (lack of an adequate framework to prioritize investments); and (vi) social protection (inadequate
social protection framework). No changes were made in Pillars throughout the series duration.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)




The series included three DPF operations (financed by IDA Grants) totaling US$16 million (as approved - $5
million, $6 million, and $5 million respectively). The actual disbursed amount was US$15.93 million. The ICR
notes that there was a delay in preparation and disbursement of the third operation relative to the original
schedule (disbursement schedule in the ICR suggests that it was about 4-6 months), related to internal political
developments - elections in 2018 that brought in a new government; reshuffle of government positions; and time
needed for the new administration to familiarize itself with the economic situation and ongoing reform program.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives were broadly relevant and reflective of the country's needs. The series supported both themes
 of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) of FY14-FY18 (extended to FY20). The first pillar contributed to
 the CPS theme of “supporting macroeconomic stability and national competitiveness”. The DPF support for
 financial sector supervision aimed to help reduce the risks of serious banking problems. The support
 for domestic revenue mobilization targeted a more sustainable budget balance. The second pillar aimed to
 contribute to the advancement of the second theme of the CPS (“reducing vulnerability and strengthening
 human capacity”) by streamlining social protection programs, expanding the coverage, and improving the
 targeting of the SP framework. The PD for DPF-1 stressed that the operation supported mainly the first axis
 of the government’s strategy – economic growth and employment generation; with some support to the
 second axis – social cohesion and external credibility – through the support to the social protection policy.

 The original PDO (“To help the government introduce growth enabling reforms in the financial sector,
 business environment, and infrastructure; generate fiscal resources and savings; and improve the quality of
 expenditures”) formulation was overly broad. The DPF series prior actions focused mainly on the financial
 (banking regulations) sector, increasing fiscal revenues (introducing VAT), and electricity sector efficiency. In
 some cases, the PDO formulation was much broader than the actual focus of the prior actions. For example,
 engagement on “growth enabling reforms in business environment” was limited to specific technical aspects
 of land registration.

 According to the analysis contained in the CPS and PD documents, one of the main constraints in STP was
 low capacity in the public sector, especially on public investment management. The PD for DPF-3 notes that
 “the country’s strategy for reaching its development goals needs to be re-considered, in particular regarding
 the large infrastructure projects with dubious viability. While important infrastructure gaps remain, the
 government continues to pursue projects with little prospects of commercial viability, which if carried out
 would drain resources from much needed investments in more viable enterprises. These projects have little
 technical backing and risk the investment’s financial sustainability” (p.41). However, rather than a focus on
 public investment, the PDO opted for a broader formulation to “improve the quality of public expenditures”
 while the actual scope of the associated prior actions was more limited.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



The program included a total of 26 prior actions (PAs), listed in the table below.

Table 1. Prior Actions for the Program

PDO 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion
DPF-1                           DPF-2                                       DPF-3
PA 1.1 The Recipient has        PA 1.2. In order to strengthen the bank
approved a banking resolution resolution framework, the Recipient,
law that provides the Central through its BCSTP, has adopted
                                                                            PA1.3. The Recipient, through
Bank with the power and         regulations implementing the
                                                                            BCSTP, has approved the Report for
authority necessary to deal     Recipient’s financial institutions
                                                                            the STP Banking System Asset
effectively with distressed     resolution law, which set out: (i) the
                                                                            Quality Review, as part of its efforts
financial institutions by       measures to be applied by the BCSTP
                                                                            to improve financial soundness of
facilitating early intervention in the resolution of distressed financial
                                                                            commercial banks.
and providing additional policy institutions; and (ii) the requirements for
instruments to address          the elaboration and adoption of
vulnerabilities.                recovery and resolution plans.
                                                                            PA 1.6. The Recipient, through: (i) its
                                PA 1.5. In order to expand the outreach National Assembly, has passed the
                                of the banking system and support           legal framework for payment services
PA 1.4. The Recipient, through financial inclusion through the usage of providers and payment system
its Central Bank, has created, mobile financial services, the Recipient, operators, which outlines the
operationalized, and staffed a through its Council of Ministers, has        oversight framework, and duties and
new directorate to consolidate approved and submitted to the                powers of BCSTP; and (ii) BCSTP,
in the same unit all            Parliament the proposed National            has passed the key implementing
responsibilities related to     Payment Systems Law, which sets             regulations under the National
oversight, policy formulation   forth the statutory level principles for    Payments System Law, which
and development of the          regulation on modern payment                provide for the legal protection of the
national payment system.        methods, such as agent banking,             electronic transfer of funds and the
                                mobile money, and electronic                licensing and supervision of payment
                                payments.                                   institutions and payment system
                                                                            operators.
                                                                            PA 1.8. The Recipient, through
                                PA 1.7. In order to develop the
                                                                            BCSTP, has passed key regulations
                                microfinance sector and promote the
                                                                            which establish the minimum entry,
                                offer of microfinance services, the
                                                                            operation requirements, risk
                                Recipient, through its Council of
                                                                            management minimum requirements,
                                Ministers, has approved and submitted
                                                                            and supervisory and reporting
                                to Recipient’s Parliament a draft law on
                                                                            procedures for microfinance
                                microfinance.
                                                                            institutions.
PDO 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system
DPF-1                           DPF-2                                       DPF-3
PA 2.1. The Recipient, through PA 2.2. In order to reduce costs and         PA 2.3. The Recipient, through its
its Council of Ministers, has   simplify procedures to register property, Council of Ministers, has approved
reduced legal fees (i.e., taxes therefore improving its ability to serve the institutional structure for enabling
and registry fees) associated as loan collateral and foster access to interoperability between the land
with the registry of mortgages. finance, the Recipient, through the         property register and the cadaster.

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



                                  Council of Ministers, has approved and
                                  submitted to the recipient’s Parliament
                                  (i) the proposed Property Registration
                                  Code; and (ii) the proposed Public
                                  Notary Code.
PDO 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector
DPF-1                             DPF-2                                   DPF-3
PA 3.1. The Recipient, through
                                  PA 3.2. In order to promote
EMAE (Empresa de Agua e
                                  transparency and incentivize timely
Electricidade, Water and
                                  payments, the Recipient, through
Electricity Company), has
                                  EMAE, has published its policy to
introduced a revised system of
                                  improve billing collection and launched
pre-paid energy services that
                                  a public awareness campaign through
will allow for accurate
                                  public TV and radio.
consumption metering and
invoicing, as well as eliminating
the risk of non-payment.
                                                                          PA 3.3. The Recipient, through the
                                                                          Presidency of the Republic, has
                                                                          instituted an energy demand
                                                                          management program, which
                                                                          includes the exchange of low efficient
                                                                          bulbs with higher efficient ones.
                                  PA 3.4. In order to structurally reduce
                                  the cost of energy, increase the share
                                  of renewable sources, and promote
                                                                          PA 3.5. The Recipient, through its
                                  long-term private investment, the
                                                                          Council of Ministers, has approved:
                                  Recipient, through its Council of
                                                                          (a) a Least-Cost Power Sector
                                  Ministers, has ruled that any capacity
                                                                          Development Plan, which provides
                                  expansion of the power sector will have
                                                                          the basis for a competitive process
                                  to follow the prescriptions of the
                                                                          for all power generation activities;
                                  integrated Least-Cost Power
                                                                          and (b) a Management Improvement
                                  Development Plan, and that any
                                                                          Plan for EMAE, which aims to
                                  exception would need to obtain the
                                                                          improve EMAE’s operational
                                  approval of the Recipient’s Minister of
                                                                          performance.
                                  Infrastructure, who shall have to
                                  provide the rationale for such
                                  exemption and publish said decision.
PA 3.6. The Recipient, through PA 3.7. In order to improve the            PA 3.8. The Recipient, through
AGER, has mandated EMAE reliability of energy supply, the                 AGER, has signed a concession
to: (i) establish a               Recipient, through AGER, has            contract with EMAE, which stipulates
comprehensive customer            published the minimum quality criteria the obligations of the Recipient and
complaint redress system, for for the provision of services in the        the licensee, including rules on tariffs
the mediation of conflicts        electricity sector.                     and sanctions.
between citizens and EMAE,
as well as representing the
interests of the public,

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



receiving feedback,
complaints, information
requests and suggestions for
improvement of service; and
(ii) send to AGER monthly
reports of complaints received
from customers.
PDO 4. Improve domestic resource mobilization
DPF-1                            DPF-2                                    DPF-3
PA 4.1. The Recipient, through
its Council of Ministries, has
simplified the tax structure and
updated the threshold values
of tax brackets for presumptive
income taxation
                                 PA 4.2. In order to generate the tax and
                                 accounting information needed to
                                 implement the VAT, the Recipient,        PA 4.3. The Recipient, through the
                                 through its Council of Ministers, has    National Assembly, has passed the
                                 adopted the legal framework for fiscal Value Added Tax Code, which sets
                                 invoices and similar documentation,      forth provisions aimed at broadening
                                 whereby it legally mandated companies the tax base and generating more
                                 to issue fiscal invoices, set out said   own-source revenues.
                                 invoice’s minimum content and time
                                 requirements for storing them.
PDO 5. Improve the quality of public expenditures and public spending efficiency
DPF-1                            DPF-2                                    DPF-3
                                 PA 5.1. In order to improve the
                                 efficiency and Value for Money of
                                 public investment, the Recipient’s
                                 Parliament has enacted a National
                                 Planning System Law that harmonizes
                                 planning and budget tools and lays the
                                 foundation for the appraisal and
                                 selection of public investment projects.
                                 PA 5.2. In order to coordinate and
                                 harmonize social protection and          PA 5.3. The Recipient, through the
                                 poverty reduction policies, the          Ministry of Finance, has instituted a
                                 Recipient has registered in the          financial system-based (non-cash)
                                 Recipient’s social registry all the      payment mechanism to allow for the
                                 beneficiaries of the three core social   tracking and reconciliation of funds
                                 protection programs defined by the       allocated to social protection
                                 Recipient’s Social Protection Policy and payments.
                                 Strategy.
                                 PA 5.4. In order to improve SOE’s
                                 financial and non-financial
                                 performance, the Recipient, through its

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



                                Council of Ministers, has approved an
                                SOE reform plan that established a
                                performance monitoring system with
                                financial and non-financial targets for
                                all SOEs and incentives to ensure
                                compliance.

PDO 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion. The PAs sought to
address three problem areas in the financial sector.

(i) Growth of non-performing loans (NPLs) and reduced bank profitability following banking deregulation
and rapid growth in banking assets from 26 percent of GDP in 2001 to 77 percent of GDP in 2015 in an
environment of inadequate legal and regulatory framework to assess borrowers' creditworthiness, pledge
collateral, and secure payments on NPLs. To address these legal and regulatory challenges, PA 1.1
supported adopting a new law that gave the Central Bank authority to assist distressed financial institutions
and a framework for effective bank resolution. PA1.2 supported revising of all lower-level regulations on bank
resolution to adapt them to the new law. The regulations specified the detailed processes of resolution of
failing financial institutions, requiring banks to prepare and adopt recovery plans. PA1.3 required the approval
by the Central Bank of a report on asset quality, to improve risk ratings and provisioning of commercial
banks, thus contributing to improving their financial soundness. Overall, the actions taken in this area would
facilitate meaningful progress along a credible results chain toward more effective banking regulation and
supervision. The PAs in this area (PAs 1.1-1.3) followed clear logic and were relevant to the achievement of
the PDO, and the relevance of each PA is rated Satisfactory.

(ii) Second problem was limited financial inclusion due to outdated payment systems, inaccessible banks,
and economic informality. A 2018 study by Alliance for Financial Inclusion showed that only 39 percent of the
population had access to a bank, and only 15percent of women and 18 percent of micro, small and medium
enterprises had access to an account. Financial literacy was also an issue for both consumers and business
owners, and according to the survey 82 percent preferred storing their business revenues at home (ICR,
pp17-18). To address these weaknesses, PA1.4 supported streamlining all responsibilities related to banking
oversight, policy formulation, and national payment system development in a Directorate within the Central
Bank. The Directorate would prioritize the tasks and provide a counterpart for better engaging with Banks and
payment system companies, thus enabling a more widely used and effective payment system. PA1.5 and
PA1.6 supported approval of a National Payment Systems Law. According to the ICR, before this, there was
no adequate legal safeguard for electronic transactions and digital financial services in STP. The new legal
framework would strengthen the security of the payment system and transactions. PAs 1.4-1.6 followed a
clear logical path and were relevant to the achievement of the PDO, the relevance of each PA is rated
Satisfactory.

(iii) PA 1.7 and PA 1.8 supported drafting a law and passing regulations to establish microfinance institutions.
Before this, lower-cost alternatives to traditional banking that would boost access to finance either did not
exist or were not well regulated. The draft law would incentivize the expansion of microfinance and
consumer finance organizations and put them under Central Bank surveillance, increasing consumer
protection. PAs 1.7-1.8 were relevant to the achievement of the PDO, but the overall chain was limited to
drafting the law on microfinance and did not stipulate its operationalization and the regulations. PA 1.7 is
rated MS and PA 1.8 is rated MS.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



Overall relevance of PAs for this PDO is rated Satisfactory.

PDO 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system. The
absence of a functioning land information system in STP was a major constraint for the emergence of
functioning land markets, which hampered private investment. The property registries and cadasters were
outdated, with no unique identification number for land parcels, which was necessary for an interoperable
information system. The 3 PAs in this area aimed to facilitate land and real estate transactions to improve the
overall business environment, and included such measures as reducing excessively high (according to the
PD and ICR) legal fees for mortgage registration (PA 2.1); developing and submitting to parliament legal acts
on property registration and public notary (PA 2.2); and approving the institutional structure for enabling
interoperability between the land property register and the cadaster (PA 2.3). These new codes aimed to lay
the foundation for upgrading land registration systems, such as digital registries, improving the interoperability
of databases, and allowing joint titling (which enabled a higher participation of women in land ownership).
The PAs in this area aimed to reduce costs and simplify procedures for land registration and its use as
collateral, as well as improve the cross-agency cooperation in this area. They were clear and followed a
logical pathway, relevant for achieving the set objective – through first reduction of fees, then development
and approval of a new codes for property registration, and finally establishment of an institutional structure
for enabling interoperability between the land property register and the cadaster. The relevance of each of
the PAs 2.1-2.3 is rated Satisfactory.

PDO 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector. Electricity in STP was costly,
unreliable, unavailable to half the population, mainly produced by non-renewable energy, and a critical
constraint to economic growth. The average retail tariff was one of the highest in the region. Renewable
energy sources were restricted to a single functioning hydroelectric power plant, with most of the energy
produced by low-efficiency thermal generators, leading to high fuel consumption. Years of underinvestment
left generation assets and the distribution grid in poor condition and highly vulnerable to failure. As a result,
outages were frequent, especially during periods of peak demand. The energy and water utility, EMAE, also
faced challenges related to management and commercial viability. Despite high tariffs EMAE was not able to
recover energy costs with its revenues. Regulatory and planning capacity was weak, as the regulatory
agency, the regulator responsible for the energy sector (Autoridade Geral de Regulação, AGER), had little
capacity and there was no effective monitoring of service quality or auditing EMAE’s accounts to assess
revenue requirements and set tariffs. This area had 8 PAs that included measures aimed to enable reforms
and address constraints for development and sustainability in the electricity sector in four results areas.

(i) First area (improvement of consumer payment and transparency of payments) included PAs 3.1 and 3.2.
PA 3.1 introduced a revised system of pre-paid services to allow for more accurate metering and invoicing
and reducing the risk of non-payment. The relevance of the PA 3.1 is rated Satisfactory as it supported a
necessary first step to resolve the issue of inconsistent payments. PA 3.2 aimed at raising public awareness
to improve bill collection through publications, TV, and radio The relevance of PA 3.2 is rated Moderately
Satisfactory as it supported relatively soft measures with unclear outreach (in the context of STP) and there
was no evidence to suggest poor tax collection was the result of inadequate public information. Some
important triggers were dropped due to procurement delays (introduction of remote metering systems,
financed by EIB) or replaced (measures to reduce arrears, e.g., conditioning budget transfers on timely
payments) by much softer measures such as awareness campaigns.

(ii) Second area (energy efficiency) was aided by PA 3.3 that aimed to promote energy efficiency through
bulb exchange program. The relevance of this PA is rated Moderately Satisfactory. While replacing



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



incandescent bulbs would contribute to greater energy efficiency, it is unclear how such improvements linked
to the overall objective of improving public service provision.

(iii) PAs 3.4 and 3.5 helped introduce and implement the Least-Cost Power Sector Development Plan to
structurally reduce the cost of energy, increase the share of renewable sources, promote long-term private
investment; establish a basis for a competitive process for all power generation activities; and improve
performance of the operator (EMAE). The relevance of PA 3.4 is rated Satisfactory. The relevance of PA 3.5
is rated Moderately Satisfactory, as it is partially repetitive(related to the Least-Cost Power Development
Plan) of the previous PA.

(iv) PAs 3.6, 3.7, and 3.8 aimed at improving quality of energy services provided to customers. With no
agency monitoring service quality in the energy sector, PA 3.6 established and operationalized a
comprehensive customer complaint redress system which would send monthly reports to AGER, including
the number of cases solved (relevance of PA3.6 is Satisfactory). PA 3.7 set minimum quality criteria for
provision of energy services and clarified the obligations of both clients and energy companies and
established deadlines and compensation to clients for poor service. While the publication of such criteria is an
important first step for improving service provision, the link of this PA to the earlier PA 3.6. is not clear and
cannot be credibly linked to improved service provision (relevance of PA 3.7 is Moderately Unsatisfactory).
The relevance of PA 3.8 (clarifying the rules on tariffs and sanctions through a concession contract with the
EMAE) is rated Moderately Satisfactory – while it was important to clarify rules and obligations of the main
parties, its link to the achievement of the related PDO was not clear.

Overall, most PAs for this PDO supported measures that appear to be relevant for the overall goal of
introducing growth-enabling reforms in the electricity sector, albeit to a varying degree. Changes in some
important triggers weakened the overall relevance of PAs for this PDO, and eventually affected the efficacy.
Essential indicators such as arrears and cost of production were dropped. Several PAs were relatively soft
(publication of quality standards, public awareness campaigns, etc.).

PDO 4. Improve domestic resource mobilization. STP long suffered from unbalanced budgets and a long-
standing high risk of debt distress. The causes included low domestic revenue mobilization, a result of poor
tax policy and administration, and inadequate surveillance of SOEs. Tax revenues come mainly from custom
duties (STP did not have a VAT). Low level of revenues collected imposed a tight limit on expenditures
financed by own sources, requiring that much of the central budget be funded externally. Short-term fiscal
challenges were being addressed by the IMF-supported program, while the DPF series focused more on
structural measures. There were 4 PAs to support this PDO. They were generally relevant for helping to
achieve the objective, with some weak areas. They included PAs in three areas:

(i) PA 4.1 stipulated simplification of the tax structure and updated the threshold values of tax brackets for
presumptive income taxation. Prior to PA 4.1, the tax structure was complicated and outdated. Importantly,
small tax-payers (both corporate taxpayers and individuals) below a threshold value of income paid a fixed
tax amount, set by progressive structure with six brackets. However, the threshold income values had not
changed in almost two decades and had not been adjusted for inflation. The PA would broaden the tax base
and improve compliance by adjusting and differentiating the threshold income values for corporations and
individuals and by reducing the tax brackets. The relevance of this PA is rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



 (ii) PAs 4.2-4.3 promoted measures to adopt the legal framework for introducing and implementing the VAT.
 The relevance of both PAs is rated Satisfactory. They followed clear logic, and were broadly relevant to the
 goal of improving generation of fiscal resources,

 The overall relevance of PAs for this PDO is rated Satisfactory.

  PDO 5. Improve the quality of public expenditures and public spending efficiency. This PDO included
 three PAs, covering two areas/results chains - on PIM and social protection.

 (i) PIM - STP lacked an adequate framework to prioritize public investment. The main problem with PIM was
 the lack of a structured process and objective criteria to select the projects to be implemented. There were no
 specific provisions for special PIM procedures in the public finance legislation. The criteria for project
 selection were unclear, and many decisions were made without a sound and objective technical analysis.
 Cost and time overruns were common. PA 5.1 aimed at enacting a law that harmonized planning and budget
 tools and lays the foundation for the appraisal and selection of public investment projects with proper
 technical analysis and application of objective selection criteria. DPF-3 dropped the trigger on PIM, which
 would have established a National Portfolio Database and the application of a project prioritization and
 investment programming tool, allowing all public investment projects to be ranked by priority. The ICR noted
 that (a) PIM work is supported by a Korean TF and another Bank project; and (b) submitting and passing a
 new law would take more time than afforded by series (ICR, p. 48). However, while PA 5.1 set the legal
 framework for improved PIM, the follow up technical support to effectively implement the law was no longer
 included. As a result, the relevance of the PA is rated Unsatisfactory.

 (ii) On social protection, PAs 5.2 and 5.3 aimed at registering beneficiaries of the three core social protection
 programs, and instituting a financial system-based (non-cash) payment mechanism for tracking and
 reconciliation of funds allocated to social protection payments. The incorporation of the three major social
 protection programs into a social registry was relevant to improve public expenditure management because
 these expenditures could be better tracked and reconciled. Both PAs followed a clear path of achieving a
 relevant objective. The relevance of PAs 5.2 and 5.3 is rated Satisfactory.

 (iii) PA 5.4 aimed to improve SOE oversight and compliance with financial targets. However, triggers for
 implementing SOE compliance through audits in DPF-3 were dropped, as they were deemed too ambitious.
 As a result, while PA 4.4 set standards for improved efficiency and performance, the key mechanism for
 ensuring accountability and incentivizing the achievement of those standards was removed. Therefore, the
 relevance of this PA is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory

 Overall, the relevance of PAs for this PDO is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



PDO 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion. There were 2 RIs in this area,
related to PAs on banking resolution and access to services (1.1-3). There were no RIs to measure the impact
toward achievements of objective on microfinance (1.7-8). The RIs were overall relevant, but incomplete (RI 2).

      RI 1. Number of banks below the Central Bank’s minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio (12 percent). This RI
       was relevant for measuring the impact of PAs 1.1-3 and progress toward achievement of the PDO, as it
       measured compliance of banks with the existing regulations and improvement of the overall soundness
       of the banking system.. RI relevance rating Satisfactory.
      RI 2. Share of the population with access to formal financial services (e.g., bank accounts). This indicator
       was only indirectly linked to PAs under this PDO (1.4-1.8) that aimed to regulate microfinance
       institutions.. The RI measurement was through surveys. However, after a baseline survey, there was no
       follow up survey . RI relevance rating Unsatisfactory.

.PDO 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system. There was one RI
in this area – “Share of real estate properties and mortgages registered and digitized in the Public Notary
Registry” (RI 3). The RI was revised to measure “share” instead of "number" of registered properties and
mortgages, a quality improvement. In addition, the target value was revised downwards from 90% under DPF-
2 to 70%. The indicator was relevant for measuring improved coverage of the land registry. It was well-linked to
PAs 2.1-3. RI relevance rating Satisfactory.

PDO 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector. There were 2 RIs in this area, related to EMAE
performance and public satisfaction with services delivered by the EMAE. Overall, the remaining RIs were
insufficient to measure the achievement of the objective (especially in its original formulation - "growth enabling
reforms") and their links to the 8 PAs in this area were inconsistent. In addition, some aspects (energy efficiency,
sector governance, etc.) were not measured by RIs.

      RI 4. EMAE operational profit/loss (millions local currency units, STD). Revised from “EMAE non-
       technical losses, %” in DPF 1. This RI measured the performance of EMAE on collecting fees for
       services provided (PAs 3.1-2). RI relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory.
      RI 5. Number of complaints received by EMAE. This RI measured the level of overall public satisfaction
       with services provided by EMAE. The link of the RI (that measured introduction of the new customer
       complaint redress system) to the achievement of the PDO (better electricity services) was unclear. RI
       relevance rating Unsatisfactory.

PDO 4: Improve domestic resource mobilization . The RI was supposed to measure the impact of tax reform
(simplification) and introduction of VAT (RI 6, PAs 4.1-3)

      RI 6. Tax revenues except custom duties on oil (millions STD). Revised from “Tax revenues as a share of
       GDP”, in DPFs 1-2. This RI was revised to measure tax revenues in local currency. The ICR does not
       specify the share of VAT (the primary measure to increase the fiscal revenue promoted by the DPF
       series) in the overall revenue. RI relevance rating Unsatisfactory.

PDO 5: Improve the quality of public expenditures and public spending efficiency. There were 2 RIs under this
PDO to track reforms in PIM and the social protection system and one RI to measure improvement in SOE
management (RI 9, PA 5.4). The RIs were broadly relevant and well-linked to the PAs.

      RI 7. Share of ongoing and finalized projects with basic information included in the National Investment
       Portfolio Database. Revised from (DPF 1) 'Estimate of multiyear borrowing plan included in the budget".

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



       This RI corresponded to the PA 5.1 (passing a law to lay the foundations for better PIM). However, it was
       unclear what exactly was being measured in relation to the achievement of the relevant PDO. RI
       relevance rating Moderately Unsatisfactory.
      RI 8. Number of beneficiaries enrolled in the three core social protection programs and receiving regular
       payments as set in law. The RI was well aligned with the PAs 5.2-3. The PD and ICR do not specify the
       overall size of the beneficiary pool. Relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory.
      RI 9. Number of SOEs’ performance monitoring systems in place. This RI was to measure the
       achievement of progress in SOE management. However, it measured only the placement of performance
       monitoring systems which was only an initial step and hence not a proper RI to account for achievement
       of the PDO. At the same time, the RI was relevant for PA 5.4 (approval of SOE reform plan, including
       establishing a performance monitoring system). RI relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory

Table 3. Results Indicators

PDO 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion. There were 2 RIs in this area,
related to PAs on banking resolution and access to services (1.1-3). There were no RIs to measure the impact
toward achievements of objective on microfinance (1.7-8). The RIs were overall relevant, but incomplete (RI 2).

      RI 1. Number of banks below the Central Bank’s minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio (12 percent). This RI
       was relevant for measuring the impact of PAs 1.1-3 and progress toward achievement of the PDO, as it
       measured compliance of banks with the existing regulations and improvement of the overall soundness
       of the banking system.. RI relevance rating Satisfactory.
      RI 2. Share of the population with access to formal financial services (e.g., bank accounts). This indicator
       was only indirectly linked to PAs under this PDO (1.4-1.8) that aimed to regulate microfinance
       institutions.. The RI measurement was through surveys. However, after a baseline survey, there was no
       follow up survey . RI relevance rating Unsatisfactory.

PDO 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system. There was one RI
in this area – “Share of real estate properties and mortgages registered and digitized in the Public Notary
Registry” (RI 3). The RI was revised to measure “share” instead of "number" of registered properties and
mortgages, a quality improvement. In addition, the target value was revised downwards from 90% under DPF-
2 to 70%. The indicator was relevant for measuring improved coverage of the land registry. It was well-linked to
PAs 2.1-3. RI relevance rating Satisfactory.

PDO 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector. There were 2 RIs in this area, related to EMAE
performance and public satisfaction with services delivered by the EMAE. Overall, the remaining RIs were
insufficient to measure the achievement of the objective (especially in its original formulation - "growth enabling
reforms") and their links to the 8 PAs in this area were inconsistent. In addition, some aspects (energy efficiency,
sector governance, etc.) were not measured by RIs.

      RI 4. EMAE operational profit/loss (millions local currency units, STD). Revised from “EMAE non-
       technical losses, %” in DPF 1. This RI measured the performance of EMAE on collecting fees for
       services provided (PAs 3.1-2). RI relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory.
      RI 5. Number of complaints received by EMAE. This RI measured the level of overall public satisfaction
       with services provided by EMAE. The link of the RI (that measured introduction of the new customer
       complaint redress system) to the achievement of the PDO (better electricity services) was unclear. RI
       relevance rating Unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



PDO 4: Improve domestic resource mobilization . The RI was supposed to measure the impact of tax reform
(simplification) and introduction of VAT (RI 6, PAs 4.1-3)

      RI 6. Tax revenues except custom duties on oil (millions STD). Revised from “Tax revenues as a share of
       GDP”, in DPFs 1-2. This RI was revised to measure tax revenues in local currency. The ICR does not
       specify the share of VAT (the primary measure to increase the fiscal revenue promoted by the DPF
       series) in the overall revenue. RI relevance rating Unsatisfactory.

PDO 5: Improve the quality of public expenditures and public spending efficiency. There were 2 RIs under this
PDO to track reforms in PIM and the social protection system and one RI to measure improvement in SOE
management (RI 9, PA 5.4). The RIs were broadly relevant and well-linked to the PAs.

      RI 7. Share of ongoing and finalized projects with basic information included in the National Investment
       Portfolio Database. Revised from (DPF 1) 'Estimate of multiyear borrowing plan included in the budget".
       This RI corresponded to the PA 5.1 (passing a law to lay the foundations for better PIM). However, it was
       unclear what exactly was being measured in relation to the achievement of the relevant PDO. RI
       relevance rating Moderately Unsatisfactory.
      RI 8. Number of beneficiaries enrolled in the three core social protection programs and receiving regular
       payments as set in law. The RI was well aligned with the PAs 5.2-3. The PD and ICR do not specify the
       overall size of the beneficiary pool. Relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 9. Number of SOEs’ performance monitoring systems in place. This RI was to measure the achievement of
progress in SOE management. However, it measured only the placement of performance monitoring systems
which was only an initial step and hence not a proper RI to account for achievement of the PDO. At the same
time, the RI was relevant for PA 5.4 (approval of SOE reform plan, including establishing a performance
monitoring system). RI relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory.

Table 2. Results Indicators

                                                                                    Actual
                                                                                               Most
             Associated                                                        change in RI                 RI
                            RI                                Actual value as                 recent
             PAs (Table             Baseline        Target                       relative to           achievement
                        relevance                              of target date                  value
                  1)                                                              targeted                rating
                                                                                             available
                                                                                   change
Objective 1: Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion
RI 1.
Number of
banks below
the Central
Bank’s                               3 banks
                1.1-3       S                      0 (2020)           0             100%     0 92021)      High
minimum                               (2015)
Capital
Adequacy
Ratio (12
percent)




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)




RI 2. Share                        39% of
of the                                the
                                             45% of the
population                        population
                                             population
with access                         (2017)
                                               (2020)
to formal      1.4-6        U                                 Unknown           -           -     Not Verified
financial                           Revised
                                            Revised from
services                           from 53%
                                            65% (DPF-1)
(e.g., bank                         (DPF-1,
accounts)                            2015)
Objective 2: Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system
RI 3. Share
of real
estate
properties
and
mortgages
registered
and digitized
in the Public
Notary
Registry.                                       70 % (2020)
                                       0%                             54 %      77% of
                2.1-3        S                                                 targeted     -      Substantial
Revised                                         Revised from
                                     (2015)                          (2021)     change
from                                            90% (DPF-2)
“Number of
real estate
properties
and
mortgages
registered in
the Public
Notary
Registry”
DPF-1
Objective 3: Improve public service provision in the electricity sector
RI 4. EMAE      3.1-3       MS       -224.9 -194.7 million -442.7 million Over 100%         -      Negligible
(Water and                           million     STD (2020)       STD (2021) deterioration
Electricity                           STD
Company)                             (2015)
operational
profit/loss
(millions
local
currency
units, STD).



                                                                                                Page 15 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



Revised
from “EMAE
non-
technical
losses, %”
DPF 1
RI 5.
Number of                                                         3,203      Over 90% of
                                       6,542
complaints      3.6-8      MS                   3,000 (2020)                   targeted     -      Substantial
                                      (2015)
received by                                                      (2021)         change
EMAE
Objective 4: Improve domestic resource mobilization and public spending efficiency
RI 6. Tax
revenues
except for
customs
duties on oil
                                       831.1                                                        Modest
(millions                                          1,050.0                   Over 100%
                                      million                1,117.2 million                      (considering
STD)            4.1-3      MU                    million STD                 of targeted    -
                                       STD                    STD (2021)                           attribution
Revised                                            (2020)                      change-
                                      (2016)                                                         issues)
from “Tax
revenues as
a share of
GDP”, DPF
1-2
Objective 5. Improve the quality of public expenditures
RI 7. Share
of ongoing
and finalized
projects with
basic
information
included in
the National
Investment
                                                95% (2020)
Portfolio
Database.        5.1       MU       0% (2015)                  0% (2021)     No change      0      Negligible
                                               Revised from
                                               100% (DPF-2)
Revised
from (DPF
1) ‘Estimate
of multiyear
borrowing
plan
included in
the budget”
Yes/No


                                                                                                Page 16 of 26
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



    RI 8.
    Number of                                                                             Over 100%
                                                               4,000 (of
    beneficiaries                                                                          of the total
                                                               which 50   5,500 HHs in
    enrolled in                                                                             number,
                                                                percent    the VFP, (of
    the three                                                                              over 90%
                                                               received   which 2,500-
    core social                                                                           of the share
                                                              payments 45.5%-received
    protection               5.2-3       MS      0 (2015)                                   of those         -          High
                                                             through the    payments
    programs                                                                                received
                                                                 formal    through the
    and                                                                                   through the
                                                               financial formal financial
    receiving                                                                                 formal
                                                               system)   system). (2021)
    regular                                                                                 financial
                                                                 (2020)
    payments as                                                                              system
    set in law.
    RI 9.
    Number of
    SOEs’
    performance               5.4        MU      0 (2015)     2 (2020)        0 (2020)      No change       0       Negligible
    monitoring
    systems in
    place.


  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial inclusion

               Rationale
               The program envisaged achieving progress on two fronts – bank soundness (to be achieved through passing
               relevant laws and regulations), and financial inclusion (introducing a new national payment system, and
               promoting microfinance services by passing laws and regulations and new staffing arrangements). The initial
               design included RI 1 for banking and RI 2 for financial inclusion (. The RI 2 on financial inclusion did not
               measure achievement on microfinance development, which was part of the PDO. The RI 1 on banking was
               fully achieved (all three banks met the minimum CAR of the Central Bank, achievement level - High), while
               the RI 2 on financial inclusion (share of population with access to financial services) was not verified, as the
               follow up survey was not conducted (achievement level – Negligible). The ICR provided additional information
               on achievements on bank soundness that could be attributed to the DPF series. At the same time, additional
               information (ICR, p. 18) on financial inclusion (payments system, microfinance), does not indicate tangible
               progress in this area, and RI did not capture any progress as well. Although (according to the ICR) the DPF


                                                                                                                 Page 17 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



helped strengthen the legal framework for microfinance by passing legislation, there is no evidence of
improved access to finance. The overall achievement level for this PDO is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the land registry system.

Rationale
Despite a broad initial formulation (business environment), the prior actions for this objective were narrowly
focused on a better functioning property (land) registration system and public notary. DPF 3 supported the
country's land information system's interoperability by creating a cadaster and a registry technical committee.
The expected benefit was improved collaboration around land transactions and improvement in the
effectiveness of property registration. The RI 3 was "the share of real estate properties and mortgages
registered and digitized in the new public notary registry," with a baseline of 0, a target of 70 percent, and an
actual achievement of 54 percent. The achievement is rated Substantial, considering that this represents over
2/3 of the targeted change in RI. The ICR also provides additional information on work done in cataloging and
digitizing disorganized paper records. At the same time, the claim that digitization of real estate properties
(while a positive development by itself) contributed substantially to the improved business environment is not
supported by concrete evidence (enterprise surveys, cost of doing business, etc.). The overall efficacy rating
for this objective is Satisfactory.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector

Rationale
The program aimed to improve the financial condition of the water and electricity utility (EMAE) through
support for metering, improved billing policy, and demand management. ICR (p. 19) confirms that the series
did not achieve the intended results in this area. The main challenges included underpricing, inefficient billing
and collection (lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa average), significant payment arrears from clients, over-
staffing, and widespread electricity and diesel theft. There were 2 RIs in this area, measuring: (i) fiscal

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



performance of the EMAE, RI 4 and (ii) public satisfaction with services delivered by the EMAE, RI 5. Another
two indicators, measuring public sector arrears to EMAE and energy cost of production, were dropped –
although they would have been helpful to show a better picture of the sector performance. The achievement
of the RI 4 (operational profit/loss of EMAE) was negligible – in fact, performance deteriorated, and losses
increased by over 100%. The RI 5 on public satisfaction showed an overall decrease in the number of
complaints received by the EMAE (slightly over 90% of targeted achievement – achievement level
Substantial). At the same time, this target was not well-linked to the overall objective of introducing growth-
enabling reforms in the electricity sector. In addition, it was not clear whether this could be attributed to the
overall customer satisfaction (somewhat unlikely give the overall poor performance of EMAE and the failure to
implement a concession contract between the government and EMAE to improve the quality of electricity
service), or other factors, such as the introduction of the new customer complaint system. Therefore, the
overall efficacy rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
PDO 4. Improve domestic resource mobilization

Rationale
In this area, the DPF series supported measures to (i) simplify the tax code; and (ii) broaden the tax base,
measured by 2 RIs. The primary measure supported by the program to broaden the tax base and increase
long-term revenue the government was adopting a VAT (law submitted to Parliament and the VAT Code
passed, DPF-3). In addition, DPF-1 supported simplifying the income tax structure from six outdated
thresholds to one (ICR p. 20). The program also included adopting fiscal invoicing regulations and supporting
taxpayers' accounting and tax information. The RI 6 measured an increase in tax revenues (except for
customs duties on oil). The RI 6 target of STN 1,050 million (from a baseline of STN 831.1 million) was
exceeded (STN 1,117.2 million). However, as emphasized in the ICR (p. 20), this achievement cannot be
attributed to the VAT reform supported by the program because the VAT was not implemented. The ICR
acknowledges that although the improvement in tax revenue could be at least partially attributed to updated
tax thresholds under DPF-1, it is not clear to what extent. The ICR mentioned several factors as contributing
to the delay in implementing the VAT: (i) the need to complete legal framework prior to VAT implementation;
(ii) the delays in implementing the IT system for the VAT; and (iii) the COVID-19 pandemic, which made it
impossible to contract the consulting services. The overall achievement level is rated Unsatisfactory.



Rating
Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)




OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
PDO 5. Improve the quality of public expenditures and public spending efficiency

Rationale
This PDO included three specific areas: (i) PIM; (ii) social protection (SP); and (iii) SOE management,
oversight, and performance. On PIM, the program supported creating and operationalizing a National
Investment Portfolio Database (database) to promote transparency, public consultation, monitoring, and
evaluation and connect planning and budgeting through a medium-term expenditure framework. The
database was supposed to include projects in the pre-investment phase, domestically funded and donor-
financed programs, concluded projects, and other information. The RI 8 measured the "share of ongoing and
finalized projects with basic information included in the database," with zero baseline, a target of 95 percent,
and zero achievement - as the database is not yet operational (achievement level Negligible).The ICR claims
that the government made progress by approving the National Planning System Law with further steps toward
creating the database but also notes that delays and weak government capacity have hampered the overall
impact of these efforts. Although the Council of Ministers has passed the law, the authorities haven't prepared
the necessary implementing regulations, nor have they set up the database.

On SP, the program supported the development of a more coherent and efficient system through registering
beneficiaries of the three core social protection programs and instituting a financial system-based (non-cash)
payment mechanism for tracking and reconciling funds allocated to social protection payments. The RI 9
measured the number of enrolled beneficiaries receiving payments from the three core SP programs, from a
baseline of zero, a target of 4,000 beneficiaries, and an actual result of 5,500 beneficiaries - exceeding the
target (High level of achievement). The government has been able to register all beneficiaries in a single
registry and, with additional WBG support, establish a social registry and develop an operational manual with
a targeting methodology and eligibility criteria. The ICR attributes the success of the registration of
beneficiaries in the social protection programs to (i) a high-quality, proactive TA; (ii) few errors of inclusion
and exclusion; and (iii) the larger scale of the activity because of its national coverage.

On SOE reform, the program focused on the approval and operationalization of the SOE reform plan by
establishing a monitoring system to strengthen SOE accountability, improve the SOEs' internal controls and
enhance the quality of financial reporting and transparency. The RI 9 was designed to measure achievement
in this area by looking at the "number of SOEs' performance monitoring systems in place," with a baseline of
0 and a target of 2. At the time of the ICR, no performance monitoring systems had been implemented, with
Negligible achievement. The ICR informs that the COVID-19 pandemic caused the delay in implementing the
monitoring systems. Regarding additional information, the ICR notes improved financial reporting by SOEs,
with reports published on the Ministry of Finance website (albeit lacking a final assessment from the auditor
due to missing data). A more relevant RI on the percentage of performance targets achieved was dropped.
The objective was not achieved, despite some minor incremental improvements (simplifying tax thresholds,
passing tax legislation, and publishing SOE reports on the web).

Overall, the efficacy rating for this PDO is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 26
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)




                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall achievement of objectives for this DPL series is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. Out of five PDOs
achievement of three objectives is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, and one is rated Unsatisfactory, reflecting
on most targets not achieved, with a few exceptions. The area of relative achievement was land registration
(PDO2). In the financial sector, there was a relative success on the banking soundness target but negligible
results on access to finance; on infrastructure, the efforts to reform EMAE did not bear any results in
performance improvement. On the contrary, its fiscal position deteriorated. The authorities didn't introduce the
VAT as planned and were unsuccessful in SOE reform efforts. While authorities made progress in registering
beneficiaries in the social protection programs, the efforts to improve PIM did not materialize.

Table 3: Efficacy Ratings by Objective

 PDO                                                              Rating
 1. Reduce financial sector vulnerabilities and expand financial
                                                                  Moderately Unsatisfactory
 inclusion
 2. Improve the business environment through modernization of the
                                                                  Satisfactory
 land registry system.
 3. Improve public service provision in the electricity sector    Moderately Unsatisfactory
 4. Improve domestic resource mobilization and public spending
                                                                  Unsatisfactory
 efficiency
 5. Improve the quality of public expenditures                    Moderately Unsatisfactory
 Overall Series Efficacy Rating                                   Moderately Unsatisfactory

Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Most of the PAs for these series were generally relevant for achieving the intended outcomes, followed a logical
sequence, and were relatively consistent. At the same time, some PAs did not demonstrate meaningful
movement along the results chain (for example – the PA on publication of quality standards for electricity
supply, aiming at improved services) or the results chain was incomplete – the PAs did not include follow up

                                                                                                        Page 21 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



steps that would be needed to ensure impact (for example, the PA on SOE performance that established the
reform Plan (PA 5.4) needed to be complemented by a PA linked to the Plan implementation. (,, and many
relevant and sensible PAs and associated RIs were dropped . Overall, the series recorded some (limited)
success in specific subareas such as the financial sector (bank soundness), land registry, and social protection
(registration of beneficiaries). However, in the most critical sectors with the highest number of PAs – electricity,
tax reform, the financial sector (payments system and microfinance), PIM - the series was less successful in
designing relevant actions and monitoring and achieving results.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR is candid in assessing multiple risks to the sustainability of development outcomes, including political,
governance, macroeconomic, fiduciary, and risks related to the country's institutional capacity for implementation
and sustainability. Some of the achievements under this DPF are related to the passage of legislation and
regulations (financial resolution, credit registry), which, considering weak implementation capacity, are at
high risk of not being sustained. Areas such as SOE management and PIM did not record visible achievements.
The ICR couldn't measure improvements in financial inclusion during the series. Still, the introduction of mobile
money and the expansion of digital financial services can be measured in the future (ICR, para 45). The
electricity sector also remains precarious, as emphasized in the ICR – especially considering that the EMAE
financial standing (one of the series targets) has deteriorated. On VAT introduction, additional measures (IT
systems, regulations, staff hired) can potentially mitigate the risks of slow implementation and low capacity. In
addition, the Bank's Institutional Capacity Building Project addresses some of the critical bottlenecks in that
area. The ICR notes that during the project's life, the risk assessment was elevated from Substantial to High.
IEG concurs with previous assessment and considers the risk to development outcomes as high, especially
given the history of poor implementation of passed legislation and overall weak counterpart capacity.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The ICR notes that the design of the program was underpinned by considerable analytical work and technical
assistance (conducted by the Bank and other partners) in relevant sectors, and benefited from knowledge
accumulated through ongoing and past sector investment and capacity building projects of the WBG and
development partners.). With this in mind, the project design should have anticipated the capacity issue early on
and incorporated it accordingly. Other ongoing projects in sectors could have provided better guidance on how
much of the intended reforms could carry on and how to provide necessary capacity supplementation to achieve




                                                                                                      Page 22 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



the rest. In particular, the design could have focused on the capacity to implement the new laws and regulations
supported by PAs.

The program was overburdened with multiple components and sectors, undermining its eventual efficacy –
especially in the electricity sector, where the counterpart’s inability of timely implementation and poor capacity
were well-known. This review however notes that these steps did not seem to be sufficient and timely to improve
achievement of results. Some of the dropped triggers and RIs appeared quite relevant and could have
complemented the existing results framework in a positive way. Timeliness was another issue – possibly
indicating that the original estimates of passing laws and regulations and their implementation were excessively
optimistic, and in some cases did not take into account local political developments (scheduled elections that led
to change in government and delays in implementation - according to the ICR). Rating: Moderately
unsatisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

On the implementation side, the ICR notes significant challenges for monitoring and evaluation faced by the
program, and in particular delays in setting up an M&E system until DPF 3, necessitating an ISR. WBG
supervision appeared to be regular, thus enabling changes in the program. The ISR and associated supervision,
helped make informed decisions about program adjustments and streamlining. Most RIs were measurable by
the time of this ICR, with some important exceptions - the financial inclusion survey was not conducted and
could not be measured, and several energy indicators could not be replicated. Program implementation was
boosted by concurrent activities, including investment projects, technical assistance and capacity building and
cooperation with the development partners. Most triggers were incorporated into PAs as planned. Rating:
Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, with Moderately Unsatisfactory rating for design,
reflecting the excessively complex design of the series given the extremely low capacity environment; and




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



Moderately Satisfactory for implementation, as the Bank played an important role in helping the Government to
promote important reforms in close cooperation with development partners.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The program contained some measures with a possible direct impact on poverty and welfare, both positive
(such as improving social protection management, targeting, better energy services, and access to finance) and
negative (introduction of VAT). The ICR does not discuss their impact on poverty, and there was no relevant
information available at the time of the ICRR.



b. Environmental

None identified.



c. Gender

None identified.



d. Other

N/A



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is good quality, thorough and candid in its program assessment. It provides a detailed description of the
country's context, which affected the design and implementation of the program. The report describes the main
challenges the program was supposed to help mitigate. Description of program pillars and areas provides
enough details. The ICR reflects on the changes made (dropped triggers and RIs) but could have discussed in
more detail the reasons for dropping them and the potential benefits of retaining some RIs. The section on the
relevance of PAs contains enough detail, is well-argued, and notes a few weaknesses. Similarly, the efficacy
section notes most shortcomings in relevance, measurability, and appropriateness of RIs. The efficacy analysis

                                                                                                  Page 24 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



is candid and notes a lack of achievement and contribution of the program to results, even in cases when the
overall country outcomes improved. The ICR provides information on other expected outcomes and impacts
(poverty, environment), except for gender – which the ICR could have mentioned, mainly in social protection but
provides no information on actual impact. Some of the intended land reforms (registry) could potentially lead to
more sustainable land use. Energy demand management programs, including replacing incandescent light bulbs
with higher efficiency ones, would contribute to less pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. So far, no savings
in fossil fuel consumption and improvements in pollution seem to have materialized. In the sections on design
and Bank performance, the ICR could have discussed in more detail the seeming complexity of the program in
the context of weak capacity for implementation and did not link it with an overall below-the-line level of efficacy.
However, the first lesson reflects this. The ICR includes seven broadly relevant lessons organized by
sectors/engagement areas. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

This review broadly concurs with the lessons from ICR and offers additional suggestions for some of them:

More focused reform agenda. Excessively spreading sectoral coverage of a DPF in a low-capacity environment
like STP is fraught with risks to efficacy, sustainability, and the credibility of reforms in the long term.

Capacity strengthening. Designing a DPF series in STP required more emphasis on capacity analytics, including
better guidance from ongoing sector investment and TA projects on the capacity needed to implement the new
laws and regulations supported by prior actions. Bank teams need to be realistic in estimating the technical
needs to implement politically sensitive and technical systems such as new VAT in a low-capacity context such
as STP, where it was relatively easy to pass laws to meet PAs. Still, additional measures were needed to ensure
implementation.

Results measurement. Results indicators and targets should reflect the existing country systems and limited
government capacity for implementing new systems. Several indicators did not adequately consider these
challenges.


                                                                                                      Page 25 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STP Strength. Growth & Fiscal Policy DPO (P159010)



Advantages of DPF series. Success in STP (land registry) shows the advantages of a series of DPFs in support
of seemingly straightforward reforms. It makes adjustments based on lessons learned and changing country
circumstances which is more difficult for one-off reform measures, even when supported by abundant TA and
analytics.

Ownership and implementation: Performance in the electricity sector shows the importance of a realistic ex-ante
assessment of counterpart capacity, ownership, and commitment to implementation. The electric utility in STP
faced significant issues, and the attempt to resolve them all at once failed.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 26 of 26
