     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023045

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P118197                                    ALAT-KARAKUL WS

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                 Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51890                                  31-Dec-2017                                        73,803,931.89

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2012                                30-Nov-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           82,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            81,651,480.75                                               0.00

 Actual                                        73,803,931.89                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally               Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Alat and Karakul Water Supply Project (AKWSP) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 6) was identical to the one in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 17) and aimed to:

   "improve the coverage, quality, and efficiency of public water supply service in the districts of Alat
   and Karakul in the Bukhara region."


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives under the same objective
   as follows:

   1. To improve the coverage of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara
   region.

   2. To improve the quality of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara
   region.

   3. To improve the efficiency of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara
   region.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Improvement of Water Supply Infrastructure (appraisal cost: US$101.47 million of which IDA
   would finance US$76.85 million, actual cost: US$81.83 million of which IDA financed US$72.18
   million). This component included the following three sub-components:

   1.1. Engineering-design and operational technical assistance services to support the Project
   Implementing Entity and the PCU Bukhara branch. The project would support implementation in the
   following tasks: (a) review of the available feasibility study and preparation of optimized preliminary designs;
   (b) preparation of detailed designs and bidding documents, construction supervision, and reporting; and (c)
   improvement utility operation, maintenance and management, all through the provision of goods and
   consultants’ services.

   1.2. Rehabilitation and expansion of water production and bulk transmission systems. This would be
   achieved through the carrying out of works and the provision of goods and consultants’ services to the
   following: (a) the construction of a new expanded water treatment plant in Dvoinik, including the
   rehabilitation of the existing intake and pre-sedimentation ponds; (b) the renewal and expansion of
   transmission systems including the 24 km trunk line from Dvoinik to Alat-town; (c) the rehabilitation of the 13
   km trunk line from Alattown to Karakul-town; and (d) the rehabilitation and expansion of the transmission
   pumping stations and related water tanks to upgrade the production and transmission capacity to about
   49,000 m3 per day.

   1.3. Rehabilitation and expansion of urban and rural water networks. This would be achieved through
   the carrying out of works and the provision of goods and consultants’ services to the following: (a) the
   rehabilitation and expansion of existing water distribution systems in Alat-town and Karakul-town, including
   treated water tanks, treated water pumping stations, disinfection systems, distribution networks, installation
   of meters on about 7,200 existing household connections and installation of about 1,600 new household

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



connections and meters; and (b) construction of new rural water transmission and distribution systems
including pumping, storage, networks and metered connections in about 120 of the surrounding villages
based on the optimized feasibility study and
preliminary design cost estimates.

2. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (appraisal cost: US$3.23 million, of which IDA
would finance US$2.41 million, actual cost: US$0.95 million of which IDA financed US$0.67 million).
This component would address Bukhara Regional Vodokanal (BVK) capacity needs to ensure sustainable
management, operations and maintenance of water supply service in the Alat and Karakul service areas,
following the merger of Alat District Vodokanal (AVK) and Karakul District Vodokanal (KVK) into a new
operating division of BVK. This component included the following four sub-components:

2.1. Institutional strengthening and capacity building. This would be achieved through carrying out of
institutional assessments of the capacity, organization and training needs of the Project Implementing Entity
to improve its management and operational performance for a sustainable water supply service in the Alat
and Karakul districts.

2.2. Strengthening the capacity of utility management and operations staff. This would be achieved
through the provision of local and international training on management and technical operations, through
the provision of consultants’ services and training.

2.3. Strengthening the management and operational capacity of Project Implementing Entity. This
would be achieved through the provision of goods, consultants’ services and training in the following areas:
(a) the establishment of modern procedures and systems, including hardware and software, for billing,
collection, customer service, internal auditing, accounting and record keeping; (b) the provision of
operations and maintenance equipment and machinery; and (c) the provision of laboratory equipment and
supplies.

2.4. Developing a communications strategy. This would include carrying out of public consultations and
awareness campaign, consumer satisfaction and gender surveys, through the provision of consultants’
services.

3. Studies for Future Investments (appraisal cost: US$0.38 million of which IDA would
finance US$0.38 million, actual cost: US$0.20 million of which IDA financed US$0.20 million). This
would include the preparation of a feasibility study of sewerage and on-site sanitation investments needs in
the towns and districts of Alat and Karakul, to accompany the increased provision of water supply services,
through the provision of consultants’ services.

4. Project Management (appraisal cost: US$2.36 million of which IDA would finance US$2.36 million,
actual cost: US$0.75 million of which IDA financed US$0.75 million). This component would
support strengthening the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and its Bukhara branch’s Project management,
monitoring and coordination capacity, through the provision of goods, consultants’ services, including
Project financial and technical audits, and Training, and financing of Incremental Operating Costs.

Revised Components. The project components were not revised during implementation.




                                                                                                Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost of the Project was estimated at US$113.5 million before taxes (US$137.7
  million including taxes). This amount was revised downwards to US$91.58 million. The actual cost
  according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$83.73 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US$82.00
  million. This amount was slightly revised downwards to US$81.65 million. The actual amount disbursed was
  US$73.80 million or 90% of the estimated amount (ICR Data Sheet, page 2). According to the ICR
  (paragraph 47), the project benefited from cost savings from competitive bidding and slower than expected
  price development. As a result of this, the project was implemented with lower costs than expected at
  project entry (ICR, paragraph 47).

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to contribute US$55.70 million of counterpart funds,
  of which US$ 31.5 million in co-financing of project costs before taxes, and about US$24.5 million in
  estimated taxes. The actual amount according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$9.92 million or
  about 18% of the estimated amount at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 22) noted that the project
  experienced co-financing delays and issues. However, the ICR did not explicitly explain/discuss the
  reason(s) for the significantly lower than expected co-financing.

  Dates. The project was approved on December 13, 2012 and became effective fourteen months later on
  February 13, 2014. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted in November, 2015, which was about one
  year and nine months after effectiveness. The PAD (paragraph 44) stated that a mid-term review of the
  progress towards achievement of the project objectives would be undertaken in early 2015. This Review
  finds that the MTR was conducted early relative to other Bank-financed operations, and should have been
  conducted at least after three years into implementation. The project was expected to close on December
  31, 2017. The closing date was extended for about four years (47 months) to close on November 30, 2021.
  The extension of the closing date was to accommodate various challenges that faced the project including:
  a prolonged effectiveness period and start-up delays; delays due to sector reforms, institutional changes,
  and co-financing delays; procurement and contract management issues; and delays associated with the
  COVID-19 restrictions (ICR, paragraphs 21, 22, 23 and 24).

  The project was restructured four times, all Level 2 restructuring, as follows:

  1. On November 23, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$24.13 million, in order to extend the loan
  closing date to June 30, 2019 and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

  2. On November 7, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$32.56 million, in order to extend the loan
  closing date to June 30, 2020, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, change the Results
  Framework (RF), and change the implementation schedule.

  3. On May 29, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$56.87 million, in order to extend the loan closing
  date to December 31, 2020 and revise the RF.

  4. On December 18, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$64.17 million, in order to extend the loan
  closing date November 30, 2021 and revise the RF.

  Rationale for Changes and Implication on the Original Theory of Change (ToC). The above-mentioned
  changes were justified given the various challenges that the project faced and resulted in implementation


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



   delays as mentioned above. The changes did not involve the revision of the overall structure or underlying
   objectives of the project and hence did not have an implication on the ToC (ICR, paragraph 20).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In Uzbekistan, the water supply and sanitation (WSS) infrastructure suffered from
the limited capacity of sector institutions to maintain, renew and expand such assets. In turn, this had
resulted in the degradation of access to WSS services (PAD, paragraph 5). Specifically, Alat and Karakul
districts faced one of the most precarious water supply situations in the country. Distribution networks
covered 23% of Alat district’s population and only about 15% of Karakul district’s population. Piped water
supply was of extreme low quality, with turbid unfiltered water reaching customers discontinuously in the
two towns, and a few periurban villages in their immediate vicinity (PAD, paragraph 13). The project aimed
to ensure that safe and reliable water service would be provided to urban and rural populations in Alat and
Karakul, contributing to human development and social inclusion through improved health and productivity
benefits, as well direct creation of local jobs (PAD, paragraph 16).

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank continues to be one the main donors in the sector through financing
rehabilitation projects, such as the Water Supply, Sanitation and Health project (1997-2008) for urban and
rural water supply in the Karakalpakstan and Khorezm regions, and the Bukhara and Samarkand, the
Water Supply project (BSWSP, 2002-2010) for urban water supply. Both projects substantially achieved
their infrastructure and service objectives, albeit with delays and quality issues, and uneven institutional
outcomes. The Bank also financed the Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage project (BSSP, 2009), and the
Syrdarya Water Supply project (SWSP, 2011), also focused on infrastructure rehabilitations. AKWSP was
the fifth loan in Uzbekistan’s WSS sector, and the first to combine rehabilitations with substantial
development of new coverage.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS, 2012-2015) objective of
supporting infrastructure efficiency, economic competitiveness, diversification and social inclusion elements
of GOU’s medium term development strategy.

At completion, the PDO remained in line with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2016–
2020). The CPF identified public service delivery under focus area (c), the core action of increasing access
and improving the quality of water supply and sanitation services which was highly relevant to the
AKWSP. The PDO’s was also in line with the CPF’s adjustments made in the Performance and Learning
Review for FY16–20. The project directly contributed to the Focus Area 2: Reform of selected state
institutions and citizen engagement and its Objective 2.3: Improved access to and quality of water supply
and sanitation services by combining water infrastructure interventions with utility performance
improvements. The project also contributed to Objective 2.4: Strengthened participation in oversight of
public service delivery through public consultations and awareness campaigns. Further, the project also
contributed to the cross-cutting areas of (a) greater public access and use of data through individual
metering, providing access to data on individual consumption per household, and thus contributing to more

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



               accurate and transparent billing; (b) improved gender equality’ by targeting women as primary project
               beneficiaries; and (c) climate change’ by improving the sustainable management of water supply services
               and reducing the vulnerability of water supply infrastructure to climate extremes.

               Consistency with Government Strategies. The PDO was in line with Uzbekistan’s Development Strategy
               for 2017–2021. The project directly contributed to Priority Area 4: Development of the Social Sphere.
               Specifically, Objective 4.3: which highlighted the need for implementing targeted programs to ensure
               improved living conditions of the population through the improvement of utility services, provision of clean
               drinking water in rural areas, and introduction of modern cost-effective and efficient technologies. The PDO
               was also in line with the GoU’s Program for the Comprehensive Development and Modernization of Water
               Supply and Sewerage Systems (2017–2021) which prioritized integrated measures to improve service
               delivery through continued reconstruction and rehabilitation of infrastructure and adoption of modern
               technologies, information systems, and automated billing for water systems. Finally, the PDO was also in
               line with Development Strategy of the New Uzbekistan (2022–2026) which aimed to increase the coverage
               rate of the population of Uzbekistan with access to clean drinking water to 87% and renew the sewage
               systems in 32 major cities and 155 regional centers (ICR, paragraph 26).

               Level of PDO. The PDO formulation was pitched at an adequate level to address the development
               problem.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and focused. The
               PDO was aligned with the current Bank CPF and the GoU priorities for the water and sanitation sector.
               Therefore, relevance of objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the coverage of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara
                             region.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would finance priority investments in
                             the urban and rural water supply sector in Alat and Karakul districts. This included the rehabilitation and
                             expansion of water production and bulk transmission systems. This was expected to reduce breakages of
                             both water transmission mains and distribution networks. The project would also finance the rehabilitation and
                             expansion of urban and rural water networks. This was expected to result in outputs such as the rehabilitation
                             of piped household water connections and the installation of water meters. These activities combined were
                             expected to improve coverage of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



Bukhara region and increase the number of beneficiaries. Anticipated higher level outcomes included a
reduction in water-borne diseases and improved living conditions in Alat and Karakul districts.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by three critical assumptions: (i) Alat and Karakul vodokanal
would be merged and integrated into the Bukhara vodokanal; (ii) Construction works would be completed
about 1.5 years before project closure, which would allow enough time to measure improved reliability of
water supply services through operating water meters; and (iii) increased households' willingness to pay for
improved service delivery.

The activities in the ToC were directly connected to the stated objective in a plausible causal chain. The
stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      232,760 direct project beneficiaries (baseline:40,456, target: 232,000, target exceeded) with
         50.70% female beneficiaries (baseline: 50.68%, target: 50.70%, target achieved).
        42,152 new piped household water connections that resulted from the project intervention
         (target: 35,400, target exceeded).
        7,400 piped household water connections benefited from rehabilitation works undertaken by the
         project (target: 7,400, target achieved).
        49,552 connections had operating water meters (target:42,900, target exceeded).
        0.10 breakages per km of water transmission mains (baseline: 1.0, target: 0.2, target exceeded).
        0.29 breakages per km of water distribution networks (baseline: 1.20, target: 0.4, target exceeded).
        The project improved water transmission main and distribution network through financing the
         construction of 182 km of transmission main (48 km primary trunk main and 134 km secondary trunk
         main) and 1,342 km of distribution network (ICR, paragraph 30).



Outcome

      Direct project beneficiaries with access to improved water sources reached 232,760 people in Alat
       and Karakul districts, slightly exceeding the target of 232,000 people. By project completion, the
       coverage rate increased from 19 to 87% in Alat and Karakul districts. Overall, 130 of 165 rural villages
       were connected for the first time to a water supply system (ICR, paragraph 29).
      The project improved water transmission main and distribution network through financing the
       construction of 182 km of transmission main (48 km primary trunk main and 134 km secondary trunk
       main) and 1,342 km of distribution network (ICR, paragraph 30). The system renewal reduced pipe
       bursts from 1.0 to 0.1 pipe bursts per km of transmission main (exceeding the target of 0.2) and from
       1.2 to 0.29 pipe bursts per km of distribution network (exceeding the target of 0.4). The reduction in
       pipe bursts reduced physical water losses and service interruptions, and reduced the potential of
       water contamination (ICR, paragraph 30).
      As a result of the project support, a total of 42,151 households were provided with new household
       water connections (overachieving the target of 35,400). Also, 7,400 households benefitted from
       rehabilitated household connections (fully achieving the target of 7,400). In total, 49,552 households

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



         were provided with operating water meters (overachieving the target of 42,900). According to the ICR
         (paragraph 31) the installation of water meters allowed reliable recording of water usage data and
         consequently enabled a more accurate and transparent billing process, which was expected to
         reduce the amount of unbilled water and increases the BST’s revenue.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project overachieved its targets related to improved coverage, in
terms of direct project beneficiaries and new households provided with new water connections. In addition,
the project fully achieved or overachieved all related intermediate results indicators (IRIs) as reported by the
ICR (Table 2). Therefore, the efficacy with which the PDO was achieved is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara region.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). In addition to the activities geared to support the first objective, the project would
support strengthening the capacity of water utility management, ensure that water quality at the source met
international standards, and develop the capacity of water utilities to ensure that water is available 24 hours
for users. These activities combined would improve the quality of public water supply services. Anticipated
higher level outcomes included a reduction in water-borne diseases and improved living conditions in Alat and
Karakul districts.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by three critical assumptions: (i) Alat and Karakul vodokanal
would be merged and integrated into the Bukhara vodokanal; (ii) Construction works would be completed
about 1.5 years before project closure, which would allow enough time to measure improved reliability of
water supply services through operating water meters; and (iii) increased households' willingness to pay for
improved service delivery.

The activities in the ToC were directly connected to the stated objective (improving quality) in a plausible
causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

        By project completion on average 98.5% (98% in Alat and 99% in Karakul) of regulatory water
         samples taken at the source met potable quality standards (baseline: 53%, target: 98%, target
         exceeded).[VD1] [HW2]
        Water supply service became available 24 hours per day (baseline: 4 hours, target: 20 hours, target
         exceeded).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)




      7.5% of households for whom water was a priority problem (baseline: 85%, target: 20%, target
       exceeded).

Outcomes

      The project improved the quality of public water supply services through supporting the construction of
       the Dvoinik WTP combined with the rehabilitation and expansion of the Dvoinik water intake structure.
       The Dvoinik WTP was commissioned in March 2022 with a treatment capacity of 50,000 m3 per day
       and the capacity to serve up to 0.5 million people in the future (ICR, paragraph 33). The Dvoinik WTP
       featured a conventional surface water treatment process including the application of primary
       chlorination. Secondary chlorination was done at the Alat water distribution center (WDC) and
       water was further distributed to three WDCs, all of which were either rehabilitated or constructed
       under the project. Water from the WDCs was distributed to Alat and Karakul towns as well as to a total
       of 37 rural settlement supply areas (SSAs). Water towers (37 in total) were constructed in each rural
       SSA to support the envisaged 24/7 water supply (ICR, paragraph 33).
      The project financed the construction of three water laboratories, including one laboratory building at
       the Dvoinik WTP and two laboratories in the administrative buildings of Alat West and Karakul East
       WDCs. To ensure that water samples met potable quality standards, water quality was monitored
       through daily samples by the BST at the Dvoinik WTP and Alat West and Karakul East WDCs.
       According to the ICR (paragraph 34) the sampling was in accordance with an annually
       agreed schedule (reflecting the frequency of sampling and determined indicators) of the Sanitary
       Epidemiological Agency (SEA) under the Ministry of Health. The ICR (paragraph 34) reported that by
       project completion 98.5% of water samples taken at the source met potable quality standards
       compared to 53% prior to the project, slightly higher than the target of 98%.
      The project improved the reliability of water supply service. According to the ICR (paragraph 35) at the
       onset of the project, the reliability of water supply for connected households was about four hours per
       day. This increased to 24 hours per day by project completion, exceeding the target of 20 hours per
       day. This improvement in reliability was achieved through the reconstruction of the water supply
       system (ICR, paragraph 35).
      Improved water reliability was further evidenced by the reduction in the number of households for
       whom water was a priority problem. By project completion, 7.5% of households identified poor water
       supply (in terms of quality and reliability) as their number one priority among household
       concerns compared to 85% at the onset of the project, and overachieving the target of 20%.The
       improved quality of public water supply services was also evidenced by a decrease in the number of
       customer complaints from 367 complaints during January–March (Q1) 2021 (before commissioning of
       the WTP), to 111 in January–March (Q1) 2022 (after commissioning). The ICR (paragraph 36)
       explained that most complaints after commissioning the WTP were made by households that were not
       connected to the new network, and the remainder were by connected households that reported
       failures in the water meters.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project overachieved its targets related to the above-mentioned
objective (improved quality) in terms of the percentage of water samples meeting potable quality standards,
and improved reliability of water supply. In addition, the project fully achieved or overachieved all related
intermediate results indicators (IRIs) as reported by the ICR (Table 2). Therefore, the efficacy with which the
PDO was achieved is rated High.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the efficiency of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara
region.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would strengthen the capacity of the
utility management and operations staff, strengthen management and operation capacity of the project
implementing entity (PIE), support the BVK participation in the International Benchmarking Networking
(IBNET) for water and sanitation utilities, and improve communication and public awareness. These activities
would improve performance of public utilities and improve the cash working ratio and reduce non-revenue
water (NRW). These activities combined were expected to improve the efficiency of public water supply
services in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara region and improve the bill collection ratio.
Anticipated higher level outcomes included a reduction in water-borne diseases and improved living
conditions in Alat and Karakul districts.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by three critical assumptions: (i) Alat and Karakul vodokanal
would be merged and integrated into the Bukhara vodokanal; (ii) Construction works would be completed
about 1.5 years before project closure, which would allow enough time to measure improved reliability of
water supply services through operating water meters; and (iii) increased households' willingness to pay for
improved service delivery.

The activities in the ToC were directly connected to the stated objective (improving efficiency) in a plausible
causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

        By project completion the bill collection ratio reached 83% (baseline:46%, target: 80%, target
           exceeded).
          An average of 0.59 BVK Cash Working Ratio was reached (baseline: 1.45, target: 0.90, target
           exceeded). Cash working ratio in Alat was 0.31 and 0.87 in Karakul (baselines were: 1.32 and 1.57 for
           Alat and Karakul districts, respectively).
          The project supported one water utility (target achieved).
          283 BVK staff recruited and trained for Alat and Karakul water supply service needs (formally revised
           target: 283, target achieved).
          Non revenue water (NRW) reached 21% (baseline: 51%, target: 25%, target exceeded).
          BVK participation in IBNET for water and sanitation utilities was not achieved. According to the ICR
           (paragraph 43) “IBNET was not implemented as the BST already had several MISs, including billing
           and accounting information systems, that filed the same information and performance indicators as
           IBNET.”

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)




      Six BST and two PIU staff participated in two international study tours to Berlin, Germany, which
       included a visit Berlin’s trade fair for water and wastewater technology suppliers, Berlin’s main WTP,
       mechanical equipment suppliers, and educational institutions (ICR, paragraph 39).

Outcomes

      The project supported the water utilities through facilitating the reorganization and merger of the AVK
       and KVK into the regional BST, fully achieving its target at completion. This merger was to overcome
       the shortfall of financial and institutional capacity to implement and operate the new water supply
       facilities in Alat and Karakul (ICR, paragraph 38). All accounting systems, including customers, wages,
       fixed assets, were transferred to the BST. The ICR (pargraph38) noted that the GoU adopted an
       overall country-level strategy which resulted in the establishment of 14 regional Unitary Enterprise
       Suvokovas (SUE) and two interregional water utilities into which all district vodokanals were
       integrated. Following this resolution, the new charter of the BST was approved on January 16, 2016,
       and AVK and KVK were integrated into the BST.
      The project supported capacity building and recruitment of the BST staff to efficiently plan, implement,
       operate, and maintain the new water supply system. After the merger in 2016, the number of staff to
       be recruited for O&M of new/reconstructed facilities was 152 (including 118 operations and support
       staff) in Alat district and 131 (84 operations and support staff) in Karakul district. At completion,
       283 BST staff were recruited and trained, fully achieving the target of 283. According to the ICR
       (paragraph 39) the BST staff received 11 formal training sessions by a local consulting firm and
       international and local experts. Trainings focused on asset management, accounting, O&M, water
       disinfection and water quality monitoring, and human resources management, among others (ICR,
       paragraph 39). [VD1]
      The improved efficiency was evidenced by: 1. the Iimproved billing collection ratio (improved bill
       collection ratio was defined as the ratio of collected versus issued bills). By project completion, the bill
       collection rate of the BST’s Alat and Karakul division increased from 46.0 to 83.5%, overachieving the
       target of 80%. In Alat, the bill collection ratio increased from 46 to 84%, and in Karakul the bill
       collection ratio increased from 59 to 82% over the same period. While the water tariff in Bukhara was
       increased by more than 100% in January 2021, the achievement of an improved bill collection ratio
       indicated a high level of willingness of the customers to pay for improved services (ICR, paragraph
       40). 2. Improved bill collection ratio resulted in improved BST cash working ratio (cash working
       ratio was defined as the ratio of cash operation expenses / cash operating revenues). At project entry,
       the cash working ratio was 1.45, indicating that the BVK had problems recovering the expenses from
       fee collection. At project completion, the ratio was 0.67, overachieving the target of 0.90 by 153%. The
       cash working ratio decreased from 1.32 to 0.31 for Alat and from 1.57 to 0.87 in Karakul
       (overachieving the common target of 0.90). 3. Decrease in NRW (defined as annual volume of water
       distributed for which bills have been collected (m3) / annual volume of water (m3) produced by the
       WTP). [VD2] [HW3] NRW decreased from 51% at project entry to 21% at project completion,
       overachieving the target of 25%. This achievement can be attributed to the construction of the new
       networks, replacement/rehabilitation of the old distribution network, and capacity building of the
       service provider (ICR, paragraph 42).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project overachieved its targets related to the above-mentioned
outcomes objective(coverage, quality, andimproved efficiency) in terms of direct project
beneficiaries, percentage of water samples meeting potable quality standards, improved reliability of water
supply and improved bill collection ratio, improved cash working ratio and reduced NRW. In addition, the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



                            project fully achieved or overachieved all related intermediate results indicators (IRIs) as reported by the ICR
                            (Table 2). Therefore, the efficacy with which the PDO was achieved is rated High.




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project succeeded in improving the coverage, quality, and efficiency of public water supply service in the
                            districts of Alat and Karakul in the Bukhara region. It overachieved its targets in terms of direct project
                            beneficiaries, percentage of water samples meeting potable quality standards, improved reliability of water
                            supply and improved bill collection ratio. In addition, the project fully achieved or overachieved all related
                            intermediate results indicators (IRIs) as reported by the ICR Table 2. Therefore, the overall efficacy with
                            which the PDO was achieved is rated High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis

   ex ante

                               The economic and financial analysis (EFA) at appraisal did not include an estimation of an economic or
                                   financial rate of return for the project.
                               The economic analysis at appraisal featured a least cost approach for the justification of this project. The
                                PAD attributed this to low tariffs, poor service and scarce reliable data on produced and distributed
                                volumes, all of which made it difficult to undertake a solid cost benefit analysis of the project (PAD,
                                paragraph 57).
                               The cost of the project was relatively high on a per capita basis, at about US$445/person, as compared
                                to an already high US$268/person for the Syrdarya Water Supply Project (SWSP). Nevertheless, unlike
                                SWSP, the need for new investments in expansion and for more pumping is higher in Alat and Karakul,
                                which explains the higher per capita cost.
                               Financial analysis was conducted (i) to identify the most appropriate project financing and debt
                                allocation/ repayment strategy taking into account that full cost recovery from consumer tariffs is only at

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 22
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



         its early stages; (ii) to estimate cost recovery tariff levels and tariff increases and/or potential subsides
         required to ensure financial sustainability of the water supply operations; and (iii) to demonstrate that any
         required tariff increases would be affordable for low-income households (PAD, Annex 8).

ex post

      The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at completion was estimated at 18% with an
         ENPV (at 8% social discount rate) of UZS 794 billion, which according to the ICR (Annex 4, paragraph
         21) was comparable to the expected returns within the water sector (with median economic rates of
         return between 15 and 20%).
        At project completion, a cost-benefit analysis was introduced to investigate the impact from project
         changes to the economic value of the project. Benefits from savings related to residents’ time spent, cost
         of treatment, purchase of tanker water, and health-related benefits were introduced in the analysis. The
         benefits included were considered a conservative estimate of the total benefits (ICR, paragraph 46).
        Financial analysis of the BST. The financial development of the BST improved due to the significant tariff
         revision being effective from 2021. This was backed by a positive development in NRW, which is a result
         of structured efforts to increase fee collection efficiency in Bukhara. As a result, the BST was likely to
         present positive earnings before financial costs and tax, which was the first time over the last four years.
         With this development, the BST achieved the financial target set for the cash working ratio of 90% (ICR,
         Annex 4, paragraph 17).
        Sensitivity Analysis. The robustness of the economic results was tested for impact from a decrease in
         benefit generation by reduced population growth and higher costs of O&M. Reduction in the population
         growth rate by 50% reduced the ENPV from UZS 794 billion to UZS 717 billion, and an increase in costs
         of O&M by 50% reduced the ENPV to UZS 748 billion. The combined case of decrease in benefits and
         costs resulted in an ENPV of UZS 672 and an EIRR of 17%.
        Other benefits. The project would result in an annual Green House Gas (GHG) emission reduction of
         around 63,000 tons of CO2-eq which was estimated from elimination of water boiling at 8 liters per capita
         per day for the project beneficiary population (ICR, Annex4, paragraph 13).
        Implementation efficiency. The project experienced significant delays related to: start-up delays, co-
         financing delays, procurement issues, and COVID-19 disruptions. While the original closing date
         was planned for December 2017 after five years of implementation, the project closed in November 2021
         with a four-year delay. The ICR (paragraph 81) identified procurement issues as the "the central cause of
         delays, affecting the performance of the AKWSP and the other ongoing WSS projects in the portfolio."

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. While the project experienced a four year delay, implementation was
completed at a lower cost than anticipated at appraisal. The project also managed to connect 7,000 additional
individual households, which "was partly made possible by cost savings from competitive bidding and price
development (ICR, paragraph 47)." These additional households added positive economic value to the project
and partially reduced the negative impact from the project delays. Finally, with an ex post economic internal rate
of return (EIRR) estimated at 18%, and when global co-benefits of greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction from
energy savings were included the EIRR was 19%, the project EIRR compares favorably to the median EIRR of
WSS projects as noted above. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              19.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated High. The project succeeded in improving
the coverage, quality, and efficiency of public water supply service in the districts of Alat and Karakul in the
Bukhara region. It overachieved its targets in terms of direct project beneficiaries, percentage of water samples
meeting potable quality standards, improved reliability of water supply and improved bill collection ratio.
Efficiency was rated Substantial. The project was completed at a lower cost than anticipated at appraisal, and
the ex post economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 18%, which compared favorably to the
median EIRR of similar WSS projects.

Based on a High rating for both Relevance of Objectives and Overall Efficacy and a Substantial rating for
Efficiency, the outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following two risks that could potentially impact the development outcome of the
project:

1. Technical risk related to the infrastructure works, quality of works, and the technology
used. These aspects were assessed during the last implementation support mission, and deemed to be
adequate and operated by trained staff (ICR, paragraph 85). However, the transmission line suffered from a
technical design flaw related to the pipe diameter, where increasing the pipe diameter from 700 to 800mm
would have resulted in 50% pump energy savings. According to the ICR (paragraph 85) while this error
cannot be adjusted, designing the transmission line and pumping station for future projects need to be done
simultaneously to optimize operating and investment costs.

2. Institutional risk related to the capacity of the Bukhara Regional State Unitary Enterprise's (BST) in
terms of operational and financial performance. While the capacity of the BST improved, there are still

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



gaps in capacity and utilities still struggle to attract and retain skilled employees (ICR, paragraph 86). The
BST and the Bukhara region are expected to receive support through the Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank-funded ‘Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Bukhara Region’ (approved on April 3, 2020),
which will continue capacity building for the BST, and finance the scale-up of a smart metering program and
the installation of a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system (ICR, paragraph 86). Also,
the BST and the sector more broadly will also benefit from the national-level interventions under the Water
Services and Institutional Support (WASIS). These interventions include: a national water metering program
and a sector monitoring and benchmarking system; medium-term planning and tariff setting procedures; an
energy efficiency financing facility; and sector professional development and capacity-building activities for
the Ministry of Housing and Communal Services (ICR, paragraph 86).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. AKWSP was the fifth Bank-financed operation in Uzbekistan’s
            WSS sector, and the first to combine rehabilitations with substantial development of new
            coverage. The PDO focused mainly on improving coverage and quality and used utility efficiency
            and consolidation as entry points for a more ambitious reform agenda (ICR, paragraph 55). The
            PDO was in line with the Government's priorities for the water sector and in line with the Bank's
            strategies for the country (see section 3 for more details).
           Technical Aspects. The project design sought to establish financial and operational sustainability
            of investments and services implemented by promoting institutional development and improved
            water supply service levels. However, the project's preparation experienced delays and setbacks
            due to suboptimal scoping and incomplete feasibility study.
           Implementation Arrangements. Implementation benefitted from existing implementation
            arrangements and procedures established under previously implemented Bank projects.
            However, the technical designs of the infrastructure had major deficiencies and the feasibility
            study was incomplete at effectiveness. However, procurement and fiduciary decisions were kept
            centralized which limited the BST’s autonomy as active decision-maker (ICR, paragraph 57).
           Fiduciary Aspects. However, procurement and fiduciary decisions were kept
            centralized which limited the Bukhara Regional State Unitary Enterprise’s (BST)’s autonomy as
            active decision-maker (ICR, paragraph 57).
           Risk Assessment. Three main risks areas were identified at appraisal related to stakeholder,
            implementing agency and project-related risks. The project had an overall risk rating of
            substantial, and governance and capacity were both areas of high and substantial risk,
            respectively. According to the ICR (paragraph 58) "mitigation measures were effectively used
            throughout implementation." These included: trainings on fiduciary aspects to the BST and Project
            Coordination Unit (PCU) and regular monitoring visits by the project team and rigorous review
            systems. However, implementation suffered from procurement-related delays despite the
            mitigation measures. Also, weakness in human resource capacity impacted the project
            performance and contributed to implementation delays (ICR, paragraph 65).
           M&E Arrangements. M&E design was adequate and the Results Framework (RF) included
            relevant indicators to track progress toward achievement of the objectives and test the links in the


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



         ToC. However, baseline data and some target values on operational and financial efficiency
         were estimates and could only be realistically set (ICR, paragraph 72).

  Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. Despite that the project was the fifth Bank-financed
  project in the water sector, procurement arrangements continued to be problematic. At effectiveness, the
  technical designs of the infrastructure had major deficiencies and the feasibility study was incomplete.
  Also, BST could have benefited from the provision of additional technical expertise to mitigate capacity
  weaknesses. Overall, QAE suffered from significant significant shortcomings that contributed to
  implementation delays. Therefore, QAE is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented under a challenging institutional environment and faced COVID-19 related
 delay, among other challenges. The project experienced several changes in sector legislation and
 regulation, and procurement authorization (ICR, paragraph 62). The Bank conducted 18 implementation
 support missions over the course of the operation (ICR, paragraph 83). The project implementation
 benefitted from having four of the five Task Team Leaders (TTLs) based in the region. According to the
 ICR (paragraph 83), this allowed close support for implementation activities and enabled the project’s
 progress, particularly during the last two years of implementation. The Bank team raised implementation
 issues with senior government officials through portfolio meetings as well as high-level visits of the Bank’s
 senior management.

 The Bank team were proactive in restructuring the project to allow enough time to complete activities and
 achieve the PDO. The ICR (paragraph 83) highlighted that the fourth restructuring was critical to allow for
 the full completion of works. The ICR (paragraph 83) also noted that the extended project implementation
 period facilitated a sector dialogue with the government and supported the reform agenda through
 analytical work. This also resulted in the preparation of a new programmatic engagement through the
 Water Services and Institutional Support (WASIS) project, which has national reform interventions at its
 core

 However, the team could have used the restructuring to better align the RF indicators with the institutional
 changes and drop some of the output indicators that were irrelevant to the client.

 Summary of the Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team were proactive in restructuring the
 project and brought critical expertise to enable the successful completion of the project, particularly in the
 last two years. Despite significant delays, the Bank team successfully guided the project to achieve the
 PDO. Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and
        the results indicators as reported in the PAD. Overall, the ToC in the ICR reflected the relation
        between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes.
       The PDO was assessed through four PDO outcome indicators: 1. Direct project beneficiaries, which
        reflected coverage; 2. Regulatory water samples meeting potable quality standards and
        3. Reliability of water supply service, where indicators 2 and 3 measured improved quality, and
        4. Improved bill collection ratio measured improved efficiency. The four outcome indicators were
        relevant and directly linked to the three elements of the PDO (coverage, quality and efficiency). The
        indicators were measurable and had baseline data, and the original targets were reasonable.
       The RF also included 11 intermediate results indicators (IRIs). Most IRIs were relevant and linked to
        the stated activities and helped to track the achievement of the outcomes and test the links in the
        ToC. The IRIs were measurable, included baselines (where relevant) and had reasonable
        targets. However, some IRIs baseline data and targets were not accurate and represented
        estimates (ICR, paragraph 72). This included baseline data and target values on operational
        efficiency (for example, on water production and consumption, in the absence of a Supervisory
        Control and Data Acquisition system and water meters) and on financial efficiency (for example,
        ‘BVK cash working ratio’, and NRW).
       Overall, M&E design was adequate despite some minor shortcomings.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E arrangements included (a) the establishment of an MIS at the BST level, with responsibility
         for data collection and transferred to the PIC and (b) annual customer satisfaction surveys
         (CSSs), to be conducted by the PIC.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 73) M&E data were "collected and analyzed in a
         methodologically sound manner." The PIC through site visits collected data and reported by the
         BST to the PCU and the Bank in semiannual progress reports. However, the proposed MIS
         was not implemented as the BST already had several MISs in place. This included a billing
         system with a customer database and an accounting system, in place, which were used to track
         achievement toward improved financial efficiency (ICR, paragraph73).
        The annual Customer Satisfaction Surveys (CSSs) were only implemented in 2016 and 2021 due
         to the delayed initiation of the civil works. A final CSS was implemented by the BST in October


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



         2021when the water supply system was still under testing and commissioning. This did not allow
         the CSS to capture the project’s full impact on improved services.
        Overall, M&E implementation was successful with minor weaknesses.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 74) M&E utilization allowed to inform project management and
         decision-making. M&E data were used to alert the World Bank and the GoU of the risk of not
         achieving the PDO’s, and consequently helped to justify repeated project extensions.
        The ICR (paragraph 74) noted that the project restructurings could have been used to
         update indicator wordings following the institutional changes and drop indicators for activities that
         were not of interest to the client.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was relevant and included adequate indicators to
  track the project progress as well as the achievement of the PDO. Implementation was successful and
  M&E utilization informed management and decision-making. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated
  Substantial despite minor shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category B (Partial Assessment). Three safeguard policies
   were triggered under the project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project activities were likely to
   generate minor and temporary site-specific environmental impacts (e.g., dust pollution, construction noise,
   vibrations and waste generation), impacts of accidental pollutant discharge in water/groundwater, impacts
   on soil and air quality, traffic interferences and occupational risks, as well as possible temporary effects to
   the local vegetation (trees) or landscape (PAD, paragraph 75). An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA),
   an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and a Resettlement Framework Policy (RFP) were prepared
   and consulted in Alat and Karakul districts and publicly disclosed in 2012.

   The ICR did not included an explicit statement on safeguard compliance, but stated that "the project closed
   with a Moderately Satisfactory rating, with no pending issues (paragraph 78)." Environmental and social
   safeguards management benefited from the Bank-supported trainings. However, there was no central
   oversight of safeguard compliance since environmental and social safeguards specialist positions at the
   central and regional PCU level remained vacant. This, in turn, contributed to reporting delays and gaps in
   supervision (ICR, paragraph 79).

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 77) "environmental issues
   were addressed to preclude the occurrence of any adverse effects on humans and the environment."
   However, there were some recurring shortcomings were related to: low priority given to occupational health

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



  and safety measures, gaps in documentation and record-keeping, and varying degrees of implementing
  corrective actions and recommendations.

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. The project did not result in large-scale resettlement activities and
  most of the works were carried out within the existing facilities or along roadways (ICR, paragraph 78).
  Temporary impacts on four farms were compensated in accordance with the Environmental and Social
  Management Plan. A project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was set up to address any
  complaints. Most complaints were related to connection issues and rehabilitation of roads after the
  construction works. According to the ICR (paragraph 78) "no complaints related to environmental and social
  safeguards were received."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). FM suffered from systemic weaknesses across much of the country
  portfolio related to: inadequate capacity of public sector accounting, poor financial reporting and audit
  arrangements, and weak internal controls and legislative oversight. The project also faced challenges
  including: late submission of interim unaudited financial reports, late submission of audited project financial
  statements, and delayed documentation of expenditures incurred (ICR, paragraph 80). In addition, the
  PCU was chronically understaffed and faced high staff turnover during most of the implementation period,
  and there was a lack of experienced specialists in the market to implement international financial
  institutions-funded projects. As a result, the project FM was noncompliant with the Bank's financial
  management requirements. FM performance improved towards the end of the project as the PCU’s staffing
  arrangements and overall capacity gradually improved. The ICR (paragraph 80) noted that the "project
  closed with a Moderately Satisfactory rating, with no pending actions."

  Procurement. The project suffered from procurement related delays. Despite Bank trainings, full
  compliance with the Bank’s policies and procedures (in terms of integrity and transparency of the
  processes) remained weak across the sector. According to the ICR (paragraph 81) "procurement was often
  the central cause of delays, affecting the performance of the AKWSP and the other ongoing WSS projects
  in the portfolio." Procurement weaknesses during implementation included: inadequate implementation
  arrangements for procurement and low procurement staff capacity; slow procurement processes including
  evaluation of tenders; and prolonged procurement and contract approval procedures. Also, procurement
  was negatively impacted by internal government restructurings and changes in the authorizing
  environment, lengthy customs clearance procedures for imported equipment and materials, and delays in
  government co-financing. All these issues had an adverse effect on the overall project implementation
  schedule (ICR, paragraph 81).

  Overall, procurement under the project was implemented in accordance with the Bank’s procurement and
  consultant guidelines and in accordance with the provisions of the Financing Agreement, and all signed
  contracts were successfully completed. The ICR (paragraph 81) reported that the project closed with a
  Moderately Satisfactory rating and had no pending procurement issues.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not report on this.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                Quality at Entry suffered from
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                significant shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Combining a programmatic approach toward incremental sector changes combined with
robust sectoral work may strengthen the potential for successful public sector reforms.
Public sector reforms take time, and one has to be realistic about timing and achieving
results. Sector reforms also requires strong country ownership combined with tailored Bank-support
to the pace of reform in the country. This has implications for the lending instruments that best
support public sector reforms. Through this project and the Bank’s engagement in Uzbekistan more
generally, sustained support was achieved through a series of interventions with a number of
credits/loans linked to the Government’s medium-term investment program. This approach was
successful in achieving gradual sector improvements in the short term and a more ambitious
intervention in the long term. Support through modest and selective entry points such as efficiency
can show partial success and these can also form the basis for later progress, even in difficult areas
such as public service reform.

2. If project readiness is ensured during the preparation phase, project delays may be
avoided or at least reduced. This project experienced several delays, some of which are rooted in
the preparation phase. Ensuring project readiness will expedite awarding of contracts so that
projects can begin immediately, leading to accelerated disbursements and achievement of project
outputs on time and within budget. Initial implementation delays can be reduced by completing more
works during project preparation such as (a) preparation of request for proposal for consulting
services, (b) approval of feasibility studies by the Government, (c) preparation of tender documents


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



for the first contract packages, and (d) advanced actions for the procurement of consulting services
or construction contracts.

3. If energy efficiency needs is considered at the design stage of projects, it may lead to more
climate friendly and sustainable interventions. Energy use is significant in the WSS sector and
can often be the single largest energy using sector in a municipality due to pumping requirements.
To develop energy-efficient projects, for water system upgrades, energy audits at the design stage
need to be carefully considered to provide a better understanding of a facility’s baseline energy use
and help identify additional energy-efficient design elements, and to take into account municipal
budgets and operating costs and a municipality’s carbon footprint. While the project benefited
from energy-efficient technologies, such variable speed pumps, a technical design flaw was
uncovered on the transmission line, which would have resulted in 50% pump energy savings by
increasing the pipe diameter (from 700 to 800 mm).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefited from the data collected by the M&E system, which enabled tracking the
progress of activities and assessing the achievement of the PDO.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the
project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify most of the
assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was adequate. The efficiency analysis provided good justification on
the validity of the project investments.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation
experience and candidly reported on shortcomings. However, reporting on safeguards did not include an
explicit statement on compliance. Finally, the ICR Data Sheet (page ii) stated the date of the MTR as December
4, 2014, while the ICR (Footnote #37) stated the MTR was in November 2015.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with minor shortcomings.




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ALAT-KARAKUL WS (P118197)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 22 of 22
