      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023039

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P174120                                    EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Philippines                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91210                                 30-Jun-2021                                         500,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2020                                30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        500,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Paul Holden                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC
 Fard



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDO) were to (i) mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on poor and
vulnerable households, and (ii) provide financial relief to affected small and medium enterprises (SMEs).




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The project was structured around two pillars:

Pillar 1: Mitigating the economic impact of COVID-19 to poor and vulnerable families and workers

Pillar 1 aimed to (i) deepen the benefits under the existing conditional cash transfer program, (ii) expand the
reach of social assistance to affected households that are not part of the conditional cash transfer program,
and (iii) provide financial assistance to vulnerable repatriated Overseas Filipino Workers who were unable to
return to their host countries due to the international travel bans related to the pandemic and to the loss in
economic activity.

Pillar 2: Providing financial relief to affected SMEs

Pillar 2 aimed to (i) temporarily alleviate the financial burden faced by formal SMEs through a wage subsidy
offered over a two-month period, (ii) provide additional temporary financial relief through deferrals of tax
payments, and (iii) support business continuity by facilitating access to credit through an MSMEs credit
guarantee scheme.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Project cost. The approved amount for the project was US$500 million. The actual disbursed amount was
US$500 million. The amounts are identical given that the commitment currency is in U.S. dollars for an IBRD
loan.

Financing. The project was financed through an IBRD loan.

Dates. The project was approved on May 28, 2020 and became effective on June 19, 2020. The closing date for
the project was June 30, 2021, with no delays incurred in completing the project.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 At the time of project appraisal, the Philippines and the rest of the world were navigating stringent
 containment measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which deeply affected economic activity
 and the population’s livelihoods. The government imposed stringent containment measures as part of the
 “enhanced community quarantine” between March 17 to May 15, 2020, initially in the National Capital Region,
 and later to all affected regions as cases spread. These measures were among the most stringent ones across
 the Association of Southeast Asian Nations region as evidenced by the stringency index computed by
 the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker. The domestic and global containment measures put in
 place in response to the pandemic resulted in a sharp deterioration of the Philippines economy and the
 population's livelihoods including through the temporary shutdown in businesses, and contractions in exports,
 remittances, public and private investment, and private consumption. Public investment fell as the government
 prioritized healthcare and social protection expenditures over public infrastructure investments. Private
 investment declined due to the fall in economic activity and the uncertain economic outlook. The Philippines

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



economy was estimated to have contracted by 16.5 percent year-on-year in the second quarter of 2020. The
national unemployment rate rose to 17.7 percent in April 2020, with 7.3 million individuals estimated to be
unemployed. Poor and vulnerable households were hit particularly hard by the pandemic.

The government launched a socioeconomic strategy in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The
strategy was comprised of four pillars: (i) emergency support for vulnerable groups; (ii) marshaling resources
to fight COVID-19; (iii) monetary actions and other financing support; and (iv) an economic recovery program
to create jobs and sustain growth. Two fiscal stimulus packages, known as Bayanihan I and II, were
consequently introduced by the government in 2020 in support of this strategy. These packages supported
additional expenditures in social protection and in health, as well as an acceleration of the planned reduction in
corporate income taxes (latter approved in 2021 with retroactive payments made starting in July 2021).
Bayanihan I came into law through the Bayanihan to Heal as One Act on March 24, 2020, and was supported
by this Development Policy Operation, and implemented between March and June 2020. Bayanihan II came
into law though the Bayanihan to Recover as One Act on September 11, 2020, and implemented between
September 2020 and June 2021. The cost of budgetary measures through Bayanihan I and II according to
government estimates were equivalent to 2.2 percent of GDP and 1.2 percent of 2020 GDP, respectively. In
addition to the measures implemented as part of the strategy, the government also provided off-budget
liquidity support which was estimated at 1.0 percent of GDP, similar in relative size to Indonesia (1.1 percent of
GDP), higher than Vietnam (0.1 percent of GDP) and lower than Thailand (3.6 percent of GDP).

Monetary policy and financial sector measures were implemented in parallel to fiscal measures. The
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) reduced its policy rate by 200 basis points through five interest rate
announcements. In order to raise short-term liquidity in the financial system, the BSP reduced the bank
reserve requirement ratio by 200 basis points and purchased government securities in the secondary market.
Moreover, the BSP provided provisional advances of PHP 300 billion in government securities through a
repurchase agreement (payable within 3 months). Subsequent provisional advances under the same
repurchase agreement were increased to PHP 540 billion in October 2020 and extended until end-2021. The
BSP also provided a dividend payment of PHP 20 billion to the government in 2020 in order to provide
additional support to the growing financing needs.

The PDO of mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable households and providing
financial relief to affected SMEs was highly relevant to addressing the challenges confronting the
repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic. The emergency quarantine affected the livelihood of millions of
individuals and led to an increase in the poverty rate from 16.6 percent in 2018 to 23.7 percent in the first
semester of 2021 according to estimates of the Philippine Statistics Authority. Enhancing access to social
assistance benefits to local workers whose earning ability was adversely affected by the emergency
quarantine supported the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable individuals. Similarly, social assistance benefits to
overseas workers allowed for an uninterrupted transfer of remittance to dependent relatives. Finally, the
financial relief offered to MSMEs supported business continuity through the wage subsidy program, the
deferral of taxes, and the expansion of credit guarantees.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



There were six PAs, with PAs 1-3 supporting Pillar 1 (mitigate the economic impact of COVID-19 on poor and
vulnerable families and workers) and PAs 4-6 supporting Pillar 2 (provide financial relief to affected SMEs).

Prior Actions for Pillar 1 - Mitigate the economic impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable families
and workers

PA1 supported the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable households over the course of the emergency community
quarantine. The PA supported the achievement of the PDO of mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on poor and
vulnerable households by allowing households to benefit from a cash and/or in kind transfer during the course
of the emergency community quarantine, and access essential goods and services. Eligible households
received between 5,000 and 8,000 pesos per month in cash and/or in-kind transfer for a period of two months,
with the exact amount determined in proportion to the minimum wage of each region, which corresponded to
roughly 60 percent of the monthly minimum wage. Roughly 4.3 million out of the 18 million households to have
received the ESP benefit consisted of existing beneficiaries of the Conditional Cash Transfer Program, also
known as the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps). The remaining 13.6 million households to have
benefitted from the ESP benefit consisted of non-4P beneficiaries who became eligible to similar amounts as
those paid to 4P beneficiaries. A targeted approach for the distribution of the ESP benefits could not be taken
given the lack of up-to-date information on household income. (relevance of PA1=S)

PA2 supported the identification of beneficiaries and the delivery of benefits to vulnerable households eligible to
the ESP who were not beneficiaries of the 4Ps. The PA supported the achievement of the PDO of mitigating the
impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable households by implementing a pilot to identify and make digital
payments to vulnerable households given the need to minimize physical contact for the submission of
applications. The identification and the delivery of benefits was made difficult by the lack of a national ID
registry and of an updated social registry. The pilot was implemented through a partnership between the
Department of Social Welfare and Development and PayMaya (i.e., one of major e-money issuers). The PA
recognized that the adoption of full-scale digital solutions would require investment in software, hardware, and
cloud service, as well as capacity building. The PA supported initial steps in providing digital solutions for the
delivery of the ESP to improve its speed, impact, transparency, and accountability. (relevance of PA2=S)

PA3 provided financial assistance to OFWs who were unable to return to their host countries due to
international travel bans related to the COVID-19 pandemic or to work in their host country due to containment
measures. The PA supported the achievement of the PDO by providing financial assistance to households
which were highly dependent on remittance inflows from OFWs. Surveys indicate that remittances in
households with at least one migrant member were slightly higher than the households’ income from domestic
sources. With the country’s migrants estimated at 6.1 million individuals and remittance inflows estimated at 9.6
percent of GDP in 2020, the fall in remittances related to the inability of OFWs to return to their host country
would have had significant repercussions on poor and vulnerable households. Overseas workers filed their
application online and once approved, the benefit was transferred to them through a bank transfer or through a
transfer to remittance centers (i.e., Western Union, M Lhuillier) (additional information can be accessed at:
https://owwa.gov.ph/?page_id=4287). (relevance of PA3=S)



Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 2: Providing financial relief to affected SMEs

PA4 was intended to support employee retention in micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) which were
forced to temporarily shut down operations or to operate below capacity during the emergency community


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



quarantine. The 3,000 largest businesses were excluded from the program. PA4 supported the achievement of
the PDO by subsidizing MSMEs’ labor costs, thereby supporting employee retention and limiting repercussions
in employees’ incomes and livelihoods. The PA supported the implementation of the Small Business Wage
Subsidy (SBWS), which provided a wage subsidy ranging between 5,000 to 8,000 pesos depending on the
region over a two-month period to 3.4 million employees across 1.6 million MSMEs affected by the emergency
quarantine. To qualify for the SBWS, businesses were required to maintain the employment status of eligible
employees and employees were required to remain employed throughout the emergency community
quarantine. The prior action was highly relevant as a means of preserving jobs at firms experiencing a
temporary reduction in business activity, by reducing firms’ labor costs while supporting the incomes of workers
whose hours were reduced. The cost of the SBWS was estimated at 0.3 percent of GDP. (relevance of PA4=S)

PA5 supported the temporary deferral of tax payments and the filing of tax returns for all direct and indirect
income tax sources for individuals and MSMEs, including the value-added tax, the excise tax, the documentary
stamp tax and the withholding tax, between April and June 2020. It supported the achievement of the PDO by
supporting the financial viability of firms, which limited business bankruptcies and potential repercussions on
economic activity and the labor market. (relevance of PA5=S)

PA6 supported MSMEs in distressed cash positions to access credit within the context of more stringent
financing and borrowing cost conditions over the quarantine period. The PA supported the introduction of a
special credit guarantee facility, which covered 50 percent of the principal amount of loans of MSMEs. The
credit guarantee was applied to a maximum loan amount of 50 million pesos per borrower, with credit
guarantees on loans in excess of 50 million pesos which may have been accepted on a case-by-case basis and
subject to PhilGuarantee's regular credit guarantee program guidelines. The loan guarantee amount provided
through the PhilGuarantee mirrored the terms of the bank loans provided to MSMEs in the Philippines.
According to the 2020 Firm Establishment Survey conducted by the Philippine Statistics Authority, there were
957,620 formal firms operating in the Philippines in 2020. Of these, 952,969 (99.5 percent of total) consisted
of MSMEs and 4,651 (0.5 percent of total) of large enterprises (defined as firms with 200 or more employees).
Micro enterprises constituted 88.8 percent (850,127) of total MSME establishments, followed by small
enterprises at 10.3 percent of total MSME establishments (98,126) and medium enterprises at 0.5 percent of
total MSME establishments (4,716). During the interview conducted as part of the ICR Review, the task team
indicated that it was impossible to know the number of MSMEs to have qualified for the credit guarantee under
the PhilGuarantee program given the lax qualification requirements, with MSMEs being able to qualify for the
credit guarantee if they simply expressed that they were adversely affected by the repercussions of the COVID-
19 pandemic. PA4 is considered to be poorly designed given the fact that it was impossible for the government
to determine whether or not recipients were credit constrained. As such, firms which were not constrained could
have qualified for the credit guarantee. The credit guarantee to MSMEs under the PhilGuarantee is still in effect
in the Philippines to this date. This is problematic, however, given that this was considered to be an emergency
measure with no sunset or firm end date. Additional information on this measure can be accessed at:
https://philguarantee.gov.ph/programs/guarantee-programs/corporate-msme/msme-credit-guarantee-program-
mcgp/ (relevance of PA6=MS)

Table 1: Prior Actions

Objective 1: Mitigating the economic impact of COVID-19 to poor and vulnerable families and
workers
PA1: The Government has enacted an emergency subsidy program (ESP) to support 18 million low-income
families through cash and in-kind transfers, as evidenced through the “Bayanihan to Heal as One” Act (RA
No. 11469).

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



 PA2: The Government has initiated a pilot for digital payments for Assistance to Individuals in Crisis Situation
 (AICS) program for vulnerable households that are not part of 4Ps, as evidenced through a Memorandum of
 Agreement between DSWD and PayMaya.
 PA3: The Government has established a financial assistance program to vulnerable Overseas Filipino
 Workers (OFWs) affected by COVID-19, as evidenced through the DOLE Department Order No. 212-2020.
 Objective 2: Providing financial relief to affected SMEs
 PA4: The Government has established a wage subsidy program for employees of small businesses affected
 by COVID-19, as evidenced through the Joint Memorandum Circular No. 001-2020.
 PA5: The Government has granted deferral of payment of taxes by at least one month, as evidenced through
 Revenue Regulation Nos. 7-2020, 10-2020, and 11-2020.
 PA6: The Government has expanded credit guarantee to MSMEs to support business continuity, as
 evidenced through PhilGuarantee Resolution No. 060-2020.

Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

RI1 (associated with PA1) (“percent of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps) beneficiaries that
received top-up benefits from the Emergency Subsidy Program”) had a target of more than 90 percent by
2021. Given the vulnerability of beneficiaries of 4Ps to falling into poverty as a result of the emergency
community quarantine, an RI that measured the share of beneficiaries of 4Ps to have received the top-up
benefits from the Emergency Subsidy Program was an appropriate measure to track. As indicated in the
ICR, RI 1 was a partial output indicator as it measured the achievement of PA 1 for only the beneficiaries
of 4Ps, not for vulnerable households who qualified for the EPS and who were not beneficiaries of 4Ps.
The ICR indicates that the PAD attributed a partial indicator to PA1 due to the lack of timely poverty data
from a comprehensive household survey. The indicator was well defined. Data were available to measure
achievement of the target. (relevance of RI1=S)

RI2 (associated with PA2) (“number of targeted non-4Ps beneficiaries that received social assistance
through electronic transfer system”) had a target of at least 10,000 by 2021. Given the vulnerability of non-
4Ps beneficiaries to falling into poverty as a result of the emergency community quarantine, and
challenges with the identification of beneficiaries and the delivery of benefits to vulnerable households
eligible to the ESP, this RI measured the number of non-4P beneficiaries to have received benefits under
the Emergency Subsidy Program through the electronic transfer system. The indicator was well defined.
Data were available to measure achievement of the target. (relevance of RI2=S)

RI3 (associated with PA3) (“number of Overseas Filipino Workers that received financial assistance”) had
a target of 10,000 by 2021. This RI measured the number of OFWs to have received financial assistance
due to their inability to return to their host country given the international travel bans or to work overseas
due to the containment measures in place. The indicator was measured through the number of eligible


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



overseas workers whose applications were approved. The indicator was well defined. Data were available
to measure the achievement of the target. (relevance of RI3=S)

RI4 (associated with PA4, PA 5 and PA6) (“percent of MSMEs that survived the liquidity constraints during
the emergency community quarantine”) had a target of 70 percent by 2021. This RI measured the survival
rate of MSMEs within the context of liquidity constraints during the emergency community quarantine. The
ICR admits that while RI4 refers to a precise figure, a precise figure was not available, and had to be
estimated through firm surveys which were periodically conducted by the World Bank starting on July
2020. These surveys assessed firms’ operational status following the introduction of restrictions due to the
pandemic. The ICR admits that RI4 “could have been complemented by additional indicators to better
capture the extent of shielding affected MSMEs, such as the level of employment and/or credit extended
to MSMEs and the level of their non-performing loans.” (ICR, p. 14) The ICR Review notes that an
indicator related to financial conditions of MSMEs would have been much more relevant to measuring the
achievement of PA4, PA5 and PA6. Furthermore, the ICR Review notes that there are many factors which
could have contributed or reduced firms' survival rate which would go beyond the measures pursued
through this operation, and as such, RI4 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. (relevance of RI4=MU)

Table 2: Results Indicators

                                                                                Actual
                                          Baseline      Target      Actual      change in RI
                     Associated RI
RIs                                       (including    (including  value as of RI relative achievement
                     PA(s)      Relevance
                                          date)         date)       target date to targeted rating
                                                                                change
Objective 1: Mitigating the economic impact of COVID-19 to poor and vulnerable families and workers
RI1: Percent of
Pantawid Pamilyang
Pilipino Program (4                                                             Over 100
                                                         More than
Ps) beneficiaries                                                   98.9        percent of
                      PA1         S            0 (2019)  90 percent                         High
that received top-up                                                percent     targeted
                                                         (2021)
benefits from the                                                               change
Emergency Subsidy
Program.
RI2: Number of
targeted non-4Ps
                                                                                Over 100
beneficiaries that                                       At least
                                                                    9,607,975 percent of
received social       PA2         S            0 (2019)  10,000                             High
                                                                    (2021)      targeted
assistance through                                       (2021)
                                                                                change
electronic transfer
system.
RI3: Number of
                                                                                Over 100
Overseas Filipino                                        At least
                                                                    540,876 percent of
Workers that          PA3         S            0 (2019)  10,000                             High
                                                                    (2021)      targeted
received financial                                       (2021)
                                                                                change
assistance.
Objective 2: Providing financial relief to affected SMEs



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



                                                                                 93 percent
                                                                                 (survey-
                                                                                 based firm
                                                                                 survival
                                                                                 rate,
               RI4: Percent of                                                   calculated
               MSMEs that                                                        by         Over 100
                                                                     At least 70
               survived the liquidity PA4, PA5,                                  excluding percent of
                                                MU        100 (2019) percent                          Substantial
               constraints during PA6                                            firms that targeted
                                                                     (2021)
               the lockdown                                                      had been change
               (ECQ).                                                            closed and
                                                                                 did not
                                                                                 expect to
                                                                                 reopen)
                                                                                 (March
                                                                                 2022)

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Mitigate the economic impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable families and workers

                Rationale
                Outcomes. The program met all three output targets for the objective of mitigating the economic impact of
                COVID-19 to poor and vulnerable families and workers.

                      RI1 on more than 90 percent of 4Ps beneficiaries receiving top-up benefits from the ESP by 2021 was
                       achieved with 98.9 percent of 4Ps beneficiaries benefitting from the ESP. (achievement rating of
                       RI1=High)
                      RI2 on at least 10,000 non-4Ps beneficiaries receiving social assistance through the electronic
                       transfer system by 2021 was achieved with 9,607,975 non-4Ps beneficiaries receiving social
                       assistance payments through the electronic transfer system. This represents a significant
                       achievement given that the identification of beneficiaries was based on LGUs prioritization of poor and
                       vulnerable individuals and the intake of beneficiaries based on self-report assessment forms and local
                       verification. (achievement rating of RI2=High)
                      RI3 on at least 10,000 OFWs receiving financial assistance by 2021 was achieved with 540,876
                       OFWs receiving social assistance benefits (achievement rating of RI3=High)

                A total amount of roughly PHP 200 billion (US$4 billion) was disbursed through cash and/or in-kind transfers
                to 18 million low-income households, representing about 73 percent of total households, over the course of
                the enhanced community quarantine.


                                                                                                                Page 8 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)




                      Rating

                      Highly Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      Providing financial relief to affected SMEs

                      Rationale
                      Outcomes. The program met the output target for the objective of providing financial relief to affected SMEs.

                            RI4 on at least 70 percent of MSMEs surviving the liquidity constraints during the emergency
                             community quarantine by 2021 was achieved with 93 percent of MSMEs estimated to have survived
                             stringent financial conditions by March 2022. This result was estimated through a survey-based firm
                             survival rate, which was calculated by excluding firms that had been closed and did not expect to
                             reopen. While the target for RI4 was met, RI4 is rated Modest given the MU rating with regard to its
                             relevance. (achievement rating of RI4=Modest)



                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The achievement of the objective under Pillar 1 is rated Highly Satisfactory. The achievement of the objective
under Pillar 2 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. As a result, the overall achievement of the objectives is rated
Satisfactory.




Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome


                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)




Rationale

The relevance of prior actions is rated Satisfactory. The prior actions were linked to the achievement of the
program objectives in a convincing and credible manner, which supported the causal chain between the prior
actions and outcomes achieved. The relevance of results indicators is rated Satisfactory, with the RIs being
clearly defined outputs linked to the prior actions, and baseline and target data which could easily be monitored
and measured over time, with the exception of RI4. The efficacy of the first objective is rated
Highly Satisfactory. The efficacy of the second objective is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The overall
efficacy rating is Satisfactory. As such, the outcome of this DPO series is rated Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks identified in the ICR pertain to the macroeconomic outlook and to the trajectory of the
pandemic. The interview with the task team also identified the Philippines' limited fiscal space, as well as
the new administration which may have a different set of priorities than the ones supported through this
operation, as additional risks to sustaining development outcomes.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The ICR Review indicates that the task team engaged with a broad range of ministries, which included, the
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) (i.e., the Planning Ministry), the Department of
Finance, and the Department of Social Welfare and Development to design the policy measures to provide
immediate relief to households and businesses. This involved close engagement with the Secretary of
NEDA. Sector specialists from the relevant global practices worked closely with government officials in
providing policy options, which included, (i) a proposed solution to enroll and verify the identity of
beneficiaries of the ESP response to the pandemic, (ii) payment delivery options for the beneficiary groups
of the ESP, (iii) targeting options for beneficiaries for the ESP, and (iv) challenges facing the health,
livelihoods, and mobility of internal and international migrants and their families due to the COVID-19
outbreak. The World Bank also conducted a number of surveys to assess the impact of the pandemic on
employment, incomes, food security, education and health behaviors, as well as the impact of the
pandemic on firms in the Philippines, focusing on sales, income and liquidity constraints of MSMEs due to
the emergency quarantine restrictions. However it is not clear how the engagement with government
officials and the results of the surveys informed the project design.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



The IEG agrees with the ICR finding that "a higher-quality M&E framework could have been designed. All
RIs of Prior Actions under Pillar I were output-based. With hindsight, two of these indicators were relatively
unambitious. They could have been complemented by survey-based evidence to better monitor progress
toward the achievement of the PDOs. Only a single RI was set for Pillar II, while data did not become
available to trace progress towards the achievement of this indicator. A substitute indicator had to be used
for assessing progress towards the PDOs." (ICR, p. 30)



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The monitoring of results indicators was adequate and took place as part of regular policy dialogue with the
authorities. Sector specialists from the POV, SPJ and FCI global practices also helped the government
undertake several rounds of high frequency monitoring of the socio-economic conditions confronting
households and firms over time, which allowed the government to assess the effectiveness of its policies over
time.




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The overall Bank performance is Rated Satisfactory, with Bank performance on design and on implementation
each rated Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)




The interventions featured under this DPO limited the rise in poverty during the emergency community
quarantine by supporting social protection measures and business activity. Households were particularly
vulnerable to income shocks related to the repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic, with 18 million
households estimated to be living in poverty or to be working in the informal sector. A large portion of these
households did not have the mechanisms in place during the emergency quarantine to support their livelihoods,
with limited personal savings, no access to social security, and no access to formal financing. The DPO
supported measures to provide temporary relief to households and businesses in order to limit the adverse
impact on livelihoods.

Macro-micro simulations performed as part of a World Bank study entitled The Distributional Impact of the
Bayanihan I and II Packages suggest that poverty incidence declined by an estimated 1.6 percentage points in
2020 largely as a result of the government's Social Amelioration Program. Without a comprehensive digital ID
that enables beneficiary verification and cross-checking with government databases, and with the time pressure
for program implementation, beneficiary enrolment was done with little deduplication or eligibility verification.
Consequently, there were significant delays in SAP delivery and confusion among LGUs and non-4Ps
beneficiaries entitled to the SAP. DSWD’s record shows that the distribution of the first tranche of SAP (SAP 1)
for non-4Ps households stretched beyond June 2020. Moreover, a greater number of beneficiaries requested
SAP benefits than initially anticipated, in part due to the confusion between “family” as commonly understood
and “household” as a unit of SA support as well as few mechanisms to differentiate them." (COVID-19 and
Social Assistance in the Philippines: Lessons for Future Resilience, p. 11)



b. Environmental

None noted.



c. Gender

The program did not attempt to target female-headed households and the differential impact across genders can
therefore not be reported.



d. Other

None noted.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)




The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. While the ICR is well written, there are a number of improvements
which could have been made. The relevance of Prior Actions in supporting the overarching objective pursued
by the PDO could have been better justified. For PA1, for example, it would have been important to have a
better understanding of the distributional impact of the benefits to 4P and non-4P beneficiaries in order to
assess the extent to which benefit and beneficiary incidences are progressive and concentrated around the
poor. The ICR, however, does not contextualize this and does not provide any information on the portion of
ESP beneficiaries to have continued to work during the emergency quarantine or the portion of ESP
beneficiaries to have received benefits from social insurance schemes. While it is clear that a targeting
mechanism supported by up-to-date information was not available, the ICR should have justified the
implementation of the PA better. Similar arguments could have been made for the other PAs. The discussion
around the Bank performance on design and implementation benefitted from the numerous engagements with
government and the results of the surveys undertaken.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                    Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICRR concurs with the lessons identified in the ICR, with some amendments:

    1. The provision of social assistance benefits should be prioritized in crisis situations such as the one
       generated by the COVID-19 pandemic. This should be achieved through (i) the vertical expansion
       through a top-up benefit to existing social assistance beneficiaries, and (ii) the enhancement in the
       scope of beneficiaries to include those who are not currently part of any existing social assistance
       program, but who are in need of support following a shock, such as, a health crisis or a natural disaster
       event.
    2. Job retention policies may be required to prevent layoffs, uphold the critical employer-employee
       relationship and support household incomes. Well targeted job retention schemes may also address
       equity concerns by targeting wage subsidies to MSMEs and employees at the bottom of the wage
       ladder, as well as women workers who are largely concentrated in the garment manufacturing and


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EMERGENCY COVID-19 RESPONSE DPL (P174120)



        hospital industry which have been among the sector which have been hardest hit by the repercussions of
        the COVID-19 pandemic.
     3. Limited government capacity to respond to specific needs created by a crisis, such as the COVID-19
        pandemic, suggests that reliance on digital systems should be improved. Greater reliance on digital
        systems would stave off some of the pressures placed on the limited government capacity. It is important
        to note, however, that the adoption of digital solutions also requires significant capacity, which could
        have perhaps been provided through technical assistance.
     4. The government should maintain an up-to-date information system in order to be able to target benefits
        to vulnerable individuals affected by a crisis. An improved targeting mechanism would increase the
        efficiency and the impact of assistance to the population.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
