     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023088

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P161730                                   PEIMRP

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Central African Republic                  Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2150                                 30-Jun-2021                                          10,238,059.16

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2017                               31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            10,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        10,239,012.75                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement, the project development objective of the Central African Republic
   Public Expenditure and Management Reform Project was to improve management and transparency of public
   expenditures and public investments.

   Following the ICR, this ICR Review parses the objective into:



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



   1. To improve the management of public expenditures.
   2. To improve the transparency of public expenditures.
   3. To improve the management of public investments.
   4. To improve the transparency of public investments.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components.

   Management and Transparency of Public Expenditures (SDR 3.65 million estimated at appraisal and
   actual at closing) was to support the consolidation of core functions: (a) budget preparation, management,
   and execution - updating of the legal and regulatory framework governing public financial management,
   audit of the expenditure chain, and associated technical assistance, studies, assessments, evaluations,
   training, and capacity building; (b) procurement management - reforms in the L'Autorite de Regulation des
   Marchés Public, the Direction Générale des Marchés Public (DGPP), and in targeted ministries (Ministry of
   Finance and Budget; Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation; Ministry of Education and
   Geographical Opening Up; Ministry of Public Health, Population and AIDS Control; Ministry of Agriculture
   and Rural Development; and Ministry of Public Works), training and capacity building on procurement
   processes, installation of a procurement monitoring system within the DGPP and in targeted ministries, and
   conduct of mandatory procurement audits; (c) financial management information systems - acquisition and
   deployment of a new Financial Management Information System, technical assistance, training, studies,
   and payment of operating costs; and (d) treasury management, accounting, and external oversight functions
   - improvement of the accounting and reporting systems, improvement of the Treasury Single Account, the
   financing of recurrent costs, training and capacity building, rehabilitation of buildings, and payment of
   operating costs.

   Management and Transparency of Public Investments (SDR 2.92 million estimated at appraisal and
   actual at closing) aimed to improve the performance of the public administration in managing public
   investments and development assistance through the: (a) creation and operationalization of the National
   Recovery and Peace Building Plan (RCPCA) Secretariat, provision of technical assistance, training and
   capacity building, rehabilitation of offices, and payment of operating costs; (b) the stocktaking of existing
   investment projects, establishment of a monitoring system for public investments and services delivery, and
   strengthening of the institutional capacities of the Direction Générale de la Programmation Economique
   (DGPE) and targeted ministries for public investment management.

   Project Management (SDR 0.73 million estimated at appraisal and actual at closing) was to support: (a)
   the Project Management Unit, which would be responsible for day-to-day management of the project,
   including all technical aspects of project activities, the preparation and costing of components, the
   implementation and coordination of individual project activities, and the maintenance of links with the




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



   relevant government bodies; and (b) the use of contingency funds to scale-up existing activities and pilots
   and to finance technical assistance and cross-cutting analytical studies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost SDR 7.3 million (US$10 million equivalent) at appraisal.

   Project Financing. The project was financed by an IDA grant of SDR 7.3 million to the Central African
   Republic. The grant was fully disbursed (the difference between the US$ equivalents at appraisal - US$10
   million - and at closing - US$10.239 million - was due to changes in the SDR:US$ rate).

   Dates. The project was approved on June 19, 2017, became effective on November 15, 2017, and closed
   on December 31, 2021, six months after the original closing date of June 30, 2021. The project was
   restructured on October 12, 2021, with US$8.41 million disbursed (82 percent of the final project cost),
   to extend the closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Development Constraints. The project development objectives were relevant to the
development challenges facing the Central African Republic identified in the Central African Republic
Systematic Country Diagnostic - Priorities for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity of
2019. Emerging from sectarian violence and civil war in 2013, the Central African Republic started an
internationally supervised political transition in 2014 that culminated in the adoption of a new constitution in
2015 and the conduct of runoff presidential and rerun legislative elections in 2016. The restoration of
constitutional order earned the country international support from the United Nations, the European Union,
the World Bank, and other donors for a five-year economic reconstruction and recovery program, the
RCPCA, valued at US$2.2 billion (the amount pledged by the donors in Brussels in November
2016). Implementation of the RCPCA, however, faced institutional capacity constraints, which this grant
operation aimed to help address.

      Budget planning, preparation, and execution remained inefficient: (a) the 2016-17 Public Financial
       Management Reform Plan introduced a new budget preparation calendar and the use of
       commitment plans and a cash plan; (b) still, the government had not used a medium-term
       expenditure framework to structure the budget process; and (c) budget execution was hampered by
       considerable use of "extraordinary" procedures (27 percent of budget expenses were executed
       using "exceptional" procedures in 2016), little oversight over petty cash accounts and temporary
       cash advances, highly centralized processes, an inefficient internal control system, cumbersome
       procedures, and low execution rates (less than 40 percent of the US$130 million investment budget
       was executed in 2016); (d) moreover, budget documentation and information were limited. The
       wage bill was the main expenditure item (5.2 percent of gross domestic product in 2016), but both
       human resource management and wage-bill control were deficient: (a) the civil service recruitment
       process was opaque; (b) civil service absenteeism was high; and (c) wage-bill control, including over


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PEIMRP (P161730)



         benefits, bonuses, and per diems, was weak. (Note: "Extraordinary," "exceptional," and
         "unorthodox" procedures are spending practices that "bypass legal provisions governing public
         expenditure processes and circumvent regular controls or other budgetary rules, including those
         related to budget time limits, approved ceilings, or approved appropriations," according to the
         International Monetary Fund [IMF], 2022, Unorthodox Expenditure Procedures in CEMAC and
         WAEMU Countries).
        Procurement was weak: (a) core procurement institutions lacked qualified personnel; (b)
         procurement data were not available or were not transparent when available; and (c) the national
         procurement institutions - the Agence de Regulation des Marches Publics (Procurement Regulatory
         Agency), the Direction Générale des Marchés Publics (Directorate General of Procurement), the
         Ministry of Finance and Budget, and the procurement units in line ministries - had limited capacity.
        Financial management information systems were degraded: (a) the information systems were
         technologically outdated; (b) system modules were not inter-connected (e.g., the budget execution
         system was not linked to the cash management system); and (c) the current Financial Management
         Information System, Système de gestion de la chaîne de dépense informatisée (GESCO), could not
         produce reliable information on budget execution.
        Treasury management, accounting, and external oversight were inadequate: (a) rules and
         administrative tools were deficient; (b) the government faced a backlog of overdue reports dating
         back to 2008; (b) significant revenues collected by line ministries were unrecorded and had not been
         transferred to the Treasury Single Account, established in 2017; (c) some 446 bank accounts
         maintained at commercial banks had not been consolidated into the Treasury Single Account; (d)
         despite the operationalization of Central Accounting Agency of the Treasury, progress with internal
         controls was fragile; and (e) with the limited capacity of the Court of Auditors and of Parliament,
         external oversight was insufficient.
        Public investment management was challenging: (a) the Ministry of Economy, Planning and
         Cooperation and the Ministry of Finance and Budget had limited capacity for planning and budgeting
         for public investments; (b) the public investment framework did not provide clear project selection
         criteria that could be used to prioritize investments; (c) public investment documentation (standard
         project documents) was inadequate; and (d) reporting, monitoring, and execution of projects were
         deficient.

Bank Group Strategy. The project development objectives were relevant to the Bank Group strategy in
the Central African Republic as laid out, at appraisal, in the Country Engagement Note for the Central
African Republic for the FY2016-2017 (CEN), and at closing, in the Country Partnership Framework for the
Central African Republic for the Period FY21-FY25 (CPF).

      The CEN structured the Bank Group's engagement with the country in two phases: (a)
       stabilization, to build confidence in the transition process, restore basic functions of the state, and
       underpin reconciliation by providing early tangible outcomes in support of livelihoods and basic
       social service provision, and (b) recovery and development, to identify the key sources of growth,
       areas of public sector reform, and ways to raise domestic revenue and crowd-in
       additional resources, in anticipation that improved conditions would allow the resumption of Bank
       operations. The second phase would be initiated with an analytical and advisory work program and
       then followed by a lending program as the security and political situation improved.
      The CPF committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities in two focus areas:
       (a) the first - human capital and connectivity to boost stabilization, inclusion, and resilience - would
       invest in people and communities, and their access to basic services and connectivity, with a focus


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PEIMRP (P161730)



                                        on improving security, rebuilding social cohesion, and reducing social and regional disparities, and
                                        (b) the second - economic management and improved governance to build state legitimacy and
                                        foster growth - would support improved governance and institutions, as well as private sector
                                        development, for domestic resource management and job creation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the management of public expenditures


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Analytical and advisory work, technical assistance, and institutional capacity building in
                             four areas of public financial management - budget planning and execution, procurement management,
                             Financial Management Information Systems, and treasury and accounting - would help build the technical
                             ability and institutional capacity of key agencies, including the Ministry of Finance and Budget, the Ministry of
                             Economy, Planning and Cooperation, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of
                             Agriculture, the Ministry of Public Works, the Treasury Committee, and the Court of Auditors, to improve the
                             management of public expenditures. Better management of public expenditures would be crucial to
                             implementing the donor-funded economic reconstruction and recovery program, RCPCA.



                             Outputs. The project achieved three and partially met two of five outputs to improve the management of
                             public expenditures.

                                        New budgetary regulations, procedures, and processes were adopted, meeting the target: (a) the new
                                         budgetary frameworks were adopted and translated onto the new Financial Management Information
                                         System, Logiciel intégré de gestion des finances publiques (SIMBA), and were used for the
                                         preparation of the 2022 Budget; (b) the Organic Law of Finance was adopted and promulgated by the
                                         National Assembly; and (c) four implementation decrees were signed in 2019 - the new Chart of
                                         Accounts, the Government Finance Table, the Budget Classification System, and the Accounting
                                         Regulations and Standards.
                                        Budget reporting and information to line ministries were partially improved, meeting two-thirds of the
                                         target: (a) budget execution reports were produced quarterly within eight weeks from the end of the
                                         quarter; (b) the reports were published on the website of the Ministry of Finance and Budget; however,
                                         (c) reports using the functional classification system were not available.


                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PEIMRP (P161730)




      Human resource management improved, meeting the target of completing human resource and
       payroll audits.
      The rollout of the new Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) was completed,
       substantially meeting the target: (a) all information system modules - budget preparation, budget
       execution, treasury, accounting, and revenue management - were delivered; (b) the budget
       preparation module was in use by September 2021; and (c) all other modules were in use by January
       2022.
      In-year financial account reports were prepared but not within the required deadline, meeting half the
       target: (a) quarterly budget execution reports were prepared; (b) quarterly treasury accounting reports
       - covering Class IV, V, VI, and VII accounts - were prepared and presented at the quarterly Comite de
       Tresorerie (Treasury Committee) meetings; but (c) not all reports were consistently produced within
       the six-week deadline. The target was for the financial account reports to be prepared quarterly within
       six weeks from the end of the quarter.



Outcomes. The project achieved one of two outcomes to improve the management of public expenditures.

      The percentage (in value) of exceptional expenditures, excluding salaries and debt, was reduced from
       27 percent at baseline to 12.5 percent by closing, exceeding the target that the percentage be lowered
       to 15 percent.
      The annual financial statements of the Compte de Gestion (Management Account), Compte
       Administratif (Administrative Account), and Loi de Règlement (Settlement Law) for 2019 were
       not submitted to the Court of Auditors and to Parliament as scheduled, failing to meet the target: (a)
       financial statements for 2019 were submitted to the Court of Auditors by September 2021; (b) financial
       statements for 2018 were submitted to the Court of Auditors in December 2019 (three months behind
       the deadline), while the financial statement for the Loi de Règlement was not submitted to Parliament;
       and (c) financial statements for 2017 were submitted to the Court of Auditors in October 2018
       (meeting the deadline) and to Parliament in 2020 (15 months behind the deadline). The target was set
       only for the financial statements for 2019, which were to be submitted to the Court of Auditors within
       nine months from the end of the year and to Parliament within 12 months from the end of the year.



Given high progress on controlling exceptional expenditures and modest progress on submission of annual
financial statements, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the transparency of public expenditures


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PEIMRP (P161730)




Rationale
Theory of Change. Analytical and advisory work, technical assistance, and institutional capacity building in
four areas of public financial management - budget planning and execution, procurement management,
Financial Management Information Systems, and treasury and accounting - would help build the technical
ability and the institutional capacity of key agencies, including the Ministry of Finance and Budget, the Ministry
of Economy, Planning and Cooperation, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of
Agriculture, the Ministry of Public Works, the Treasury Committee, and the Court of Auditors, to improve the
transparency of public expenditures. Improved transparency of public expenditures would be crucial to
implementing the donor-funded economic reconstruction and recovery program, RCPCA.



Outputs. The project partially met one and achieved the other of two outputs to improve the transparency of
public expenditures.

      The transparency of public procurement improved, meeting half the target: (a) all target ministries
       published their annual procurement plans, and (b) "some" notices of call for bids and "some" notices
       of attribution were published on the website of the Ministry of Finance in 2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021.
       The exact percentage (of bids and awards for which notices were published) was not available,
       making it impossible to determine whether this part of the target was met. The compound target was
       for all target ministries to publish their annual procurement plans and to publish notices for 30 percent
       of all bids and awards.
      Public procurement audit reports for 2017, 2018, and 2019 were finalized and published on the
       Ministry of Finance and Budget's website, meeting the target.



Outcomes. The project achieved the sole outcome to improve the transparency of public expenditures.

      The "Transparency Composite Indicator" (defined as the number of budget and financial documents
       published) improved to 13 by closing, meeting the target. The documents published included: (a) the
       enacted 2020 and 2021 Finance Laws; (b) the revised 2021 Budget; (c) the Budget Annexes (Stated
       Funded Entities); (d) the forecast of fiscal deficit; (e) the aggregated budget data for revenue and
       expenditures using the main heads of classification, including data for the previous and current fiscal
       year; (f) macroeconomic assumptions (growth, inflation, exchange rate, and interest rates); (g) the
       2020 fiscal deficit financing including key assumptions; (h) the debt stock, with details at the beginning
       of the current fiscal year and in accordance with IMF Government Finance Statistics standards; (i) the
       2019 and 2020 fiscal expenditures; (j) the Quarterly Budget Execution Reports; (k) the Annual
       Procurement Plans for at least four priority ministries - Education, Health, Agriculture, and Public
       Works; (l) bid opportunities (though not comprehensive); (m) bid awards (though not
       comprehensive); (n) key procurement regulatory documents; and (o) the 2017, 2018 and 2019
       procurement audit reports. Although this target was met, the composite indicator itself was
       weak, providing no information about the quality of the published documents and potentially
       incentivizing fragmentation of reporting.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PEIMRP (P161730)



Data were not available for publication of bids and awards, but all other targets were met. Achievement of
this objective is therefore rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the management of public investments

Rationale
Theory of Change. Analytical and advisory work, technical assistance, and institutional capacity building in
public investment management - investment project planning, selection, execution, and reporting - would help
build the technical ability and the institutional capacity of key agencies, including the RCPCA Secretariat, the
DGPE, and key line ministries, to improve the management of public investments. Better management of
public investments would be crucial to implementing the donor-funded economic reconstruction and recovery
program, RCPCA.



Outputs. The project achieved one and failed to meet the other of two outputs to improve the management
of public investments.

      Annual and bi-annual reviews of the RCPCA were completed, meeting the target.
      Public investment projects were not prioritized based on the published standard criteria for project
       selection, failing to meet the target. Criteria for the selection of public investment projects were not
       developed, and therefore the prioritization of projects could not be done.



Outcomes. The project achieved the sole outcome to improve the management of public investments.

      The Investment Budget execution rate rose from 39 percent at baseline to 52 percent by closing,
       meeting the target of 50 percent.



Although improvement in the investment budget execution rate met the target, investment projects were not
prioritized as planned. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Substantial, but with caveats.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PEIMRP (P161730)




OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve the transparency of public investments

Rationale
Theory of Change. Analytical and advisory work, technical assistance, and institutional capacity building in
public investment management - investment project planning, selection, execution, and reporting - would help
build the technical ability and the institutional capacity of key agencies, including the RCPCA Secretariat, the
DGPE, and key line ministries, to improve the transparency of public investments. Improved transparency of
public investments would be crucial to implementing the donor-funded economic reconstruction and recovery
program, RCPCA.



Outputs. The project achieved three of four outputs to improve the transparency of public investments.

      Annual and bi-annual reviews of the RCPCA were completed, meeting the target.
      Public investment projects were not prioritized based on the published standard criteria for project
       selection, failing to meet the target. Criteria for the selection of public investment projects were not
       developed, and therefore the prioritization of projects could not be done.
      Bi-annual and annual public investment reports were publicly disclosed, meeting the target.
      Annual reviews of the RCPCA incorporated feedback from consultations with citizens, meeting the
       target.



Outcomes. The project achieved the sole outcome to improve the transparency of public investments.

      The "Transparency Composite Indicator" (defined as the number of budget and financial documents
       published) improved to 2 by closing, meeting the target. The documents published included: (a)
       annual reports on public investments execution for 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020 were published by
       DGPE on the websites of the Ministry of Finance and Budget and the Ministry of Economy, Planning,
       and Cooperation; (b) bi-annual and annual reports of the execution of the RCPCA were published by
       the RCPCA Secretariat on its website.



Given publication of key documents on public investments and incorporation of consultations with citizens,
achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PEIMRP (P161730)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            There was substantial achievement in improving the management and transparency of both public
                            expenditures and public investments, with caveats related to submission of annual financial statements
                            and prioritization of public investments. The overall efficacy of the project is therefore rated Substantial, but
                            with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. Neither the Project Appraisal Document nor the ICR calculated an economic rate of
   return or financial rate of return for the project. The ICR argued that, at a project cost of US$10.2 million
   principally for technical assistance, the project delivered or would deliver "substantial" economic benefits, but
   those benefits were not quantified.

   Operational Efficiency. The project completed all its planned activities by closing. The disbursement rate was
   99 percent. The project's implementation strategy was deliberately developed with an eye toward simple and
   straightforward execution for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and beneficiaries (single contracting the
   IFMIS and consolidating all technical assistance under one firm, for example). The hiring of a project
   management assistant specifically to support IFMIS implementation effectively supported that activity.
   Performance on both procurement and financial management was rated Satisfactory at project closing. The
   duration of the project was extended by six months: (a) political unrest erupted in 2020 and triggered insecurity,
   with violence between government and rebel forces marring the presidential election in December 2020; and (b)
   the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted activity in 2020 and 2021. The requirement to work remotely complicated
   implementation of the IFMIS, but the project team and consultants nimbly adapted to virtual meetings and
   activities (ICR, p. 21). Similarly, in an unexpected situation when the RCPCA's office building collapsed, the
   team coordinated closely with the government to adapt, realigning project expenditures in a way that prioritized
   achievement of outcomes. The ICR (p. 25) notes that the PIU is "one of the best performing in the portfolio,"
   recognized by it having been tasked with increasing responsibility for other projects. The ICR (pp. 25-26) also
   notes some moderate shortcomings in implementation efficiency: delays caused by inattention from the Steering
   Committee, and expenditure cuts necessitated by instability in the political and economic environment.

   On balance, given evidence of efficient implementation, project efficiency is rated Substantial.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial




                                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PEIMRP (P161730)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was highly relevant to country conditions and Bank Group strategy. Efficacy is rated substantial,
with caveats related to submission of annual financial statements and prioritization of public investments.
Efficiency is rated substantial due to evidence of efficient project implementation. Overall Outcome is rated
Satisfactory, reflecting only minor shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to development outcomes achieved by this project are substantial given the country's fragility,
conflict, and violence (FCV) status. The Central African Republic has been on the World Bank's FCV list
since FY2006, when the list was first compiled.

Security Risk. The Central African Republic defeated an attempt by armed groups to seize power in late
2020/early 2021. Since then, a key rebel leader has surrendered to the International Criminal Court, the
Douala-Bangui corridor was reopened, and the President (reelected for a second term in December
2020) launched the Republican Dialogue peace initiative alongside the Luanda Road Map spearheaded by
neighboring countries. Recurrent security crises like this one pose substantial risks to political normalcy and
economic activity in the Central African Republic, and to the sustainability of the development outcomes of
this project.

Macroeconomic Risk. The economy is projected to grow by 3.5 percent annually on average in the
medium term, 2022-24, from 0.9 percent annually in 2019-20, provided that: (a) security gains are not
reversed, and (b) the economic impact of the Ukraine-Russia war on global economic recovery is
contained. The risks to this outlook, however, remain high and tilted to the downside. The extension by the
IMF of the Staff Monitored Program approved in December 2021 (where performance has been broadly
satisfactory with most end-March 2022 quantitative and structural benchmarks met) could help mitigate
macroeconomic risk in the near term, as it will likely pave the way for the resumption of discussions for an
arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility. The three-year arrangement was approved in December
2019 for SDR 83.55 million (US$115.1 million) but veered off-track; most performance criteria and structural

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



benchmarks were missed prior to the intensification of the domestic conflict in late 2020/early 2021, and the
third review has not been completed.

Fiscal Risk. Government finances are highly reliant on budget support from donors. Donors have delayed
disbursing budget support pending greater transparency in the government’s security-related
spending. Security-related spending was not a focus of this operation. Nonetheless, it remains important
for the government to bridge its differences with donors. Stalled budget support would strain the
government's finances.

Institutional Capacity Risk. The pace of capacity building activities slowed in 2020-21, dragged down by
insecurity and the COVID-19 pandemic, which restricted travel and work by consultants. Weak institutional
capacity poses risks to the sustainability of improvements made in the management and transparency of
public expenditure and investment. The Public Sector Digital Governance Project, approved in May 2022,
aims to improve efficiency and transparency in key areas of public resource management and lay the
foundations for digital government.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Foundations. Project design reflected comprehensive analytical work produced by the Bank,
  other development partners, and consultants.

         The Central African Republic - Medium-Term Action Plan for the Governance of Public Finances
          (IMF, 2017) noted that budget preparation, management, and execution improved only marginally
          in 2016. Budget documents could not identify compulsory and priority spending. Consequently,
          the use of "extraordinary" spending procedures remained prevalent.
         The Central African Republic Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Report
          (2010) rated payroll controls "D" (lowest possible score) and identified numerous inconsistencies
          in the reconciliation of the human resource database and the public payroll.
         The Audit of the Système de gestion de la chaîne de la dépense informatisé (GESCO) (Expertise
          France, 2016) found that the GESCO was technologically outdated and that the Ministry of
          Finance and Budget relied on continual and sometimes remote support from the application
          developer (a single person) to maintain and debug the system. The audit strongly recommended
          the urgent replacement of GESCO with a new Financial Management Information System.
         A report by a benchmarking team identified the Logiciel intégré de gestion des finances publiques
          (SIMBA), the software developed by the International Association of Francophone Mayors, as a
          suitable Financial Management Information System. SIMBA supported the processes for budget
          implementation, accounting, and financial reporting and covered the current and investment
          budgets. Other modules, including fixed asset management, debt management, tax and customs
          administration, and payroll and pension systems, would need to be interfaced with the core
          system.

  Donor Coordination. Like the RCPCA, jointly prepared by the Bank, the United Nations, the European
  Union, and multiple bilateral donors, this project was prepared by the Bank in collaboration with donors to

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



  ensure alignment of the project objectives and activities with other programs in the Central African
  Republic. According to the Project Appraisal Document, this project was: (a) aligned with the operations
  of the European Commission's European Regional Development Fund, which planned to provide
  US$220 million in assistance in 2016-20; (b) aligned with the country portfolio of the Agence Française
  de Développement (French Development Agency), valued at US$40 million and focused on economic
  recovery, social protection, and general budget support; (c) supportive of the assistance package of the
  African Development Bank, amounting to US$80 million and directed at emergency operations,
  community reconstruction, governance support, and capacity building; and (e) consistent with the
  program of the IMF; a year before the Bank approved this project in June 2017, the IMF approved in July
  2016 a three-year arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility to strengthen revenue
  collection, improve spending efficiency, scale up social spending and infrastructure
  investment, implement reforms, and mobilize and coordinate support from other development
  partners. Additionally, the IMF Africa Regional Technical Assistance Center supported technical
  assistance activities focused on fiscal administration reforms and capacity building, using trust funds.

  Monitoring and Evaluation Design. There were definition and measurement problems with three of the
  four outcome indicators, and with one of the eleven output indicators (see Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank produced eight Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), two reports a year. The ISRs
 reported progress with the results indicators. The Bank filed three aides-memoires for supervision missions
 in 2016, 2020, and 2021. The Bank extended implementation support in six areas: (a) review of the
 technical aspects of the project; (b) project management (assistance with the recruitment of project
 management support staff); (c) environmental and social safeguards (see Section 10a); (d) procurement
 (see Section 10b); (e) financial management (see Section 10b); and (f) operational matters, especially with
 the reconstruction of the RCPCA building, which collapsed while this project was being implemented. The
 support was delivered despite disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and insecurity in late 2020-
 early 2021 (see Section 7). However, shortcomings in M&E design and implementation were not fully
 addressed (see Section 9).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document defined eleven output (intermediate results) and four outcome (PDO-level)
 indicators to measure progress toward the achievement of the project objectives. The Project
 Implementation Unit was to be responsible for project M&E overall, with the RCPCA Secretariat tasked
 with the M&E of RCPCA activities, and the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation for activities
 related to the investment budget.

 There were several shortcomings with M&E design.

       The outcome indicator "Percentage (in value) of exceptional expenditures, excluding salaries and
          debt" was not defined in the Project Appraisal Document results framework or in the Project
          Implementation Manual.
         The outcome indicator "Investment budget execution rate" was not defined in the Project Appraisal
          Document results framework or in the Project Implementation Manual.
         The outcome indicator "Timely submission of annual financial statements of the Compte de
          Gestion (Management Account), Compte Administratif (Administrative Account), and Loi de
          Règlement (Settlement Law) for 2019 submitted to the Court of Auditors and to Parliament" had two
          elements: submission of the financial statements to the Court of Auditors, and submission to
          Parliament. The Project Appraisal Document did not clarify how to measure the indicator if only one
          of the two was achieved.
         The output indicator "Transparency of public procurement - the public procurement plans for all
          concerned ministries and at least 30 percent of bid opportunities and awards published" had two
          issues: (a) the indicator had three elements - publication of procurement plans, publication of bid
          opportunities, and publication of awards - the weighting of which was not specified; and (b) the
          Regulatory Procurement Agency, the National Procurement Agency, and the Project
          Implementation Unit could not agree on how to calculate the "30 percent" of bid opportunities and
          awards published.
         The outcome indicator "Transparency composite indicator" was defined to measure the
          achievement of the objective "to improve the transparency of public investments," but it was also
          applicable to the objective "to improve the transparency of public expenditures." It would have been
          appropriate to separate elements of the composite indicator into the parts that were applicable to
          public investment and to public expenditure.
         The Project Implementation Unit did not employ a dedicated M&E specialist.



b. M&E Implementation
  As the project did not provide for the hiring of a dedicated M&E specialist at the PIU, the deputy project
  manager for the first component and the coordinator for the second component assumed and
  performed M&E data collection functions.

  To remedy the shortcomings with the results indicators, the PIU: (a) developed a formula to calculate the
  outcome indicator "Percentage (in value) of exceptional expenditures, excluding salaries and debt"
  as total expenditures outside the regular expenditure execution process divided by total expenditures;
  and (b) identified the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation's quarterly Investment Budget
  Execution Reports as the data source for the outcome indicator "Investment Budget execution rate." For
  its part, the Bank (ICR Team) used the outcome indicator "Transparency composite indicator" for the

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)



  objective "to improve the transparency of public investments" as well as for the objective "to improve the
  transparency of public expenditures."

  However, according to the ICR, M&E implementation was erratic: (a) the PIU found it difficult to
  calculate some indicators - e.g. the percentage of procurement opportunities and awards that were
  published; (b) some indicators were not regularly reported - e.g. the timely submission of annual financial
  statements; and (c) quarterly M&E reports were not produced for the Project Steering Committee (note -
  the Financing Agreement required bi-annual project reports for the Bank). Three annual project reports
  were produced.



c. M&E Utilization
  With quarterly M&E reports not produced for the Project Steering Committee (the body responsible for
  overall project strategic direction, review and approval of the annual work plan and budget, and review
  and approval of the final implementation report, including the audit report), the Committee appears not to
  have focused on the results indicators. Discussions reflected in the Committee reports indicate that the
  Committee essentially focused on project activities rather than on project outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category "B"
   project (i.e. some type of environmental assessment/review/plan is required, but limited in scope and
   flexible in structure, reflecting limited environmental impacts of the project and anticipated relatively
   straightforward mitigation) at appraisal and triggered OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment and OP/BP
   4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources. OP/BP 4.01 applied because the project would support the
   rehabilitation of state buildings (RCPCA, Court of Auditors, and public buildings used by the Ministry of
   Finance and Budget in five towns outside Bangui) and the digging of trenches in urban areas of Bangui to
   deploy a fiber-optic cable. OP/BP 4.11 applied because the digging activities under the fiber-optic works
   would involve the excavation and movement of earth. An Environmental and Social Management Plan
   (ESMP) was drawn up, validated by the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development,
   following which a Certificate of Environmental Compliance was issued and approved by the Bank. The PIU
   hired a part-time consultant to monitor compliance with the protective measures; the consultant was
   supported by the Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists. The contractors implemented
   the ESMP measures, and no environmental safeguards deficiencies were reported during project
   implementation. Compliance with environmental safeguards and overall safeguards was rated satisfactory
   at closing (last ISR of December 2021).

   Social Safeguards. The project did not trigger any social safeguards policies.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PEIMRP (P161730)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Early weaknesses with procurement were addressed using direct contracting (for the new
   IFMIS) and the consolidation of all technical assistance under one firm. The Bank's procurement specialist
   supported the PIU with procurement activities. By project closing, most contract deadlines were broadly
   met. Procurement was rated satisfactory at closing (last ISR of December 2021), upgraded from
   moderately satisfactory previously.

   Financial Management. Financial management adhered to guidelines. Interim financial reports were
   produced quarterly, financial statements were submitted annually, audits of the project financial statements
   were conducted annually, and audit opinions were unqualified. The Bank's financial management
   specialists supported the PIU with financial management activities. Financial management was rated
   satisfactory at closing (last ISR of December 2021), upgraded from moderately satisfactory early in project
   implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Moderate shortcomings in M&E
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 design and implementation.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Obtaining support at the highest level of government raises the rate of success of an
operation in an FCV setting. In this project, the Minister of Finance and Budget had high
ownership of the project objectives and activities during preparation and implementation. According
to the ICR, the project could have met stiff resistance from the bureaucracy and political interference
without the strong leadership by, and firm commitment from, the Minister of Finance and

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PEIMRP (P161730)



Budget. The active engagement by the Minister in the implementation of the new Integrated
Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) minimized operational risks, ensured the smooth
execution of activities, and contributed to the achievement of project objectives.

Simplifying project implementation processes in the context of low capacity improves the
chances of achieving results. In this project, two key procedures were simplified: (a) the
procurement of the new IFMIS was confined to a single-source procurement, and (b) technical
assistance was consolidated under a single consulting services provider. The Logiciel intégré de
gestion des finances publiques (SIMBA), developed by the International Association of Francophone
Mayors (AIMF), was previously determined to be a suitable replacement for the Système de gestion
de la chaîne de la dépense informatisé (GESCO) as the new IFMIS. The software had been tested
and worked in other Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) countries, the
license was free, and the developer was a non-profit organization, allowing single-source
procurement. The single technical assistance service provider had the requisite expertise in project
management and in information technology and was able deliver assistance for project
management to the government, the Project Implementation Unit, and the AIMF for the installation
and operation of the new IFMIS across the targeted agencies. These simplified procedures
minimized procurement problems and reduced the burden on the government and the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU).

Designing simple output and outcome indicators aids the measurement of project results
and facilitates monitoring during project implementation. In this project, the PIU found it difficult
to report on the achievement of the results indicator "Improved budget reporting and information to
line ministries," which was defined to cover multiple elements including the publication of budget
execution reports, the use of new functional and administrative budget nomenclature, the
communication of budget commitment ceilings to sector ministries on a quarterly basis, and the
publication of budget documents within eight weeks from the end of the quarter. Also, the Project
Implementation Unit had to grade the achievement of the results indicator "Timely submission of
annual financial statements to the Court of Auditors and to the Parliament" as negligible. The
financial statements for 2019 were not submitted to Parliament by closing and were submitted to the
Court of Auditors after some delay However, this results indicator obscures the fact that the financial
statements - of the Compte de Gestion (Management Account), Compte Administratif
(Administrative Account), and Loi de Règlement (Settlement Law) - were prepared by the Ministry of
Finance at all - a singular achievement in the context of weak capacity in the Central African
Republic. An "unpacking" of the results indicator into three stages would have better captured this
achievement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PEIMRP (P161730)



Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR was consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment financing
projects.

Conciseness. The account of the project’s performance was well informed and concisely presented.

Results Orientation. The efficacy assessment was outcome-oriented and based on achieving the
results targets.

Quality of Evidence. The ICR presented ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance
at design and at implementation.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program was candid. The use of compound results
indicators obscured the degree of achievement of some of the targets. In addition, the parsing of the objectives
into four PDOs, rather than just two (on management/transparency of public expenditures, and
management/transparency of public investments), was excessively granular. Management and transparency
are not entirely distinct. They overlap significantly, and one (transparency) is an essential precondition for the
other (good management). Transparency is largely a means to an end, rather than an end in and of itself. With
the theories of change largely identical and many outputs contributing to both, it would have been more
analytically sound to treat management and transparency together in a single objective.

Lessons. The ICR drew lessons that would be valuable to governments that are trying to acquire technical skills
and build up institutional capacities in areas critical to public spending and investment but under difficult FCV
settings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
