     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023094

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P126583                                   CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Colombia                                  Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-81840                               10-Jul-2015                                        250,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Jul-2012                              10-Jul-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                       250,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                J. W. van Holst             Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD
 Krishnamani                Pellekaan



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The objective of this Development Policy Loan (DPL) operation as stated in the Program Document (PD, page
ii) was " to strengthen the Government's program for reducing risks resulting from adverse natural
events ".



                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The development objective was to be achieved through reforms in three policy areas/pillars (PD, paragraph
8).

Pillar 1. Strengthening disaster risk management (DRM) institutional and planning capacity.

Pillar 2. Strengthening the institutional framework and capacity for including DRM in land use planning.

Pillar 3. Strengthening policies and tools to reduce disaster risk in the housing sector.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. An IBRD loan of US$250.0 million financed this DPL operation with a Catastrophe Deferred
Drawback Option (Cat-DDO). The loan was fully disbursed.

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on July 10, 2012, and it became effective on January 3, 2013, with a
closing date of July 10, 2015. (According to the World Bank's Financial Product Note (2010), the Cat DDO has a
revolving feature, that is, amounts repaid during the drawdown period are available for subsequent withdrawal).
According to the Program Document (paragraph 63) the drawdown for this operation was originally for three
years. The operation could be renewed up to four times for a total of 15 years. Renewals require that the original
program remain largely in place (meaning having an adequate macroeconomic framework and disaster risk
management program). The operation was renewed in 2015 and 2018 for a total implementation period of nine
years. The operation closed on July 10, 2021.

Changes. As the original targets were realized, the Government and the Bank increased some results indicator
(RI) targets when the operation was renewed in 2015 and 2018. When the operation was renewed in 2018. some
RIs were replaced by more ambitious ones (discussed in Section 4 of this review).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context. According to the Global Hotspots Analysis, 85% of Colombia's population and 87% of its
 assets are in areas exposed to two or more natural hazards (earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides and
 extensive flooding) per year. Past experiences showed that hazards disproportionately affected the poor and
 vulnerable segments of the population. For instance, the population of over 3.5 million affected in the wake of
 the La Nina floods in 2010 and 2011 were from the lowest income quintiles. This event highlighted the need for
 improving disaster risk analysis at the territorial, sectoral and subnational levels.

 Government Strategy. Since mid-1990s, Colombia shifted focus towards proactive DRM measures as
 opposed to treating natural hazards as external shocks based on four lines of actions: (i) identifying risks; (ii)
 reducing risks; (iii) institutional development; and (iv) raising risk awareness. The Government's strategy,
 articulated in Vision Colombia 2019 identified three priority DRM areas: (i) strengthening actions in disaster

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



risk prevention and mitigation; (ii) reducing the fiscal vulnerability to hazards; and (iii) improving
decentralization and land use planning. The National Development Plan (NDP) Prosperity for All for 2010 to
2014 identified DRM as a national priority. This DPL supported the three areas of the Government plan
(discussed below).

Bank Strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was well-aligned with the Bank's 2012-2016 Country Partnership
Strategy's (CPS) theme of Sustainable Growth with Enhanced Climate Change. The CPS underscored the
need to address Colombia's vulnerabilities related to urbanization through improving, land
management, service delivery and governance. The PDO is well-aligned with the current Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for 2016 - 2021. The CPF reiterated the need for territorial development, acknowledged the
inadequacy of DRM for Colombia's growing urban population in the face of climate change, and identified
DRM as among the country's constraints for achieving inclusive and sustainable growth.

The Bank financing for this operation intended to provide Colombia with: (i) a fiscal buffer for reducing the
impact of natural disasters: (ii) ensuring that national budget resources are not diverted from other programs;
and (iii) provide bridge financing for immediate response following natural disasters. The DPL was an
appropriate and relevant use of Bank resources, given that the operation addressed country-specific
challenges of anticipated recurring natural disasters that would disproportionately affect the vulnerable
segments of the population.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has a history of financing projects, technical assistance (TA) work and
analytical work on DRM in Colombia such as through the: (i) The National Disaster Vulnerability Reduction
Projects 1 and 2; (ii) Four TA processes in 2011 for using an open source risk assessment platform for
integrating probabilistic risk information in specific policy making processes; (iii) The National Macroproyectos
Social Interest Program for providing affordable housing to low-income beneficiaries in 2011 ; and (iv) The
First Programmatic Fiscal Sustainability and Growth Resilience Operation in 2011 for developing a national
financing strategy to reduce fiscal vulnerability to risks, including disaster risks. The Bank when this operation
was being prepared, was also providing TA in designing an inventory tool to help the municipalities prepare
inventories of informal settlements in high-risk areas.

This operation was the second Bank-financed DPL loan with a Cat-DDO in Colombia. The first loan was
disbursed within 72 hours and the operation provided a critical cushion to the government to support its
emergency response following the La Nina floods in 2010 and 2011. The operation aimed to support three
areas of the NDP for 2010-2014: (i) strengthen policies and institutions of the National System for Disaster
Management and Prevention; (ii) strengthen policies and tools to improve land use planning; and (iii) reduce
risks in the housing sector.

The Bank team assessed Colombia's macroeconomic outlook as adequate for supporting a DPL at appraisal.
Colombia also had a flexible credit line with International Monetary Fund (IMF) when this operation was
prepared.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



PDO. To strengthen the Government's program for reducing risks resulting from adverse natural
events.

Pillar # 1. Strengthening DRM institutional and planning capacity. There was only one prior action (PA) for
this pillar.

PA # 1. The Government enacted legislation (# 1523) on April 24,2012, establishing the national DRM policy
and the National DRM System (SNGRD) for implementing DRM issues and created a National Agency
(UNGRD) through Decree (# 4147) on November 3, 2011, for coordinating activities under the SNGRD. The
decree elevated the Directorate of Disaster Risk Management (DGR) which had been in the Ministry of
Interior, to a stand-alone entity directly under the Presidency. This law also mandated the DGR to provide
technical support to municipalities to formulate DRM measures in their development plans.

When this operation was prepared, mainstreaming disaster risk reductions in development plans in
Colombia was done at three levels: the national government, departmental governments and by municipalities.
The aftereffects of the 2010-2011 La Nina floods and landslides which affected over 90% of the municipalities,
underscored the need for a coordinated approach to disaster risk identification and risk reduction. Although
Colombia had enacted legislation on Disaster Management and Prevention (SNPAD) in 1993, the law did not
evolve in line with constitutional changes, decentralization and with the international agreements signed by
Colombia since then. The law neither clearly articulated the responsibilities of the various government entities,
nor did it ensure that municipalities had capacities for implementing DRM measures (such as for watershed
protection and land-use regulations).

The analytical underpinnings for the prior actions for this program were based on: (i) the Hyogo Framework for
Action, developed by the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction Secretariat and
endorsed by the Government. This report made the case for having a risk financing strategy and provided
guidelines for developing disaster risk management actions; and (ii) the World Bank's Natural Disaster
Hotspots: A Global Analysis. This report identified Colombia as one of the most exposed countries in the world
to multiple hazards based on land area exposed and percentage of total population at risk.

The mandates of the DGR would help in clarifying the responsibilities of the government entities and
strengthening the technical assistance provided by the national government to the municipalities for identifying
and managing disaster risks. Assuming that the Government maintains its commitment to DRM, this prior action
would help in strengthening the Government's program for reducing risks from natural disasters. Therefore, this
prior action is rated satisfactory.

Pillar 2. Strengthening the institutional framework and capacity for including DRM in land use
planning. There was one prior action.

PA # 2. The Government enacted legislation (Article 189 of Decree 019) on June 16, 2011, mandating
identification and zoning of hazard risk areas and defining specific measures as part of the review process for
the issuance of new land plans and revising the existing ones.

Historical records in Colombia indicated that 80% of the damages generated by natural hazards in
municipalities were due to inadequate land management (problems of location) and housing quality (poor
construction). Although Colombia had enacted legislation in 1993 for incorporating risk as a component of
municipal land management and water resource management, progress in this area was limited. The major
floods that affected Colombia in 2010 and 2011 indicated that the municipal land use plans did not adequately
cover flood risk aspects. The National Development Plan for 2010 - 2014 noted that only 83 watershed

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



management plans were approved, and even the approved ones did not adequately incorporate the risk
component.

The analytical underpinnings for this pillar and the following pillar (discussed below) were based on: (i) "The
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction" by the United Nations Strategy for Disaster Risk
Reduction Secretariat. This assessment examined DRM instruments in countries like Colombia where
significant barriers still existed in areas such as land use planning, water management, building codes and
ecosystem management and identified new approaches for addressing DRM measures; and (ii) "Natural
Hazards, Unnatural Disasters; The Economics of Effective Prevention" by the World Bank and the United
Nations in 2010. This report presented examples from around the world that demonstrated that government
investments in ex ante DRM measures (as opposed to emergency response) can be more cost effective for
managing natural disaster risk.

Assuming that the municipal land-use plans are effectively enforced, this prior action would help in
strengthening the institutional framework for land use planning in urban areas. The links between this prior
action which were based on sound analytical underpinnings and the intended outcome of strengthening the
Government's program for reducing risks resulting from adverse natural events in urban areas were clear.
Therefore, this prior action is rated satisfactory.

Pillar 3. Strengthening policies and tools to reduce disaster risks in the housing sector. There was one
prior action.

PA # 3. The Government enacted legislation (Article 218 of 1450) on June 16, 2011, mandating the
development of a methodology for formulating and consolidating a national inventory of informal settlements in
areas deemed to be "high-risk".

When this operation was under preparation, estimates showed that 50% of households in Colombia lived in
informal urban settlements that were vulnerable to natural disasters due to inefficient housing standards. Over
the last forty years, housing sector losses due to natural disasters amounted to over 190,000 houses destroyed
and the cost of losses resulting from high-impact, low-frequency disaster events has been estimated to be
approximately US$2.04 billion (Program Document, paragraph 96). This was due to a combination of factors
including, lack of municipal inventories of settlements in high-risk areas, lack of technical capacities in the
municipalities to prepare such inventories and lack of national guidelines on preparing such inventories.

The ability to measure and monitor settlements in high-risk areas will help in enabling the government to
integrate territorial planning in municipalities and also help the municipalities to resettle people located in areas
where the risks cannot be mitigated. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were sound and the link
between the prior action and the PDO was clear. Therefore, this prior action is rated satisfactory.

In summary, this review rates the objective of this PDO as relevant to the current government and Bank
strategy. The prior actions were aligned with the goals outlined in the National Development Plan and the policy
matrix was based on the Government's program. The prior actions included a mix of upstream national level
activities and activities at the sectoral and subnational levels for strengthening the government program of
reducing risks from natural disasters. They were based on sound analytical underpinnings. Therefore, this
review rates the overall relevance of DPL design as satisfactory.



Rating

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)




Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar 1. Strengthening DRM institutional and planning capacity. Reforms in this area aimed at
strengthening DRM institutional and planning capacity for improving nationwide coordination of DRM
activities. There were two original results indicators (RIs).

RI # 1. The number of instruments for inter-agency coordination put in place by the agency under the
Presidency for coordinating DRM measures.

RI # 2. The number of DRM plans formulated by the municipalities under the technical assistance of the
National Unit for DRM as per the national guidelines for DRM. As the original targets were realized in
2012, the targets for RIs 1 and 2 were revised upwards when the DPL was renewed in 2015 and
2018. Two more indicators were added when the operation was renewed in 2018.

RI # 3. The National DRM Technical Assistance Program was designed, approved and implemented.

RI # 4. The Environmental Damage Losses and Needs Assessments were designed and implemented.

The RIs are a direct measure of the prior actions aimed to strengthen the institutional and planning
capacity for strengthening DRM both at the national level and in the municipalities. The indicators were
quantifiable and verifiable. Therefore, the relevance of the four RIs are rated as substantial.

Pillar 2. Strengthening the institutional framework and capacity for including DRM in land use
planning. Reforms in this area aimed to strengthen the institutional framework for including DRM in land-
use planning. There were two original RIs and one additional indicator was added when the operation was
renewed in 2018.

RI # 5. The number of municipalities which under the new decree revised their land use plans to be in line
with the national guidelines for DRM that had been agreed with the Regional Autonomous Corporation
(CAR).

RI # 6. The number of watershed management plans with DRM in their formulation.

As the original targets for RIs 5 and 6 were not achieved by 2015, the targets were maintained when the
operation was renewed for the first time in 2015. As the targets were realized by 2018, the two indicators
were replaced by another (single) indicator when the operation was renewed for the second time in 2018.

RI # 7. The number of departments with climate change adaptation initiatives that included risk
assessment and risk reduction actions that were implemented within the Territorial Climate Change
Management Plan.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



The three results indicators directly measured the intended outcome of strengthening the institutional
framework for including DRM in land use planning at the national level and in the municipalities. The
indicators were quantifiable and could be monitored. Therefore, the relevance of the indicators is rated as
substantial.

Pillar 3. Strengthening policies and tools to reduce disaster risk in the housing sector. There were
three RIs.

RI # 8. The number of municipalities that were assisted and trained in applying the methodology to design
inventories of high-risk areas.

RI # 9. The number of municipalities that created inventories of settlements in high-risk areas as per the
guidelines of the Ministry of Housing, Cities and Lands and reported the information.

RI # 10. The number of documents produced for the resettlement processes of families in areas where
risks could not be mitigated.

The three indicators measured the extent to which the reforms contributed to assisting the number of
municipalities to design inventories of settlements in high-risk areas and help the resettlement of
population in areas where the risks could not be mitigated. The indicators were to some extent
monitorable and were relevant for the intended outcome of strengthening policies and tools to reduce
disaster risk in the housing sector. Therefore, the relevance of the indicators is rated as substantial.

Overall, the links between the PAs and results indicators were logical and relevant for monitoring the
intended outcomes.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs) they support, baseline values, target
values, actual change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

Pillar #1. Strengthening institutional and planning capacity in DRM
PA #1. National Policy and National System for DRM updated, and National DRM
Agency created
                                                                                 RI
                   Relevance                               2018-December
         RIs                    2012-2015     2015-2018                    achievement
                      of RI                                     2021
                                                                              rating
     RI # 1. The
  number of DRM
                                               Baseline:
instruments put in              Baseline: 0
                                              2 Target:
 place by the new                 Target: 2                     125%
                   Substantial                  4                           Satisfactory
agency under the                                             achievement
   Presidency for                 Actual: 2
                                             Actual: 5
    inter-agency                   100%
   coordination.                  achieved
     RI # 2. The   Substantial               Baseline: 813      119%        Satisfactory
      number of                               Target: 886   achievement.
  municipal plans                 Baseline:                 This indicator
  formulated with               388 Target: Actual: 1,054. was replaced by
 technical support              688 Actual:                  RIs 3 and 4

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



 from the National               813 118%
   Disaster Risk                  achieved
 Agency (UNGRD)
     RI # 3. The
National Technical
      Assistance
 Program in DRM                                                  Baseline:
     and Climate                    Not                         0 Target:
                     Substantial              Not applicable                  Satisfactory
        Change                   applicable                     1      45%
  Adaptation was                                                 achieved
      designed,
   approved and
    implemented
     RI # 4. The
      number of
   Environmental                                                Baseline: 0
  Damage Losses                                                  Target: 5
                                    Not
      and Needs      Substantial              Not applicable                  Satisfactory
                                 applicable
   Assessments                                                     100%
       (EDANA)                                                achievement.
   designed and
    implemented
Pillar #2. Strengthening the institutional framework and capacity for including DRM in
land use planning
PA #2. The Government mandated the municipalities to identify disaster risk areas and
required them to include DRM in their watershed management plans
     RI # 5. The
      number of                                                    516%
                                 Baseline: 0
 municipalities that                           Baseline: 15 achievement.
                                 Target: 25
 revised their land                             Target: 25    This indicator
                     Substantial Actual: 15                                   Satisfactory
   use plans with                                            was replaced by
                                    60%
  DRM measures                                 Actual: 129 RI # 7 discussed
                                  achieved
as per the national                                               below
      guidelines.
                                               Baseline: 5.
     RI # 6. The                                                    97%
                                 Baseline: 0 Target: 60
      number of                                               achievement.
                                 Target: 15
       municipal
                                                   Actual:
      Watershed      Substantial                              This indicator  Satisfactory
                                  Actual:5      58    97%
   Management                                                was replaced by
                                   33.3%         achieved
Plans with DRM in                                            RI # 7 discussed
                                  achieved
     their design                                                 below
   RI # 7. The   Substantial       Not     Not applicable    Baseline: 0     Satisfactory
   number of                    applicable                     Target:
departments with                                             10 Actual:
Climate Change                                               10 100%
Adaptation (CCA)                                            achievement.

                                                                                              Page 8 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



     initiatives that
      included risk
 understanding and
     risk reduction
          actions
 Pillar #3. Strengthening DRM policies in the housing sector
 PA #3. The Government enacted legislation mandating the development of a
 methodology for formulating and consolidating a national inventory of settlements in
 high-risk areas
       RI # 8. The
        number of
                                  Baseline: 0
     municipalities                           Baseline: 109
                                  Target: 250
 trained in applying                           Target: 250     107%
                      Substantial Actual: 109                             Satisfactory
  the methodology                                           achievement.
                                    43.6%
      for designing                            Actual: 267.
                                   achieved
     inventories of
    high-risk areas
       RI # 9. The
        number of
 municipalities that
         created                  Baseline: 0 Baseline: 4
     inventories of               Target: 25
     settlements in                Actual: 4   Target: 25       40%        Moderately
                      Substantial
    high-risk areas                                         achievement. Unsatisfactory
        under the                    16%          Actual:
  guidelines of the                achieved      10
        Ministry of
    Housing, Cities
 and Land (MVCT)
      RI # 10. The
        number of
     documents of
      resettlement
      processes of
   families in areas
  where risks could                            Baseline: 0
                                      Not                       100%
  not be mitigated, Substantial                                           Satisfactory
                                  applicable.               achievement
 that were used as                              Target: 2
       an input for
        preparing                               Actual: 2.
        guidelines
 for resettlement of
    population from
       such areas

Rating

Satisfactory

                                                                                             Page 9 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)




   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the Government's program for reducing risks resulting from adverse natural events.


               Rationale
               Theory of change. There were three PAs that were expected to provide the basis for achieving this
               objective.

               PA # I aimed to strengthen the institutional and planning capacities for DRM at the national level and in
               municipalities. Reforms such as updating the national DRM policy, the National System for DRM, creating the
               politically empowered National DRM agency, can be expected to help in inter-institutional coordination and for
               establishing the National Emergency Response Strategy. Technical support provided by the National DRM
               agency to the municipalities were likely to help them in formulating municipal DRM plans that adhered to the
               national guidelines.

               PA # 2 aimed to strengthen the municipalities institutional framework for integrating DRM in land-use
               planning. Technical support by the government to the municipalities to revise their territorial development
               plans using the guidelines of the Regional Environmental Authorities, incorporating DRM measures in
               Watershed Management Plans, and including risk understanding and risk reduction actions under the
               framework of the Territorial Climate Change Management Plan, were likely to strengthen the institutional
               framework and capacity for integrating DRM measures in land-use planning.

               PA # 3 aimed to strengthen the DRM policies and tools to reduce risk in the housing sector. Developing a
               methodology for consolidating a national inventory of settlements in high-risk areas, training municipalities in
               applying the methodology for designing such inventories and developing plans for resettlement of people
               located in high-risk areas where risks could not be mitigated. Together these activities were likely to
               strengthen DRM policies and strategies in the housing sector.

               Assuming that the Government remains committed to the DRM program, these reforms were likely to
               strengthen the government's program for reducing risks resulting from adverse natural events.

               PA # 1. Strengthening DRM institutional and planning capacity. (RIs 1 - 4).

               Achievements.

                     The National DRM policy was formulated, and the National DRM system was updated.
                     The National DRM Agency (UNGRD), directly under the Presidency was created to coordinate DRM
                      efforts and to provide technical support to the municipalities.
                     The National DRM Agency created two instruments for inter-institutional coordination of the national
                      DRM system as targeted by 2015. Five instruments for inter-institutional coordination by 2018,
                      exceeding the target of four. This represented 125% of the target when the operation closed in 2021.
                     688 municipalities formulated plans with DRM features in 2015 (as compared to 388 at the baseline in
                      2012) with technical support from UNGRD. This was short of the target of 813. By 2018, 1,054

                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



       municipalities formulated plans (as compared to 813 in 2015), exceeding the target of 886. This
       represented 119% of the target when the operation closed in 2021.
      Five Environmental Damage, Losses and Needs Assessment (EDANA) were designed and
       implemented by the Regional Environmental Autonomous Corporations (CARS) as targeted. EDANA
       supported the coordination between the National Disaster System (SNGRD) and the National
       Environmental System (SINA) and provided environmental information for decision-making in the
       planning stage for post-disaster recovery.
      The National Technical Assistance program was not implemented when the operation closed due to
       the restrictions in the wake of the COVID 19 pandemic.

PA # 2. Strengthening the institutional framework and capacity for including DRM in land use
planning. (RIs 5 - 7).

Achievements.

      15 municipalities revised their land use plans (POT) with the Regional Environmental Autonomous
       Corporations by 2015. This was short of the target of 25. By 2018, 129 municipalities revised their
       land use plans exceeding the target of 25. This represented 516% achievement relative to the target
       when the operation closed.
      Five Watershed Management Plans were completed by the municipalities with DRM in their design by
       2015. This was short of the target of 15. By 2018. 58 plans Watershed Management Plans were
       completed by the municipalities by 2018, slightly short of the target of 60. This represented 97%
       achievement relative to the target when the operation closed in 2021.
      Ten departments with climate change adaptation initiatives or projects under implementation included
       risk understanding and risk reduction actions as targeted. The ICR (page 18) noted that to date
       Colombia has exceeded the target of ten departments and is to date implementing 24 projects with
       climate change adaptation initiatives.

PA # 3. Strengthening policies and tools to reduce in the housing sector. (RIs 8 - 10).

Achievements.

      109 municipalities were assisted and trained in applying the methodology to design inventories of
       high-risk areas, short of the target of 250 by 2015. By 2018, 267 municipalities were trained,
       exceeding the target of 250. This represented 107% achievement when the operation closed.
      Four municipalities created inventories of settlements located in high-risk areas under the guidelines
       of the Ministry of Housing, Cities and Land (MVCT) by 2015, far short of the target of 25
       municipalities. By 2018, ten municipalities created inventories, short of the target of 25. This
       represented 40% achievement relative to the target.
      Two documents were produced to support the resettlement processes of families in areas where risks
       could not be mitigated as targeted.

Drawdown of the Cat-DDO. Colombia requested the activation and full disbursement of the Cat-DDO to
respond to the emergency caused by the COVID19 pandemic. Although this cat-DDO did not explicitly allow
disbursements based on public health emergencies, a legal determination by the Bank made COVID19 "an
eligible disaster". This allowed drawdowns for public health emergencies.


                                                                                               Page 11 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



                      Summary. Of the six original results indicators, four were realized (although with some delays). Given that
                      two indicators were not realized, overall efficacy is rated as moderately satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Of the six original results indicators, four were realized (although with some delays). Given that two indicators
were not realized, overall efficacy is rated as moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      Relevance of the PDO to the Government and current Bank strategy for Colombia is high. The prior actions
      were aligned with the goals outlined in the Government's National Development Plan and the policy matrix was
      based on the Government's program. The prior actions were based on sound analytical underpinnings. The
      causal links between the prior actions and the PDO was logical and the results indicators appropriate for
      monitoring performance.

      Of the original results indicators, four were realized (although there were some delays in realizing the indicators
      with municipalities). Taking these factors into account, the program's achievements had moderate shortcomings
      and its overall outcome is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Government commitment/ownership. The risk to the development outcomes is moderate. The ICR
      (paragraph 58) notes that specific instruments and tools developed under the prior actions of this
      operation, such as the national inventory of settlements in high-risk areas and guidelines for municipalities to

                                                                                                                      Page 12 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



include DRM in climate change and land-use plans, are institutionalized under the government's national and
regulatory framework. The ICR also notes that the Government is strongly committed to DRM as evidenced
by the fact that it has requested a Cat-DDO III to strengthen DRM.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank prepared this operation based on the experiences from the Bank's earlier DRM operations in
Colombia and elsewhere. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) increasing risk awareness and
sources of financing; (ii) strengthening the DRM framework; and (iii) establishing the mechanism for
securing immediate access to emergency financing in the wake of a natural hazard. The analytical
underpinnings of the prior actions were sound (discussed in Section 3 of this review). The development
objective, the prior actions and the results indicators were prepared in close collaboration with the relevant
government agencies.

The project identified several risks to the operation including substantial macroeconomic risks given
Colombia's exposure to three types of external shocks, such as a slowdown in economic activity in the
United States, decline in oil prices, and global financial market turmoil. The PD (paragraph 118) notes that
the authorities had some domestic monetary and fiscal space which could be utilized to counter external
shocks, and the IMF Credit Line combined with ample international reserves, provided an additional buffer.
Given this, the overall operational risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PD, paragraph 116).

There were moderate shortcomings in program design. In this operation some results indicators were
assigned at the subnational level (the municipalities). Assigning results indicators at the subnational level
straitjacketed the actions of the directly responsible national government entities and required adjustments.
RIs under municipal responsibility exceeded the functions and capacities of the national government
entities responsible for their completion. Eventually this issue was resolved by assigning the responsibility
of monitoring the activities of the municipalities to the national entities.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

According to the ICR (paragraph 54), the Bank team carried out thirteen missions during the 2013 - 2021 period
and maintained a continuous dialogue with the government during this period. The supervision team helped in
mitigating the challenges posed by the personnel turnover in the ministries. The Bank also provided substantial

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



support to the achievement of results indicators at the municipal level, such as helping them to develop the
inventory of settlements located in high-risk areas. The Bank together with the Government increased the
targets when the operation was renewed in 2018 and replaced some indicators with more ambitious ones when
the operation was renewed in 2018.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory, in view of the moderate shortcomings in
program preparation.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The identification of settlements and analysis of the resettlement processes for households in high risk areas
where risks could not be mitigated, contributed to savings and protecting the assets of vulnerable population.
The loan activation and disbursement also proved very helpful to mitigate the socioeconomic impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic.



b. Environmental

The increase in risk management capacities could have positive environmental impacts through improved
environmental management in territorial planning, safety in water supply and sanitation and strengthening of the
integrated management of hydrographic basins.



c. Gender

This operation did not directly have a gender dimension.



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)




d. Other

The ICR does not mention any unintended consequence.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is concise and well-written. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly articulates the links
between the prior actions, the results indicators and the intended outcomes. The quality of evidence and the
analysis provided in the ICR is adequate to assess the achievements. The ICR candidly discusses the issues at
the subnational level. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

1. In cases where subnational entities are responsible for the monitoring of the results indicators, it
helps if extensive support is provided to them by way of technical assistance at the design stage. In this
operation, the rather limited progress in achieving results particularly in the initial years, were due to the weak
capacity of the municipalities.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Disaster Risk Mgmt Cat DDO II (P126583)



2. Strong analytical underpinning and timely technical assistance during implementation can help in
securing government ownership. In this operation, the analytical base and technical assistance provided by
the Bank greatly helped in getting the government committed to the reforms.

3. It is useful to have a report on the achievements and progress during implementation. The operations
renewals offer the opportunity to update or adjust the results indicators depending on the progress achieved so
far.

4. Although the Cat-DDO was originally designed to cover emergencies due to natural hazards, the
COVID19 pandemic demonstrated the importance of being able to use drawdowns in the face of a health
emergency, such as epidemics or pandemics. This health emergency in Colombia highlighted the
importance of clearly defining the Cat-DDO activation eligibility criteria.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
