     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023090

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P174118                                   COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Colombia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91420                                30-Jun-2021                                         700,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2020                               30-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           700,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            700,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        700,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Rashmi Shankar              Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

This stand-alone COVID-19 Crisis Response Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation for US$700
million aimed to support the Government of Colombia’s response to the health, social and economic crisis
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic (Program Document [PD], p. 4).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



The development objective of this operation was to help Colombia (i) support the capacity of the health
system, (ii) provide income and nutrition support to poor and vulnerable households, and (iii) maintain liquidity
and access to finance for firms, in response to COVID-19 (PD, p .4).

For the purpose of this ICRR, the objectives of the operation (against which outcomes will be assessed)
are taken to be the following:

Objective 1: Support the capacity of the health system;

Objective 2: Provide income and nutrition support to poor and vulnerable households; and

Objective 3: Maintain liquidity and access to finance for firms, in response to COVID-19.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The three pillars of the operation were identical to the objectives above (PD, p. 5), with the following prior
actions (PAs) under each (PD p. 41 and Financing Agreement, p. 4):

Pillar 1, "support the capacity of the health system," had two PAs under it:

PA1: The Republic of Colombia has authorized the Ministry of Health and Social Protection (MSPS) to apply
targeted financial mechanisms to provide additional liquidity to health care providers so that they may
effectively deliver health care services in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as evidenced by Art. 5 Decree
No. 538 published in the Official Gazette on April 12, 2020.

PA2: The Republic of Colombia through MSPS has developed a biosafety framework, facilitating the carrying
out of economic and social activity in a manner consistent with mitigation, control, and prevention of the
spread of COVID-19, while the sanitary emergency is in effect, as evidenced through Resolution No.
666 published in the Official Gazette on April 24, 2020.

Pillar 2, "provide income and nutrition support to poor and vulnerable households," had three PAs under it:

PA3: The Republic of Colombia, through the National Planning Department (DNP), has expanded its
master database for targeting social programs so as to facilitate crisis response cash payments to poor and
vulnerable households currently not registered for social programs; as evidenced by Decree No. 518
published in the Official Gazette on April 4, 2020 and the letter from the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
(MHCP) and DNP dated May 26, 2020.

PA4: The Republic of Colombia has: (i) approved the Ingreso Solidario Program and modifications to existing
social protection programs, all to provide crisis response cash payments to poor and vulnerable individuals
and households; and (ii) authorized the MHCP to subscribe and modify agreements with financial service
providers so as to provide such payments in a direct and timely fashion, all as evidenced by Decree No. 458
published in the Official Gazette on March 22, 2020, and Decree No. 518 published in the Official Gazette on
April 4,2020.

PA5: The Republic of Colombia and the Colombian Institute for Family Welfare (ICBF) have approved new
regulations for the implementation of the school feeding and pre-school feeding programs so as to protect the
nutrition of poor and vulnerable children following facility closures, as evidenced by Special Unit for School

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



Feeding (UEAE) Resolution No. 007 dated April 16,2020 and published on the Ministry of Education (MOE)
website, and the Second Article of ICBF’s Resolution No. 2900 dated March 15, 2020.

Pillar 3, "maintain liquidity and access to finance for firms, in response to COVID-19," had three PAs under it:

PA6: The Republic of Colombia and the National Guarantee Fund (FNG), as applicable, have (i) recapitalized
the FNG through the reallocation of capital from different public assets (enterprises and funds); and (ii)
introduced operational changes to the FNG, including increasing coverage rates and modifying pricing
conditions and covering costs partially with funds from the government to promote program accessibility and
increase outreach, as evidenced by Decree 492, published in the Official Gazette on March 28, 2020; Decree
466 published in the Official Gazette on March 23, 2020; and FNG’s Circulars No. 10, 11 and 12, all dated
April 15, 2020, and published on FNG’s website.

PA7: To support access to finance and operational continuity for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs) in the face of COVID-19, the Republic of Colombia and the Business Development Bank of
Colombia (Bancoldex) have launched emergency credit lines via Bancoldex aimed at maintaining
working capital and employment in critical sectors, as evidenced by Article 2 of Decree 468, published in the
Official Gazette on March 23, 2020, and Bancoldex Circulars No. 4 (dated March 18, 2020), No. 6 (dated April
2, 2020), and No. 7 (dated April 8, 2020).

PA8: The Republic of Colombia has (i) temporally postponed the deadline for tax payments, as evidenced by
Decree 401 published in the Official Gazette on March 13, 2020, Decree 435 published in the Official Gazette
on March 19, 2020, and Decree 520 published in the Official Gazette on April 6, 2020; and (ii) accelerated
value-added tax (VAT) and income tax refunds during the whole period of the health emergency, as
evidenced by Decree 535 published in the Official Gazette on April 12, 2020.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The stand-alone COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118) was approved in June 2020 and became effective
in July 2020. It provided US$700 million in budget support to the Government of Colombia’s response to the
health, social and economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and closed as planned in June 2021.
There was no discrepancy between approved and disbursed amounts.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives of the operation were highly relevant for three main reasons: (1) they aimed to support the
 government's response to an unprecedented shock of a global health emergency that quickly became an
 economic and social crisis; (2) they were anchored in a significant body of country-specific analytical and
 advisory (ASA) work, including the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), various sector ASA, and the Country
 Partnership Framework (CPF), thereby reflecting the World Bank Group's (WBG's) strategic development
 priorities for Colombia, and (3) they were specific and concrete.

 Country situation: Crisis response


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



Colombia declared a national health emergency on March 12, 2020, the day after the World Health
Organization declared the novel coronavirus a global pandemic. In addition to comprehensive public health
measures to stop the spread of the disease in the country, the government announced a package of fiscal
measures amounting to 2.5 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) with three aims: to strengthen the
capacity of the health system to manage the pandemic, to mitigate the impact of the economic crisis on the
poorest and most vulnerable households, and to provide liquidity support to firms to keep them afloat, with a
view to mitigating the economic and social consequences of the crisis. The three objectives of this operation
are therefore fully aligned with the aims of the government's crisis response.

The relevance of the objectives of this crisis response operation are underscored by the severe cost of
COVID-19. The crisis led to a revision in real GDP growth from the forecast of 3.6 percent in 2020 to -7
percent, while the fiscal deficit nearly tripled against rising crisis-related expenditures and declining oil exports
and revenues. It is estimated that 67 percent of the country's workforce (more than 15 million people) were in
sectors that were affected by COVID-19 and that a large number of MSMEs were adversely affected (ICR, p.
7; PD, p. 5). The economic contraction and increase in unemployment led to higher poverty rates, with
significant mitigation - of the order of 2.2 percentage points (World Bank Poverty Lab, 2022) - provided by the
government's emergency response.

WBG priorities and link with CPF

While the operation was designed and implemented rapidly to support the government's crisis response, the
objectives were aligned with structural reform priorities and anchored in a comprehensive set of analytical
work, notably the SCD, which identified three critical challenges: (a) high inequality, weak social inclusion,
uneven service delivery in education and health, and significant internal displacement as a consequence of the
long-running internal conflict; (b) an extractives-based growth model; and (c) wide disparities between rural
and urban outcomes (SCD, introduction, and CPF, Table 2). The SCD noted that a fiscally sustainable path
would have to be found to maintain recent progress on education, health, and social protection.

The CPF, approved in April 2016, therefore rested on three pillars: (i) fostering balanced territorial
development; (ii) enhancing social inclusion and mobility through improved service delivery; and (iii) supporting
fiscal sustainability and productivity. The CPF reflects both the government's program and lessons learned
from a long history of implementation in Colombia of both World Bank and International Finance
Corporation projects (CPF, pp. 12 and 13).

The operation's objectives were squarely aligned with Pillars 2 and 3 of the CPF and were designed to
address country-specific priorities in line with WBG comparative advantage. In addition, the operation
aligned closely with two of the three dimensions of the Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID)
paper of the WBG by promoting: (i) expanded social protection to extreme poor, poor, and vulnerable groups;
and (ii) increased access to finance for MSMEs. The crisis response measures supported by the operation are
also fully in line with just-in-time diagnostics prepared by the Bank, which prioritized measures to protect the
most vulnerable households and firms, and support the health sector.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



Objective 1, "support the capacity of the health system," had two PAs under it that addressed constraints to
achieving the objective. As in many other countries, the health sector was overwhelmed with the pandemic, in
terms of both financial and human resources. Critical economic sectors needed to be functional, but the risk of
infection needed to be mitigated. These two PAs provided financial support to health care providers to allow
them to continue their operations, and developed biosafety protocols in eleven key sectors to slow down the
pace of contagion and gain additional time to strengthen the capacity of health care providers.

PA1: Prior to the pandemic, the financial sustainability of the health system in Colombia had been threatened
by growing expenditures, inefficient utilization of resources, overspending, overutilization of services, and
malpractice, leading to mounting debt of the health system. The COVID-19 pandemic put additional pressure on
the sector, and payment arrears put future health service provision at risk. In this context, PA1 aimed to ensure
sufficient liquidity in the health system, including payments to health care providers for past services, so that
these healthcare providers could provide care to COVID patients while fulfilling their contractual obligations to
health care workers. The PA specified four main channels through which financing would support the capacity
of the health care system (PD p. 34): (i) the provision of financial support to health care providers (public and
private) to guarantee the supply of health care services (including medical equipment) for the population
affected by COVID-19; (ii) the creation of temporary economic compensation for beneficiaries enrolled in the
subsidized insurance regime diagnosed with COVID-19 ; (iii) the definition of a costed basket of health services
and technologies to attend patients infected by COVID-19, which will allow additional resources to be allocated
to health insurance companies and health care providers to program, contract, and pay for health care services;
and (iv) a one-time financial incentive (bonus) to health workers caring for patients infected with COVID-19.

Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory

PA2: Pandemic-related lockdowns had affected a majority of economic sectors, leading to significant hardship,
particularly among the most vulnerable. To control the spread of the virus and facilitate a re-initiation of
economic activity, binding technical and scientific protocols on biosecurity were issued to MSPS. This included
design, implementation, and execution of action plans to address safety requirements in targeted economic and
social sectors.

Relevance of PA2: Satisfactory

Objective 2, "provide income and nutrition support to poor and vulnerable households," had three PAs under it
that addressed constraints on achieving the objective by strengthening income and nutrition support to poor and
vulnerable households during the COVID-19 pandemic. Given that a significant share of poor and vulnerable
groups was not registered in any social programs, targeting mechanisms to reach these groups through the
existing programs were not adequate.

PA3: This PA made DNP (National Planning Department) responsible for determining the list of eligible
beneficiaries for Ingreso Solidario, and authorized DNP to cross-reference SISBEN III/IV with other databases
to create an expanded registry to target beneficiaries. SISBEN - the Identification System of Potential
Beneficiaries of Social Programs - was the main targeting instrument for social programs in Colombia for over
two decades. As of March 2020, it contained validated information for 39.4 million persons, or 78 percent of
Colombia's population, and was being used by 21 social programs. In 2017, the government initiated SISBEN
IV, a fourth comprehensive census sweep to improve the quality and timeliness of the information in the
registry, while reducing its vulnerability to fraud. With technical assistance from the World Bank, SISBEN IV has
become a more dynamic social registry, integrated with a number of other databases for real time information
sharing. However, SISBEN IV was not up and running at the start of the pandemic, and therefore the


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



government faced challenges in quickly identifying those most in need of government programs. The
government therefore created a new cash transfers program - Ingreso Solidario – which took as its foundation a
new master database that combined SISBEN III and IV, cross referenced against other beneficiary registries
and administrative records from social security, the civil registry, and the financial superintendent. This master
database allowed identification of poor and vulnerable households not covered by government programs but
also ensured that ineligible persons – including deceased persons – were excluded from the cash
transfer scheme. Overall coverage of the database also improved, with 3.6 million persons added to the target
population, including 3 million of the neediest households that had not been covered under any other social
program. In total, 7.5 million vulnerable and poor households would now be covered by the main social
programs: Familias en Accion (2.66 million families), Jovenes en Accion (204,000 youth), Colombia Mayor
(1.68 million elderly citizens) and Ingreso Solidario (newly targeting 3 million vulnerable households not covered
before). PA3 authorized the creation of the master database and DNP's responsibility for determining eligibility
under Ingreso Solidario and was thus relevant to objective 2, in so far that it enabled crisis response cash
payments to poor and vulnerable households not registered for social programs and improved targeting by
excluding ineligible households.

Relevance of PA3: Satisfactory

PA4: To protect the poor and vulnerable in response to the COVID-19 crisis, the government deployed a
comprehensive social response, aiming to rapidly provide income support to at least 7.5 million poor and
vulnerable individuals. This included: (a) additional cash payments through existing programs, that cover 2.66
million families in Familias en Acción, 204,000 youth in Jóvenes en Acción, and 1.68 million elderly citizens of
Colombia Mayor; (b) acceleration of the implementation of the VAT refund program targeted to the poorest who
are already receiving these cash transfer programs (originally planned as a pilot for 100,000 individuals but
later expanded to 1 million individuals); and (c) implementation of Ingreso Solidario, the new unconditional cash
transfer program targeted to 3 million vulnerable households not registered for other social programs. Social
protection had been the main driver of poverty reduction in Columbia over the past ten years, mainly taking the
form of Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs. COVID-19 is estimated to have increased poverty rates by
3 to 9.1 percent points, representing a significant reversal even in the best-case scenario. Payments under
Familias en Accion and Jovenes en Accion, two major social programs, are mainly (90 percent) through closed-
looped debit cards that can only be used at Bank branches and ATMs, even though only 46 percent of
Colombians (42 percent of women) have bank accounts. About 10 percent of payments are in cash. The
government saw the crisis as an opportunity to leverage fintech and the emergency cash transfers to support
financial inclusion, especially for women and poor households. This included the use of account-based
deposits and the introduction of electronic deposits, which also reduced health risks from agglomeration. In
addition to expanding payments to the existing 4.5 million households covered by major social programs, the
new payment modalities covered 3 million additional persons covered by the new program Ingreso Solidario, as
well as VAT refunds to one million current beneficiaries of the major social programs. PA4 thus supported
electronic payments against both expanded coverage and additional transfers to existing beneficiaries, and
created systems that strengthen financial inclusion (PD, page 26).

Relevance of PA4: Satisfactory

PA5: The 2018-22 National Development Plan aimed to strengthen child services in Colombia through a
combination of school feeding programs and Early Childhood Development (ECD) programs. The pandemic-
related shutdowns interfered with the capacity of the system to reach beneficiaries. PA5 therefore set up
alternative implementation arrangements for both programs, covering monthly in-kind deliveries of a food



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



 basket to families as well as a food voucher redeemable at select places. The PA did not specify how this
 support would specifically benefit the poor and vulnerable.

 Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory

 Objective 3, "maintain liquidity and access to finance for firms, in response to COVID-19," had three PAs under
 it that addressed constraints on achieving the objective by providing swift financial support to MSMEs, the
 segment of business most strongly affected by the crisis.

 PA6: The pandemic led to a collapse in the cash flow of firms, particularly MSMEs, with some economic sectors
 affected more than others. It was necessary to ensure that the short-term shock represented by the pandemic
 did not damage long-run viability of these firms. Government-backed guarantees through FNG aimed to
 incentivize banks to accommodate the liquidity needs - mainly working capital and payroll - of temporarily
 distressed but creditworthy firms, particularly MSMEs. The credit guarantee lines were to target MSMEs and
 independent professionals separately. PA6 was relevant in the given country and sector
 context, targeting borrowers that were already accessing credit from the banking system and were most
 affected by the crisis (aviation, hotels, events, restaurants and tourism).

 Relevance of PA6: Satisfactory

 PA7 aimed to maintain working capital and employment in critical sectors, in direct support of the objective.
 While credit guarantees (under PA6) were a useful instrument to stimulate bank lending when credit risk was a
 major concern for lenders, their utility was dependent on how much liquidity lenders had at hand or whether
 lenders perceived liquidity risk as heightened. The PA put in place the regulatory framework for Bancoldex to
 expand second-tier lending, including instructions on oversight and financial terms and conditions of the lines of
 credit, thus supporting continued credit intermediation to firms across sectors and promoting liquidity in the
 financial sector despite heightened market risk as a result of COVID-19. As a result, viable firms would survive
 and employment would be protected.

 Relevance of PA7: Satisfactory

 PA8: The effective tax rate in Colombia on business profits is 50 percent. The crisis led to liquidity problems
 and tensions between payments to suppliers, tax payments and social security payments. These tensions were
 especially acute for the self-employed and for MSMEs, which account for 96 percent of businesses, 80 percent
 of employment, and 35 percent of GDP (PD, pg. 30). Given the need to ease liquidity conditions in the private
 sector, short-term emergency response tax policy was relevant, mainly in the form of extending tax payments
 and accelerating tax refunds on both income and VAT. These measures were relevant in helping firms to pay
 suppliers and meet social security obligations through the crisis.

 Relevance of PA8: Satisfactory



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)




Rationale

Results Indicators (RIs) are presented in Table 1 along with mapping, progress, and ratings.

RI1: Injection of additional liquidity by the Administrator of the Resources of the General Social Security
System in Health (ADRES) directly to health care providers for the provision of COVID-19 services.

While improved funding was necessary for supporting emergency services during the pandemic, the RI
monitored only the disbursement of funds into the sector and did not capture implementation or
improvements in the ability of health care providers to effectively deliver health care services in response
to the pandemic.

Relevance of RI1: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI2: Number of economic sector bio-safety protocols approved.

The RI monitored the number of protocols approved, but it did not capture the quality of these protocols or
their contribution (separately or in tandem) to a coherent biosafety framework that would mitigate, control,
and prevent the spread of COVID-19, thus facilitating continued social and economic activity.

Relevance of RI2: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI3: Number of poor and vulnerable individuals included in expanded database for targeting social
programs.

The RI captured progress on objective 2 and PA3 by measuring the increase in coverage of poor and
vulnerable households in order to better target emergency support during the pandemic while
strengthening existing CCT programs. The criteria for inclusion were well defined under PA3. Income and
asset limits were established below which households would be identified as poor and vulnerable.

Relevance of RI3: Satisfactory

RI4a-i: Number of poor and vulnerable individuals receiving temporary economic support payments.

The RI captured progress on the implementation of the unconditional cash transfers under Ingreso
Solidario and was relevant given the crisis situation. The criteria for inclusion were well defined under
PA3. Income and asset limits were established below which households would be identified as poor and
vulnerable.

Relevance of RI4a-i: Satisfactory

RI4a-ii: At least 70 percent of the poor and vulnerable individuals receiving cash benefits should be
women.

This RI measured progress on addressing gender gaps in accessing benefits. However, by measuring the
percentage of poor and vulnerable beneficiaries who were women rather than the total number of poor
and vulnerable beneficiaries who were women, it left open the possibility that the denominator could have


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



been small, in which case a smaller than desirable overall increase in the total number of poor and
vulnerable women receiving benefits would not be captured.

Relevance of RI4a-ii: Moderately Satisfactory

RI4b-i: Number of Ingreso Solidario beneficiaries opening new digital accounts.

This indicator measured progress in expanding the use of fintech to strengthen access to emergency and
CCT payments in the face of weak bank account ownership, facilitating improvements in the direct and
timely nature of payments.

Relevance of RI4b-i: Satisfactory

RI4b-ii: At least 70 percent of individuals opening digital accounts should be women.

This indicator measured progress on the use of fintech to strengthen access to emergency and CCT
payments given weak bank account ownership, especially for women. However, by measuring the
percentage of all new account holders who were women, rather than the total number of new account
holders who were women, it left open the possibility that the denominator could have been small, in which
case a smaller than desirable increase in the total number of women account holders would not be
captured.

Relevance of RI4b-ii: Moderately Satisfactory

RI5: Number of poor and vulnerable households and students supported through adapted pre-school and
school feeding programs.

This RI measured the continued implementation of school feeding programs and ECD programs through
the COVID-19-related lockdowns and school shut-downs. The eligibility criterion was enrollment in either
public school or in a pre-school service center. The goal was to provide 70 percent of nutritional
requirements to at least the same number of students – 6.9 million between 0 and 17 – that were covered
before the school closures. The RI did not provide granularity on how these households and children were
targeted (identified as poor and/or vulnerable) or whether there was cross-referencing with the SISBEN
master database.

Relevance of RI5: Moderately Satisfactory

RI6-i: Partial credit guarantees (PCGs) provided by FNG for salary payments of MSMEs, in COP.

The RI measured support for business continuity and containment of job losses through partial credit
guarantees (PCGs) to MSMEs. It was relevant insofar that it captured support earmarked for salaries, but
it could have been more granular on the precise mechanism for ensuring that the funding went to
creditworthy but distressed MSMEs and was used to protect salaries and jobs. A more effective RI might
have measured actual job continuity and/or loss.

Relevance of RI6-i: Moderately Satisfactory

RI6-ii: PCG for working capital of MSMEs, in COP.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



 This RI measured support to MSMEs’ working capital through PCGs with the aim of helping them stay
 afloat and not lose long-term viability due to the pandemic. Again, it could have been more granular on the
 precise mechanism for ensuring that the funding went to creditworthy but distressed MSMEs and was
 used to protect working capital. A more effective RI might have measured actual business continuity
 among MSMEs.

 Relevance of RI6-ii: Moderately Satisfactory

 RI6-iii: PCG for professional and independent workers, in USD.

 While the RI measured financing through PCGs to professionals in crisis-affected sectors, it could have
 better captured targeting or usage of the funds, as there was no measurement of whether or how the
 funds addressed specific COVID-related exigencies.

 Relevance of RI6-iii: Moderately Satisfactory

 RI7: Total volume of financing facilitated as a result of national lines of credit introduced, in COP.

 This RI captured overall financing by Bancoldex for national lines of credit, but it did not specify how the
 financing was targeted at critical sectors (airlines, industry, tourism, events and entertainment) or the
 extent to which working capital and employment in these sectors was maintained.

 Relevance of RI7: Moderately Satisfactory

 RI8: Number of firms benefiting from the accelerated VAT and income tax refunds.

 This indicator captured the number of firms benefiting from the refunds without capturing the benefit of the
 policy, for example in terms of actual usage of the refunds to support workers or social security benefits,
 and it did not capture benefit from postponement of the deadline for tax payments.

 Relevance of RI8: Moderately Satisfactory



 TABLE 1: RESULTS INDICATORS (RI)

                                                                                     Actual
                                                                                    Change
                                                                           Actual
                                                                                      in RI       RI
                                                 Unit of Baseline Target achieved
Indicator Name            PA RI relevance                                           Relative achievement
                                                Measure (2020) (2020)        at
                                                                                        to      rating
                                                                         completion
                                                                                    Targeted
                                                                                    Change
Objective 1: Support the capacity of the health system
RI #1: Injection of       PA1 Moderately COP billion 0 (Feb) 407 407 (May) 100%                Modest
additional liquidity by       Unsatisfactory                      (May)
ADRES directly to health
care providers for the


                                                                                                          Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



provision of COVID-19
services.
RI #2: Number of
economic sector bio-            Moderately
                           PA2                      No.     0 (Feb) 7 (May) 11 (May)      157%     Modest
safety protocols               Unsatisfactory
approved.
Objective 2: Provide income and nutrition support to poor and vulnerable households
RI #3: Number of poor
and vulnerable
individuals included in                            No. in     39.4    43.0
                           PA3 Satisfactory                                  43.4 (May)   100%      High
expanded database for                            millions    (Feb) (May)
targeting social
programs.
RI #4a-i: Number of poor
and vulnerable
                                                   No. in              7.5      7.36
individuals receiving      PA4 Satisfactory                 0 (Feb)                       98%    Substantial
                                                 millions            (June)    (June)
temporary economic
support payments.
RI #4a-ii: At least 70
percent of the poor and
                                Moderately                             70
vulnerable individuals     PA4                 Percentage 0 (Feb)            65 (June)    92%    Substantial
                                Satisfactory                         (June)
receiving cash benefits
should be women.
RI #4b-i: Number of
                                                                    600,000 823,650
beneficiaries opening      PA4 Satisfactory         No.     0 (Feb)                       137%      High
                                                                     (June)    (June)
new digital accounts.
RI #4b-ii: At least 70
percent of individuals          Moderately                             70      74.82
                           PA4                 Percentage 0 (Feb)                         106%      High
opening digital accounts        Satisfactory                         (June)    (June)
should be women.
RI #5: Number of poor
and vulnerable
households and students         Moderately         No. in      0    6.9 (Jun
                           PA5                                               7.5 (June)   108%      High
supported through               Satisfactory     millions (March)       e)
adapted pre-school and
school feeding programs.
Objective 3: Liquidity and access to finance for firms.
RI #6-i: Partial credit
guarantees (PCG)
                                Moderately                     0
provided by FNG for        PA6                 COP trillion         12 (Oct) 12 (Oct)     100%      High
                                Satisfactory                (March)
salary payments of
MSMEs.
RI #6-ii: PCG for working       Moderately                     0
                           PA6                 COP trillion          3 (Oct) 4.98 (Oct)   166%      High
capital of MSMEs.               Satisfactory                (March)
RI #6-iii: PCG for
                                Moderately                     0
professional and           PA6                 COP trillion          1 (Oct) 1.2 (Oct)    120%      High
                                Satisfactory                (March)
independent workers.

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 19
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



RI #7: Financing
facilitated as a result of                   Moderately                  0     606
                                       PA7                COP billion                    679 (Dec)    112%        High
national lines of credit                     Satisfactory             (March) (Dec)
introduced.
RI #8: Firms benefiting
from the accelerated                         Moderately                   0    20,000      11,762
                                       PA8                       No.                                   59%       Modest
VAT and income tax                           Satisfactory              (March) (June)      (June)
refunds.

               The RIs in most -- but not all -- cases captured adequately the impact of the PAs on progress towards the
               development objectives. The RIs mapped to the same pillar – for example R1 and RI2 mapped to PA1
               and PA2 under Objective 1 – complemented and reinforced one other. RIs were well defined in terms of
               baseline, targets, and data sources. Relevance of RIs is therefore rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Support the capacity of the health care system

                Rationale
                This objective was supported by PAs designed to improve allocation of financial resources to the health
                sector and improve management of health risks with a view to alleviating pressure on the system during the
                pandemic. The RIs aimed to measure progress through direct liquidity provided to health care providers and
                through the establishment of bio-safety protocols in critical sectors. Both targets were achieved. However, the
                causal links in the results chain were weak. While the objectives were highly relevant, and the RIs established
                baselines and targets and were measurable, they did not capture either the utilization of the liquidity made
                available to health care providers or the content and implementation of the bio-safety protocols and how they
                contributed to the economy's value. However, the project team later provided more specific information
                demonstrating achievement under each PA.

                Under PA1, additional liquidity of COP 407 BN was provided to 380 health care providers. These funds were
                used to pay the salaries of health care workers and to continue to provide health care services to COVID-19
                patients.

                Under PA2, eleven novel sector-specific biosafety protocols were designed and implemented to address the
                safety requirements of the pandemic and to reinitiate critical economic activity safely. After the March 2020
                declaration of a health emergency, 78 specific resolutions were issued to support mitigation, control, and
                management of pandemic impacts. These protocols and resolutions supported the government to achieve a



                                                                                                                Page 12 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



higher level of preparedness to effectively respond to future pandemic crises, and they continue to be
updated regularly in response to the course of the pandemic (ICR p. 12; PD, p. 22).

Given the additional information provided by the project team, objective 1 is rated Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Provide income and nutrition support to poor and vulnerable households

Rationale
This objective was supported by PAs designed to expand the social assistance database, strengthen
coverage of the poor and vulnerable in the master database, and increase digital access to transfers of
recipients; and to support income and learning equity through nutrition programs. Progress under PA3 and
PA4 was measured against the increase in the number of poor and vulnerable individuals included in the
database, increase in the number of poor and vulnerable households receiving temporary income support,
and increase in the number of beneficiaries of digital access to transfers. Outcomes were monitored by
gender, given gender gaps in access to financial services. Almost all targets were met, with small shortfalls
under the targets for recipients of temporary economic support payments. Under PA5, progress was
measured against the increase in the number of poor and vulnerable households and children supported by
the continuance of pre-school and school feeding programs, in spite of school closures. Targets were
measurable, with clear baselines and targets.

Through PA3 and PA4, the operation expanded the existing database by 3.98 million individuals and
thereby enabled an expanded social safety net of emergency transfers (ICR, p. 13; PD p. 23). The operation
also established the Ingreso Solidario program through which 7.4 million additional individuals benefited from
cash transfers (65 percent of whom were women). In addition, PA 5 supported the continued functioning
of school and pre-school feeding programs, which directly benefited 7.5 million poor and vulnerable children --
1.7 million families through the ICBF pre-school feeding program, and 5.2 million students aged 6-17 years
through the school feeding program -- in spite of the closure of all 60,000 ECD Service Units and 43,000
schools around the country.

The three PAs worked together effectively to provide income and nutritional support to poor and vulnerable
households, and support school-going and pre-school children, with a clear line of sight from the PAs to
intended outcomes. There were moderate shortcomings in the specification of gender targets and targeting of
nutrition support to poor and vulnerable children, though the latter likely resulted in inclusion errors that were
understandable given the crisis situation. Objective 2 is therefore rated Satisfactory.



Rating



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



                      Satisfactory


                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Maintain liquidity and access to finance for MSMEs



                      Rationale
                      This objective was supported by prior actions designed to provide short-term financing with partial risk
                      guarantees and new credit lines targeting MSMEs to facilitate payments during the pandemic, and to
                      decrease the VAT and income tax burden on firms with a view to maintaining liquidity and access to finance
                      for firms in response to the pandemic. Liquidity support was also provided to professional service providers.

                      The RIs mapped to the PAs measured the increased access to credit by MSMEs for salaries and working
                      capital and individual entrepreneurs; the increased volume of total financing enabled by the lines of credit,
                      capturing liquidity support to MSMEs without access to banking services; and the increased number of firms
                      benefiting from accelerated VAT and income tax refunds. Targets were mostly exceeded, suggesting some
                      lack of ambition, though it is noted that the project was prepared as an emergency response during a period
                      of great uncertainty.

                      This financing supported firm operations, working capital, and salaries (ICR, p. 13; PD, p. 24) through partial
                      credit guarantees of COP 18.2 trillion to MSMEs under PA 6, while PA7 supported the creation of emergency
                      credit lines in Bancoldex through which COP 675.9 billion was disbursed to MSMEs in critical sectors and to
                      individual professionals. The RIs, however, did not measure the actual use of funds in supporting workers and
                      continued MSME operations. Through PA 8, the government temporarily postponed the deadline of tax
                      payments for 42,388 MSMEs and accelerated the VAT and income tax refunds for 11,762 taxpayers (persona
                      natural or persona jurídica) throughout March – June 2020, without monitoring the use of funds. This
                      represented a significant shortfall relative to the target that was not reported in the ICR (which instead adds
                      refunds to legal entities that were not captured by RI8). In addition, the RI for PA8 did not measure the benefit
                      from postponement of the deadline for tax payments.

                      The three PAs worked together effectively to support liquidity and access to finance to firms, particularly
                      MSMEs, with a moderately clear line of sight to outcomes. Targeting, however, could have been improved for
                      professional service providers and firms receiving tax breaks, and more effort could have been made to
                      monitor the impact of the tax refunds.

                      With these achievements and shortcomings, objective 3 is rated Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




                                                                                                                        Page 14 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Based on the ratings for achievement of the three objectives, overall efficacy is rated Satisfactory. All PAs directly
contributed to achievement of the objectives, and although the RIs under the first two PAs were insufficiently
specific, the project team provided data indicating substantial achievement of the first objective.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With Satisfactory relevance of prior actions and Satisfactory efficacy, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.

The operation was well designed, with a clearly defined and concrete set of development objectives. The PAs
responded to the emergency while remaining anchored in the national program, the SCD, GRID, Crisis
Response Notes, other core ASA, and the CPF, and were relevant. The PAs within each objective were
complementary for the most part, with moderately well defined and relevant RIs mapped to them. Relevance of
the RIs was mixed. Most of the relevant RIs were achieved or exceeded, with some relatively minor shortfalls.
Although the RIs under the first two PAs were insufficiently specific, the project team provided evidence to
demonstrate substantial support for capacity of the health care system. Some lack of ambition in setting the
targets could have driven positive project outcomes.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several outcomes of the operation are likely to be sustained, particularly under objectives 2 and 3, given the
government's strong commitment to maintaining a sound macroeconomic policy framework, to stronger and
more even public service delivery, and to support for vulnerable households and firms. The country was on
track for robust growth performance and policies focused on strengthening social and geographic inclusion,
supporting peace, and facilitating a more diversified growth model. Swift government response to the
pandemic appears to have supported recovery to near 2019 levels by June 2021.

The level of financing under this operation is unlikely to address structural financial weaknesses in the health
system; deeper health care reform is necessary to ensure system viability and resilience. At the same time,
the war in Ukraine is adversely affecting food prices and hurting vulnerable households. Approval of a



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



flexible International Monetary Fund credit line of US$9.8 billion is likely to support the government's efforts
to respond to shocks and maintain crisis response measures.

It will be critical to build on this operation to strengthen further the financial position and capacity of the health
care system and to continue to strengthen targeting and coverage of the government's programs, to build
resilience against the impact of external shocks likely to impact the poor and vulnerable.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Bank Performance -- Design is rated as Satisfactory for three main reasons.

First, despite the limited time for preparation and implementation in a period of uncertainty, the Bank's
country knowledge, robust body of analytical work, technical and policy expertise, and excellent
communication led to the design of an operation that supported emergency response and led to Colombia
moving from a large COVID-induced setback to rapid growth recovery. The focus on health, social
protection, and access to finance was fully aligned the Bank's guidance on pandemic response as well as
with GRID. Second, the PD built on previous experience with policy-based lending (PD, p. 20), in particular
drawing on lessons learned to ensure that operational design (i) supported a crosscutting but interlinked
set of reforms to respond to the COVID-19 crisis; (ii) was based on strong policy dialogue and technical
assistance; and (iii) was being supported by the knowledge generated by the WBG, based on international
experience, to help client countries respond to the crisis. Third, close collaboration with the government, as
well as the anchoring of the operation in the national program, ensured that the Bank team benefited from
the government's own stakeholder consultations. Indeed, the government's strong ownership of and
commitment to the program was the Bank's entry point on the preparation of the operation.

While M&E could have been better designed with stronger focus on impact and on risk mitigation, the
results chain was for the most part well developed given the emergency response focus of the operation,
which led to a mostly short-run focus. The Bank laid out clearly the ex-ante risks - both exogenous and
sector level - to achieving the PDO, and in spite of the short period over which the operation was prepared,
was able to support risk mitigation though complementary technical assistance and support from other
operations in the portfolio.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

                                                                                                          Page 16 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)




The Bank team demonstrated effective communication and monitoring through the short implementation period
of the operation. A stronger effort could have been made to gather more granular data to support future policy
interventions in Colombia and elsewhere; however, it is noted that the M&E period of the operation was 7-9
months, and there were no delays in effectiveness or in closing. The Bank's performance on implementation is
therefore rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Based on a satisfactory rating for the Bank's performance on both design and implementation, the overall
rating of Bank performance is in line with that of the ICR, and is Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR does not present evidence of significant poverty or social impacts.




b. Environmental

The PAs supported by this DPF are not likely to have had negative effects on the environment, forests, or other
natural resources.



c. Gender

Gender impacts were likely to have been positive, given that female access to financial digital services was
supported.


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)




d. Other

Under objective 2, the government developed a system to better identify the neediest segments of the population
and deliver them social benefits more efficiently and effectively. This increased the knowledge base and the
capacity of the government to design and maintain better targeted and functioning social benefit programs and
mobilize them swiftly during a crisis (ICR, p. 30). This is likely to have strengthened related institutions in terms of
delivery, outreach, and governance, through greater reliance on digital solutions.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well written overall and presents a comprehensive, evidence-based discussion for the most part.
The ICR clearly distinguishes between ex-post and ex-ante risks to development objectives. Lessons learned
are clearly presented. Ratings are for the most part well justified. However, there are some shortcomings.
The ICR is thin on information relating to how some of the RIs capture development impact, including links to
the program objectives, especially the first objective. It also does not specify how analytical work (and which
analytical work) supported operational design and policy dialogue. One of the targets is mis-reported (under
RI8). Finally, relevance of the PAs is not well captured, necessitating careful review of the PD.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                  ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG concurs with the main lessons highlighted by the ICR.


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Crisis Response DPF (P174118)



A robust body of analytical work, the Bank's experience with operations in the country, and effective
use of guidance from the Bank on crisis response can support a swift and effective response to crisis,
in spite of a challenging timeline. In this case, these factors allowed the Bank to effectively support the
government's efforts to save lives and livelihoods. The operation was anchored in the SCD, GRID, and other
ASA, supporting reform measures that not only for crisis response but also longer-run positive impacts on
poverty, equity and gender, and overall institutional preparedness for risk management. These
successes highlight the importance of a strong ASA portfolio and just-in-time technical assistance.

Operational success is driven as well by strong policy dialogue and technical assistance provided
throughout an operation. In this case, the Bank's country knowledge and effective client communication
allowed the design of relevant technical assistance rapidly.

The operation was developed and implemented in close collaboration with the Colombian government, reflecting
a key lesson learned from other DPFs on the importance of country ownership and commitment to achieve
a program’s objectives.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                               Page 19 of 19
