     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023060

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P093765                                  GAS SECT DEVT

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Turkiye                                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-73420,IBRD-83490                   31-Dec-2012                                        709,693,584.58

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2005                             31-Dec-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        325,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         709,693,584.58                                              0.00

 Actual                                     709,693,584.58                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 2, page 15) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) is:

   " To increase the reliability and stability of gas supply in Turkiye by implementing critically needed
   gas storage and network infrastructure, and support BORU HATLARI ILE PETROL TASIMA A.S.



                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



   (BOTAS) in strengthening its operations as a financially stable and commercially managed
   corporation ".

   The PDO is parsed as follows for this review.

   1. To increase the reliability of gas supply

   2. To increase the stability of gas supply

   3. To support BOTAS in strengthening its operations as a commercially managed corporation

   4. To support BOTAS in strengthening its operations as a financially stable corporation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two components (PAD, pages 5 - 6).

   1. Gas storage facility. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$365.70 million. The actual cost was
   US$607.00 million. The actual cost was higher than the appraisal estimate due to the significant cost
   overruns during implementation.

   This component planned to finance construction of a gas storage facility in an underground salt formation
   located close to Tuz Golu. Activities in this component: (i) construction of surface and sub-surface facilities
   (including engineering and construction, solution mining, the gas pipelines and the compressor facility); (ii)
   construction of water and brine discharge pipelines; (iii) cushion gas; and (iv) consultant's services for for
   supervision, monitoring and regulatory aspects.

   These changes were made to this component through the project restructurings (discussed below). (i) The
   original design envisioned financing 12 caverns in three phases of four caverns each. This aspect of design
   was changed to two phases of six caverns each; (ii) a 42 kilometer (km) high-voltage transmission line for
   the water pump was added; and (iii) the project no longer financed cushion gas, as this activity was
   financed by BOTAS (Turkiye's main pipeline company).

   2. Network expansion. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$88.50 million. The actual cost was
   US$56.00 million.

   This component planned to finance construction of two compressor stations at Erzincan and Corum and
   other network infrastructure for transmitting the increasing volumes of gas expected to be imported into
   Turkiye from existing and new sources.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



  BOTAS completed the compressor station at Corum with its own financing. As a result, this project only
  financed the Erzincan station.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$538.00 million. The actual cost was US$938.69
  million. The difference between the actual cost and the appraisal estimate was due to the significantly
  higher actual cost for component activities as compared to their appraisal estimates.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$325.00 million to BOTAS, with the
  loan guaranteed by the treasury. AF of US$400.00 million was approved on October 2, 2014. With this, the
  Bank financing was US$750.00 million. The amount disbursed was US$709.69 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$213.00 at appraisal. Their actual
  contribution was US$229.00 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on November 29, 2005, became effective on March 7, 2006, with a
  scheduled closing date of December 31. 2012. However, the project closed on December 31, 2021.

  Changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings. The changes during implementation are listed in
  sequential order as follows:

  The first restructuring on December 6, 2012, extended the closing by a year from December 31, 2012 to
  December 31, 2013, for completing the ongoing gas storage activities that were delayed in the initial years.

  The second restructuring on May 22, 2014, extended the closing date by six months from December 31,
  2013, to June 30, 2014 in response to the delays in finalizing the AF for the project.

   The third restructuring on August 2014, extended the closing date by three months from June 30, 2014
  to September 30, 2014 for the reason discussed above.

  The changes made through the AF approved on October 2, 2014, are as follows.

        The AF was approved to cover the significant cost overruns of component one activities.
        The covenants associated with cushion gas were removed, since this activity was no longer
           financed by the project.
          The self-financing covenant pertaining to the financial health of BOTAS was removed from the Legal
           Agreement.
          The tariff filing for gas storage was postponed from January 31, 2009, to May 31, 2015, in view of
           the implementation delays.
          The safeguards on "Natural Habitats" was triggered, as the Tuz Golu salt lake, the final discharge
           location for brine solution, was a designated "Specially Protected Environmental Area".
          The closing date for the AF project was December 31, 2020.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



   Through the fourth project restructuring on December 30, 2020, the closing date was extended by a
   year from December 31, 2020, to December 31, 2021, for completing the ongoing activities that were
   delayed in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Before appraisal, the energy sector (especially the natural gas sector), was a key driver
in Turkiye's economic recovery since 2004. Natural gas consumption had grown rapidly over the past two
decades, with average annual growth of 24%. The largest user of natural gas was the electricity generation
industry (65%), followed by the residential sector (20%) and the balance by the industrial sector. With
growing urbanization and the potential increase in requirements for electricity and heating, the demand for
natural gas was expected to grow rapidly in the medium term. Turkiye does not have significant gas
reserves and 99% of its gas is imported from the Russian Federation, Iran, Algeria, Nigeria and and
recently, Azerbaijan.

Sector context. Despite growing demand for natural gas, Turkiye did not have gas storage capacity. Most
developed countries maintain gas storage as some portion of their gas consumption and Turkiye's law
required storage to be maintained at 10% of its annual consumption. The lack of storage facilities
jeopardized the security and reliability of the gas system, especially in winter. Given the need to improve
security of gas supply, Turkiye had diversified its sources for importing gas. Although BOTAS had the
potential to operate commercially over the medium term, as a government-controlled entity it faced
restrictions on borrowings and investments. The objectives of improving energy security and BOTAS's
ability to cover demand peaks in winter and improving the financial viability of BOTAS was important in the
sector context.

Government strategy. Before appraisal, the Government had undertaken several energy sector reforms.
The Government enacted the Natural Gas Market Law in 2001 for transferring imports of natural gas into
private ownership. The Government enacted the public financial management law in 2003 for modernizing
public financial management and reporting and the Energy Market Regulatory Authority (EMRA) was
entrusted with the responsibility for setting standards for energy companies. Following the Natural Gas
Market Law, BOTAS diversified its distribution business into separate companies which were privatized. In
2014 auctions were completed for 65 regions, and EMRA granted distribution licenses for conducting
natural gas distribution and retail sales to 69 companies in 71 of 81 Turkiye's provinces.

Bank strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was consistent with
the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) of October 2, 2003. The CAS identified the delays in developing gas
markets as a serious issue in Turkiye. This issue was reiterated in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for 2012- 2017. The Bank's current CPS for 2017 - 2021, articulated the need for Turkiye to move towards a
more favorable energy mix (including renewables) and reducing its cost of importing energy by transitioning
from oil to natural gas. The CPS also highlighted the need for liberalizing the energy sector.

Previous Bank experience. This project was the first Bank-financed gas storage project. The Bank has
however financed many energy sector projects in Turkiye (such as the National Transmission Grid Project,
the Renewable Energy Project and the Energy Community of South Eastern Europe project). The Bank was

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



               also advising the Government on gas sector reforms, and in 2004 collaborated with the Government for
               producing a Gas Sector Strategy Note and a Gas Distribution Strategy Note for restructuring the sector.
               When this project was being implemented, the Bank also had a technical assistance (TA) project for
               supporting BOTAS's operations on a commercial basis (including through unbundling of BOTAS and a gas
               trading platform).

               The project activities were output-oriented. However, as discussed in the theory of change (section three),
               the intended outcomes of increasing the reliability and stability could be imputed from the outputs of the gas
               storage facility and the compressor stations. Although there were legal covenants, the project did not
               directly support activities aimed at the commercial orientation or the financial viability of BOTAS. The
               relevance of objectives is substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the reliability of gas supply.

                             Rationale
                              Theory of change. The outputs such as the gas storage facility and related infrastructure (surface and sub-
                             surface facilities and water and brine discharge facilities, solution mining, the gas pipelines and the
                             compressor facility), and the two compression stations at Erzincan and Corum for transmitting the volume of
                             gas imported into Turkiye, were expected to increase the capacity for storing imported gas. These outputs
                             were expected to provide for the back up in case of unexpected supply interruptions and thereby aid in
                             increasing the reliability of gas supply in Turkiye). The links between project activities, outputs and outcomes
                             were logical.

                             Outputs.

                                        Ten caverns for storing gas were completed, short of the target of twelve. The remaining two caverns
                                         were infeasible due to geological reasons. The storage capacity in each of the ten caverns increased
                                         to 0.92 Million cubic meters (bcm), as compared to the target of 0.96 bcm. The ICR (page 20) notes
                                         that 0.92 bcm instead of 0.96 is considered by industry norms to be technically reasonable, given the
                                         uncertainty with this type of project.
                                        At project closure on December 31, 2021, the total pipeline capacity for the gas transmission network
                                         in Turkiye was 109 bcm/year. Of this, 18 bcm were to come from the compressor stations at Erizincan
                                         and Corum. The project contributed to achieving 10 bcm of the pipeline capacity, as the Corum station
                                         was completed by BOTAS outside the project.


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



Outcomes.

The outputs described above was expected to increase reliability of gas supply (reliability defined as meeting
demand without interruptions).

      In the absence of baseline and target figures, BOTAS provided information on curtailment data (the
       difference between actual consumption and demand) from 2017. There was a steady increase in
       curtailment of gas supply to the industry and energy sectors during the winter months (November to
       February) during which demand peaks up to 2017, when the first phase of this project was completed.
       There was however no curtailment during the winter months from 2018 to 2020 when the second
       phase was completed. The storage facility at Tuz Golu reduced curtailment by almost 5% of gas
       demand in 2020 - 2022.
      The ICR (paragraph 38) notes that there was curtailment during the 2020 - 2021 winter due to an
       isolated situation. Iran halted natural gas flow to Turkiye for ten days due to technical failures on a key
       pipeline. This contributed to the curtailment, since Iran accounts around 10% of Turkiye's gas
       imports. The ICR notes that the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (MENR) and BOTAS had
       implemented a policy of no interruptions to household customers, with curtailments confined to the
       industry and energy sectors.

Based on the information discussed above, this review concludes that the project substantially contributed to
increasing the reliability of gas supply in Turkiye.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the stability of gas supply.

Rationale
Theory of change. The increase in storage capacity due to the gas storage facility and related infrastructure
and the two compression stations were expected to enable BOTAS to inject and withdraw gas during periods
of low and high demand and thereby help to stabilize the supply of gas at the wholesale level. The links
between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.

Outputs.

The outputs described above were relevant to this objective.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above was expected to increase stability of gas supply ( with stability defined as the
ability to inject and withdraw during periods of low and high demand).



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)




      According to the curtailment data provided by BOTAS, while there was a steady increase in
       curtailment of gas supply during the winter months (November to February) up to 2017, there was no
       curtailment during the winter months from 2018 to 2022. As described above, the curtailment during
       2020 - 2021 was due to an unusual situation.

Based on the BOTAS curtailment data, this review concludes that the project substantially contributed to
increasing the stability of gas supply in Turkiye.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

To support BOTAS in strengthening its operations as a commercially managed corporation.

Rationale
Theory of change. The project did not directly support activities aimed at supporting BOTAS as a
commercially managed corporation. However, the targets specified in the financial covenants were intended
to contribute to the intended outcome. The theory of change explicitly assumes that the financial covenants
and the support provided by the Bank under a different technical assistance project would be expected to
help in BOTAS's commercial orientation.

Outputs.

      The annual financial audits provided by BOTAS were verified as specified in the AF Loan Agreement.
      When the project closed, BOTAS storage unit was operating as a separate business unit to ensure
       open access. Storage facilities could also be accessed by third party private operators as required by
       law.

Outcomes

No specific intervention was included either in the project investments or as conditions in the Loan
Agreement, directly supporting the third intended outcome. The main intervention for this was the technical
assistance provided by the Bank under a different project for the unbundling of BOTAS and gas trading
platform.

Given that the outcome cannot be attributed to the project activities, efficacy of this objective is modest.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)




                            OBJECTIVE 4
                            Objective
                            To support BOTAS in strengthening its operations as a financially stable corporation.

                            Rationale
                            Theory of change. The project did not have activities aimed at supporting BOTAS in strengthening its
                            operations as a financially stable corporation. The target specified in the original covenant was intended to
                            lead to the intended outcome. However, the self-financing covenant was dropped with the AF for the project.

                            Outcomes.

                                   The debt service coverage ratio when the project closed was 1.20 as targeted. According to the
                                    clarification provided by the team, this requirement was also included in the Loan Agreement.
                                   According to the clarifications provided by the team, BOTAS remained financially viable during the
                                    whole period of project implementation (with the Government providing targeted support through tariff
                                    increase and deferral of tax payments over time). The team also clarified that there were several tariff
                                    adjustments during implementation for transmission, distribution of gas and for storage of gas. The
                                    tariff for storage was to be a formula guaranteeing an acceptable rate of return to BOTAS for the
                                    storage services.

                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Of the four intended outcomes, three outcomes (increasing the reliability of gas, increasing the stability of gas
                            supply and financially viability of BOTAS were realized. However, there is no evidence that the project
                            interventions supported BOTAS in strengthening its operations as a commercially managed corporation).
                            Overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency



                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted for the activities of constructing the gas storage
facility and related infrastructure. These components accounted for 78% of the appraised cost and 85% of the
actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from: (i) seasonal storage benefits; (ii) cost avoided due
to the availability of seasonal storage; (iii) avoided costs of interruptions from peak shaving; and (iv) avoided
cost of unplanned interruptions. The Net Present Value (NPV) at closure was US$111.00 million, as compared
to the NPV of US$ 236.00 million at appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
15.1%, as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 17.3%. The reason for the difference between the ex-post EIRR
and the ex-ante EIRR was due to the cost escalation due to procurement delays and delay in the start of
revenue generation. The EIRR for the compressor station was not calculated at closure.

Administrative and operational shortcomings. A sequence of procurement setbacks, corruption
investigations and the debarment of the lowest evaluated bidder for the project components delayed the start of
construction by almost five years.

The cost of constructing the gas storage facility was significantly underestimated, with the actual cost almost
twice that of the appraisal estimate. This necessitated the AF for the project. The cost escalation was due to a
combination of factors including: (i) cost increase to BOTAS from transferring the geological risk allocation cost
to the contractor; (ii) cost of constructing a 42 km high-voltage transmission line that was added for the water
pumps needed for solution mining; and (iii) incremental cost of operating phase one while phase two was under
construction. The cost overruns were exacerbated by factors over which the project had no control such as
increased material costs (steel and copper), geological factors which rendered two of the twelve salt caverns to
be unusable and in the final years due to the restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

One shortcoming of the project was that it did not directly support any activities aimed at supporting BOTAS to
operate as a commercial corporation or strengthening its financial stability. Finally, despite the AF, the project
financed a reduced scope of project activities, with the originally envisioned Corum compression line eventually
financed by BOTAS.

In sum, efficiency is rated as modest in view of the administrative and operational shortcomings during project
execution.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      78.00
 Appraisal                                                 17.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      85.00
 ICR Estimate                                              15.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)




6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and the Bank strategy is substantial. Overall efficacy is
substantial, with three of the objectives (increasing the reliability and stability of gas supply, and financial
viability of BOTAS rated as substantial. Efficiency is modest, due to the administrative and operational
shortcomings during implementation. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is moderately
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. The technical risk to the project development outcome is moderate. The ICR (paragraph
101) notes that: (i) the storage and compressor capacity are likely to be available over the life of investments;
and (ii) BOTAS had good operational arrangements to operate and manage the assets created under the
project.

Macroeconomic risk. There is substantial macroeconomic risk, given the reluctance of the Government and
the regulatory authority to increase tariffs to cover the increased cost of gas in the past, as part of the
Government's policy to contain inflation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  There was no precedent on the technical aspects, as this was the first Bank-financed gas storage
  project. Therefore, the Bank prepared this project based on its executing large infrastructure projects, and
  from the experience of experts in gas storage. The lessons incorporated at design included: (i) focusing
  attention on examining feasibility; (ii) introducing monitoring equipment for monitoring seismic activity; (iii)
  attention on safeguards; and (iv) developing a regulatory framework in consultation with BOTAS and the
  Energy Market Regulatory Authority (EMRA). (PAD, pages 4 - 5). The analytical underpinnings of the
  project were sound and based on the Bank's Gas Sector Strategy Note, the Gas Distribution Strategy
  Note, the World Bank Development of Regional Energy Trade in Southeast Europe and the Economic
  and Regulatory Assessment of the Tuz Golu project.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including substantial risk associated with the
  macroeconomic constraints (The Government in the past had maintained consumer prices for natural gas
  when gas prices were rising. This had adversely impacted BOTAS profit margins).




                                                                                                         Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



  The implementation arrangements at appraisal were appropriate. BOTAS was in charge of designing the
  compressor stations as it had significant experience in operating compressors. A Project Management
  Unit (PMU) in BOTAS was in charge of project implementation (PAD, pages 8 - 9). The arrangements
  made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. The risks associated procurement delays were
  underestimated. These delays contributed to the significant cost overruns which necessitated the AF for
  the project. There was no geological risk assessment at preparation. This contributed to the infeasibility
  of two caverns. There were M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twenty five Implementation Status Results (ISR) reports were filed over the execution period of fifteen
 years, implying twice a year supervision missions. The continuity of leadership was more or less
 maintained, with five task team Leaders (TTLs) over the project lifetime of fifteen years. The team was
 proactive in working with the Government to help BOTAS in meeting the project's financial covenants and
 motivating BOTAS resolve the outstanding contract issues by project closure. The support provided by the
 supervision team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (CR, paragraph 76).

 There were moderate shortcomings during supervision. The team was not proactive in reducing the initial
 procurement delays and adjusting either the PDO or the results indicators to ensure their consistency.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is moderately satisfactory in view of the moderate shortcomings both at
 Quality-at-Entry and during supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 BOTAS was in charge of monitoring the performance indicators. The monitoring was to include reporting
 progress on the financial and operational efficiency of BOTAS with financial and operational ratios and
 separation of storage into a separate business unit.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



 However, there were several shortcomings in M&E design. While the project activities aimed at increasing
 the reliability and stability of gas supply, there was no precise definition of "stability" and "reliability'. While
 curtailment is a good proxy, there was neither a baseline nor targets for this indicator. Since the project did
 not directly support institutional strengthening activities, only compliance with the financial covenant was
 used for monitoring activities associated with commercial orientation and financial viability of BOTAS.
 Furthermore, even though an indicator for beneficiaries and their disaggregation by gender was added to
 the results framework with the AF for the project, household-level monitoring and gender analysis was not
 considered to be relevant, as gas storage facilities and compressor stations were assumed to not have
 direct operational impact on households, or men and women, per se.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 87) notes data for monitoring project performance was collected regularly and in a
  timely manner. The financial performance reporting was thorough and this helped the Bank in flagging
  issues (such as the loss noted in 2012, indicating BOTAS' non compliance with the financial covenants
  on the loan with regard to the self-financing and debt-coverage ratio). The ICR reports that there were
  some inaccuracies in the reporting of data with respect to the increase in compressor capacity.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for providing guidance during the project restructurings and monitoring
  performance at project closure.

  In sum, M&E is rated as modest in view of the shortcomings at M&E design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies: Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). (PAD, page 18). With the AF
   project, the safeguards on Natural Habitats was also triggered, as the brine discharge had some possibility
   of affecting the habitat of certain bird species (ICR, paragraph 91). The summary reporting below on
   compliance with Bank safeguards is based on the detailed discussion from pages 35 - 37 of the ICR.

   Environmental Assessment and Natural Habitats. BOTAS prepared and publicly-disclosed an
   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) on July 8, 2005, to address the environmental impacts. As the
   original EIA did not cover access roads and electricity transmission lines that were added with the
   AF, BOTAS prepared an addendum to the EIA to address these issues. The project's compliance with
   environmental safeguards was rated as moderately satisfactory, as there were minor unresolved

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



  environmental issues when the project closed. There were no issues with the safeguards on natural
  habitats.

  Involuntary Resettlement. As there was the possibility that landowners (public and private), could be
  affected by the project activities, BOTAS prepared and publicly-disclosed a Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) in
  2005. The 2005 LAP was revised in February 2013 to include the power transmission line and the access
  roads. There was economic but no displacement of Project Affected Peoples (PAPs) during implementation.
  Compensation was made to the affected PAP from 2012 - 2015, and to informal residents later. In
  December 2016, four informal households (consisting of 17 individuals) were notified about physical
  displacement due to safety concerns. The affected households were compensated by BOTAS in 2018.

  Safety of Dams. This safeguards was triggered, as the project was expected to use water from the Hirfali
  Dam. The State Hydraulic Works (DSI) - the agency in charge of operating dams, conducted a site visit to
  Hirfali and attested to the soundness of the dam structure. The report was validated by the Bank's dam
  safety expert. There were no issues with the safeguards on safety of dams during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of BOTAS's financial arrangements at
  appraisal . The assessment concluded that the financial arrangements were adequate (PAD, page
  15). The financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory during implementation (ICR,
  paragraph 97). There were some discrepancies in the project's Aide Memoire of 2021. The ICR notes that
  a time-bound action plan was agreed with the BOTAS and that compliance with the plan would be
  monitored regularly by the Bank. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the audits were
  unqualified and the final audit was submitted in October 2022, for the full financial year of 2021.

  Procurement. The Bank conducted an assessment of BOTAS procurement arrangements (PAD, page
  45). Although BOTAS had experience executing large infrastructure projects, it lacked experience with
  Bank's procurement guidelines. Therefore, the procurement was rated as high at appraisal. Mitigation
  measures incorporated at design, included training and monthly procurement meetings. BOTAS developed
  a procurement plan at appraisal that was acceptable to the Bank. There were significant procurement
  delays during implementation, due to the Government's investigations of several procurement packages.
  However, there were no actual procurement irregularities. A potential dispute, regarding two unusable
  wells was resolved by project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (paragraph 65) noted that there were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---


                                                                                              Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. It would be useful to consider gas storage as an integral part of the Bank's options, when
considering support to a country to ensure energy security. Given that gas demand patterns
from end-users typically coincide with gas supply profiles, a buffer capacity would aid in ensuring
reliable gas services. This is particularly so in countries like Turkiye which import significant amounts
of natural gas.

2. Adequate analysis of the related risks and appropriate mitigation measures are particularly
needed in ambitious, Bank-financed projects. This project, which was the first of its kind financed
by the Bank identified fiduciary risks as substantial. It did not however make an assessment of the
geological risks. This eventually led to the infeasibility of two caverns envisioned in the original
design.

3. The overall theory of change needs to be consistent with the activities financed under the
project. In this project, a PDO indicator ( "storage operates as a separate business unit to ensure
independence and open access"), was not attributable to any project interventions. The design
implicitly assumed that Bank interventions elsewhere would produce this intended outcome. The key
lesson is that such a presumption needs to be formalized, and this link needs to be explicitly
recognized as acceptable practice for evaluation purposes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written. The ICR candidly acknowledges the weak links between some project activities and the
chosen key outcome indicators in the theory of change. Given that some words in the PDO like "the reliability

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GAS SECT DEVT (P093765)



and stability of gas supply" were not properly defined, the ICR does a commendable job of identifying
appropriate proxy indicators. The analysis provided in the ICR is adequate for monitoring performance. The ICR
draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

One minor shortcoming of the ICR is its length. The main body of the text at about 35 pages is more than the
recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
