     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023059

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P150351                                     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56730,IDA-60730                         30-Jun-2020                                          102,138,631.32

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jun-2015                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                        102,643,103.96                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.4) dated October 26,
   2015, and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.6), the project objective is “to improve access to water and
   sanitation services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner.” The project objective is the
   same in the Financing Agreement signed on July 20, 2017 for an additional financing (AF).

   For the analysis of this project’s achievements, the project objective is parsed as follows:


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



        1. To improve access to water services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner; and
        2. To improve access to sanitation services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the loan agreement, the project consisted of three components.

   A. Water Supply. (Appraisal cost: US$48.90 million; revised cost at AF: US$77.64 million; actual cost:
   US$73.65 million)

   This component consisted of four subcomponents:

        1. Development of groundwater resources. This subcomponent was to finance the following
           activities to develop groundwater resources and water storage and transmission systems in Tassette
           and Mbour areas to increase the availability of water and improve the quality of water services in
           Dakar and Petite Cote areas: (a) drilling and equipping nine new boreholes with connection pipes to
           collect groundwater; (b) provision and installation of 46 km of feeder pipes, two booster pumping
           stations and construction of two ground storage tanks; (c) construction of two elevated storage
           tanks; and (d) provision of goods.
        2. Rehabilitation of urban water infrastructure in the urban center of Nguekhokh. This component
           was to finance the construction and rehabilitation of water infrastructure in Nguekhokh: (a) drilling
           and equipping two new boreholes; (b) construction of an elevated storage tank and 42 km of
           distribution pipes; (c) rehabilitation of standposts and approximately 1,500 household water
           connections; and (d) provision of goods.
        3. Access to safe water. Under this subcomponent, approximately 1,600 km of water distribution
           pipes and 20,000 household water connections were to be installed in selected urban centers.
        4. Technical studies. This subcomponent was to finance technical studies for water supply systems in
           Dakar and Petite Cote.

   The scope of this component expanded at the time of additional financing in June 2017 (see Revised
   Components below).

   B. Sanitation. (Appraisal cost: US$16.80 million; no change at AF; actual cost: US$19.46 million)



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



  This component consisted of four subcomponents:

      1. Sanitation facilities in the urban center of Joal-Fadiouth. This subcomponent was to finance
         three activities: (a) provision and installation of 44 km sanitation pipes, five sewage pumping
         stations, and 3,000 household sewerage service connections; (b) construction of a wastewater
         treatment plant and a sludge treatment plant; and (c) installation of 320 on-site household sanitation
         facilities and eight public toilets.
      2. Access to sewerage services. This subcomponent was to finance the expansion of sewers by 55
         km, construction of a pumping station, and installation of 3,015 sewerage service connections in
         Kaolack, Thies and Dakar, where sewerage network already existed.
      3. Supervision and communication: This subcomponent was to support project implementation
         through the supervision of the activities to be implemented under the first two subcomponents, and
         implementing communication, information, and education activities in Joal-Fadiouth.
      4. Technical studies: This subcomponent was to finance detailed technical studies for the
         development of a sanitation system for the Dakar East Zone.

  C. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management. (Appraisal cost: US$4.30 million; revised cost
  at AF: US$5.66; actual cost: US$5.81 million)

  This component consisted of three sub-components:

      1. Capacity strengthening in monitoring and knowledge of groundwater resources: (a)
         construction of piezometers; (b) provision and installation of remote monitoring equipment; and (c)
         hydrogeological studies for the Horst de Ndiass region.
      2. Reforms: Support in the reforms of the water and sanitation sector.
      3. Project implementation: Support to the project implementing entity in project coordination,
         supervision, financial management, communication and outreach, procurement, monitoring and
         evaluation, supervision of safeguards implementation.

  Revised Components

  Under the US$30 million additional financing signed in July 2017, the connection between the third phase of
  Guiers Lake Water Supply System (ALG3 – Adduction du Las du Guiers, which is a 250 km pipeline
  connecting the Guiers Lake to the Dakar area) and the transmission and distribution network serving the
  Mbour and Petite Cote were added to the first component. The construction of this connection was to supply
  water from ALG3 and eliminate water shortages in the Petite Cote area. This connection was found to be
  the only feasible solution as “seawater desalination in the area was technically not feasible, groundwater in
  the Petite Cote area was already overexploited and a transmission line between Tassette and Petite-Cote
  was financially not feasible” (ICR, p.10). Additionally, the third component’s scope was increased to include
  groundwater studies and trial explorations, and the Strategic Environmental Assessment for the Water
  Supply Master Plan for Dakar-Thiès-Petite Côte.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



   Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$70.00 million. At the additional financing
   in July 2017, the project cost estimate was revised up to US$100.00 million. On December 31, 2021, the
   project closed with a total cost of US$98.92 million.

   Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan was estimated at US$70.00 million. An additional financing of
   US$30.00 million was approved in July 2017. The project disbursed US$98.92 million. All project funds
   were accounted for at the time of project evaluation.

   Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated and none materialized by
   project closing.

   Additional Financing and Project Restructuring: An additional financing was approved in July 2017 and
   the project was restructured once in January 2021:

         Additional Financing (July 21, 2017): An additional financing of US$30.00 million was approved to
          finance the connection between ALG3 and the transmission and distribution network serving the
          area of Mbour and Petite Cote (see Revised Components above). To allow time for the completion
          of these additional infrastructure investments, the project closing date was extended by 18 months
          from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2021. In accordance with the increase in the project scope, the
          target values of three indicators were revised up: (a) Number of people with access to enhanced
          water supply services under the project from 330,000 to 560,000; (b) number of direct project
          beneficiaries from 590,000 to 820,000; and (c) length of feeder pipes constructed under the project
          from 45 km to 99.5 km.
         Project Restructuring (Level 2 - January 15, 2021): The disbursement categories were amended
          to allow the use of US$6 million credit savings from the additional financing to finance the drilling of
          additional boreholes and construction of sanitation pumping stations under the parent project.
          Additional boreholes were required because the number of negative boreholes observed was higher
          than expected. This had created a 1,586 cubic meter per day water production gap. These
          boreholes would go deeper to reach aquifers where water was available. Construction of a sanitation
          pumping station and a related 27.4 km of sewerage network was necessary to connect an additional
          620 households to the sewerage network to achieve the project’s targets.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 15, 2014. The Financing Agreement was signed on October 26,
   2015, and the loan became effective on January 18, 2016. An Additional Financing Agreement was signed
   on July 21, 2017. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in January 2020. The original project closing date
   was June 30, 2020. The project closing date was extended by 18 months to allow the completion of civil
   works under the additional financing, and the project closed on December 31, 2021.

   Reason not to undertake a split assessment of the project outcome: The target value of one key
   associated outcome indicator was revised up in line with the expansion of the scope of the project following
   the additional financing. As per Bank guidance (p.17), such an upward revision of outcome indicators does
   not require a split assessment of the project outcome. Hence, the project’s outcome will be assessed based
   on the revised target.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



Rationale
The project objectives are highly aligned with the World Bank’s current strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Senegal, FY20-FY24. The project sought to address the development
problem of spatial inequalities in access to water and sanitation because of insufficient water production
and lack of water supply and sewerage networks in the capital or Dakar and other urban centers. The
development problem fits under the “Objective 3.2 Ensure access to water and sanitation in the most
vulnerable areas” of the “Focus Are 3: Increase Resilience and Sustainability in the Context of Growing
Risks” of the CPF (pp.33-34). Since poor access to water and sanitation services disproportionately impacts
women and girls because of time loss in fetching water, health burdens, and safety concerns due to open
defecation, the project objectives are also aligned with the CPF’s cross-cutting objective of enhancing
gender equality (CPF, p.1). The project was to address these development problems by financing
infrastructure investments in groundwater production, related water transmission network, sewerage
network, and household and social connections to water and sewerage networks.

The project objectives are highly relevant to the country context. Despite a high access to water rate of 98
percent in urban areas and 85 percent in rural areas, water shortages are common in major urban areas of
Dakar and Petite Cote and access to improved sanitation is significantly low: 62 percent in urban areas and
39 percent in rural areas (ICR, p.5). Therefore, the project objectives were appropriately pitched for the
development status in the country and given the experience of the water and sanitation utilities in
implementing similar projects and the government’s commitment to improve access to water and sanitation
nationwide, the achievability of the project objectives was substantially high.

However, while the objective remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary response
to a development challenge in Senegal, a shortcoming here is the lack of clarity in the project objectives’
formulation around what outcomes would be achieved through improving the access to water and sanitation
services; in what ways was the project’s intervention expected to improve peoples’ lives? Focusing on
“improved access to water and sanitation services” alone is not outcome-focused and does not help in
understanding what development results were expected as a consequence of the project. Those expected
results are partially described in the PAD (pp.23-26) but are not reflected in the formulation of the project
objectives. These may be longer term targets but tracking them and identifying them is an important aspect
of a successful development operation.

The World Bank has been a long-term development partner of Senegal in the water and sanitation sectors
since 1995. The first World Bank-financed project was the Water Sector Project (1995), which was
designed to address bulk water shortages and the weak financial viability of the National Water Company of
Senegal (SONES - Société Nationale des Eaux du Sénégal). The second project was the Long-Term Water
Sector Project (2001). This project expanded water coverage to unserved and low-income neighborhoods
of Dakar and secondary cities. The third project—the Water and Sanitation Millennium Project (2010)—was
designed to address three challenges that emerged during late 2000s: (i) sustainable groundwater
management; (ii) weakening financial viability of SONES and National Sanitation Agency of Senegal
(ONAS - Office National de l’Assainissement du Sénégal); and low water and sanitation coverage in rural
areas. Although these projects were implemented as stand-alone projects, there was continuity in the
project series as findings in the previous ones had led to the design and implementation of the following
projects. Therefore, the project under this review is a continuation of the project series in water and
sanitation sector, but as discussed in the previous paragraph, the project objectives are not sufficiently




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



               challenging to reflect the World Bank’s more than two-decade long engagement in Senegal and the water
               and sanitation sectors.

               Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to water services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             The project’s inputs—IDA credits—were to be used to finance the construction of boreholes, booster pumping
                             stations, ground and elevated water storage tanks, water collection and feeder pipes in Tassette and Mbour
                             areas and the construction and/or rehabilitation of boreholes, one elevated storage tank, distribution pipes,
                             standposts and household connections in Nguekhokh area. The project was also to finance the construction
                             of water distribution pipes and social connections in the selected urban centers of Diourbel, Mabour and
                             Richard Toll. The expected outputs of these activities were increased water production and transmission
                             capacity in Tasette, Mbour and Nguekhokh areas, and increased number of standposts and household
                             connections in Nguekhokh and other three selected urban centers. The outputs achieved in the Tasette and
                             Mbour areas would have been expected to lead to the project outcome of addressing water shortages in
                             Dakar-Petite Cote and Mbour. The outcomes expected from the outputs achieved in Nguekhokh and other
                             three selected urban centers would have been improved water quality and increased access to water. The
                             causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved through physical
                             investments could be attributed to the project’s intervention. But the expected outcomes were closer to output
                             level in the results chain, and the project’s impacts on service delivery aspects—i.e., availability, reliability,
                             quality, and affordability—and socio-economic welfare of the beneficiaries were not captured by the theory of
                             change, such as improved health and the time saved because of the elimination of the requirement to fetch
                             water that could be used for money earning activities.

                             The phrase “in a financially sustainable manner” in the project formulation was not defined. This review
                             interprets this phrase as the “provision of water services in a cost-efficient way” that would ensure sufficient
                             maintenance of the water service system resulting in sustained reliability and quality of water supply. The
                             technical assistance activities defined in the third component, i.e., assistance to the government in
                             formulating the next round of urban water and sanitation sector reforms and updating the performance
                             contract for water services, were expected to result in the identification of next steps in the sector reform and
                             lowering the risks related to the operation of the water services under the updated performance contract for

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



the private operator. Assuming that lowered contractual risks would lead to a lower fee demanded by the
private operator, this would lower the water cost and improve the affordability of water while increasing the
amount of money available for additional investments and sufficient maintenance of the water network. The
causal pathways are somehow valid, but not so direct. The project design did not include activities that would
directly lead to an improvement in the financial viability of the water utility, nor the sustainability of water
services. The achievement of the expected outcome could be partly attributed to the project’s intervention
since technical capacity of the utility and/or the operator in maintaining the water system, and financial
viability of the utility to continue with investments to ensure water availability to meet increasing demand,
were not directly covered under the project. Although the project was to support the sector reform through
tariff studies and the conclusion of the performance contract with a private operator, the financial viability of
the utility dependent on the government’s decision to raise the tariffs.

Overall, the project’s ToC for Objective 1 was robust regarding the achievement of the project objective in
improving access to water, but there were gaps as to how water services would be provided “in a financially
efficient manner.”

Outputs

      Additional water production capacity constructed under the project. The target was to construct
         35,500 cubic meter of additional water production capacity. The achievement at 35,243 cubic meter
         was slightly lower than the target value.
        Water storage capacity constructed under the project. The achievement at 25,400 cubic meter
         was higher than the target of 24,600 cubic meter.
        Length of feeder pipes constructed under the project. The project financed the construction of 117
         km of feeder pipes. The target was 99.50 km revised at the time of additional financing.
        New piped household water connections that are resulting from the project intervention. The
         achievement was 20,000 household connections as targeted.
        A consultancy firm hired under the project advised the government on the Second Generation (2G)
         sector reform, which included a water tariff study and support to the bidding process of a performance
         contract with a private operator. These activities were not captured by the results framework.
        A total of six piezometers and remote monitoring equipment were installed to strengthen groundwater
         monitoring and improve knowledge of groundwater resources of the Directorate of Water Resources
         Management and Planning (DGPRE - Direction de la Gestion et de la Planification des Ressources en
         Eau). These activities were not captured by the results framework.

Outcomes

      Number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water resources under the
       projection. The target was to connect 180,000 people to piped water. It was verified that on average
       nine people would benefit from each household connection. The project financed 20,000 household
       connections; therefore, the total number of people benefiting from piped water was calculated at
       180,000.
      Number of people with access to enhanced water supply services under the project. This
       indicator measures the cumulative number of people in urban areas currently having access to water
       services who received enhanced water from production facilities constructed under the project. It was
       calculated by dividing the product of additional water produced from project financed facilities (cubic
       meter per day) and network efficiency of 80 percent by the product of peak factor of 1.3 and 65 liter

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



       per capita per day, which is average daily consumption per capita. In line with the additional water
       capacity constructed under the project, the number of people with access to enhanced water supply
       services increased by 562,000, slightly higher than the target of 560,000, which was revised up from
       330,000 at the time of additional financing.
      Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflected their needs (percentage). A satisfaction
       survey was conducted at project closing. Around 90 percent of the participants responded that the
       project investments reflected their needs. A similar survey conducted during Mid-Term Review
       resulted in a satisfaction rate of 81.70 percent. The target was 80.0 percent. The survey assessed the
       impact of the project investments both in water supply and sanitation services, rather than assessing
       the beneficiaries’ satisfaction with water services before and after project investments. Therefore,
       there was no baseline defined at appraisal.
      Financial equilibrium of the urban water supply subsector. The target of this indicator was defined
       as SONES having a cash balance equal or higher than zero (The definition of cash balance is
       “previous year’s cash plus net cash flow operations minus debt service and variation of working capital
       requirements). According to SONES’ financial reporting, the water utility maintained financial
       equilibrium through to project closing. The achievement of debt service coverage ratio above the
       target of 1.1 throughout project implementation is evidence of SONES’ sustained financial equilibrium.
       In their email dated October 28, 2002, the project team reported that SONES used the financial model
       developed under a previous World Bank-financed project and the tariff study prepared under this
       project “to engage the discussions with the Government on the necessity to raise tariffs to improve the
       coverage debt ratio. This model was also used by SONES to negotiate the conditions of financing of
       future investments.” The project team also maintained a policy dialogue with the government
       regarding tariff adjustments. As a result, tariffs were increased in 2015 and 2020 helping SONES and
       the sanitation utility ONAS maintain their financial equilibrium.

The project was highly successful in achieving the targets related to the construction of physical water
production, transmission, and distribution networks. The project’s intervention resulted in an improvement in
access to water. However, the information is insufficient regarding whether the project addressed the water
shortages in Dakar, Petite Cote and Mbour through the increase in water production capacity and the
construction of the related storage and transmission network; there is no information in the ICR regarding the
duration of water service availability per day in these urban areas. The information is also insufficient to
assess the reliability, quality, and affordability of water service in the project areas; the indicators are
inadequate to capture the project’s impact on water service delivery aspects. On the other hand, the
beneficiary satisfaction rate of 90 percent can be used as a proxy for the improvement in water services
beyond having simple access to water.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to sanitation services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)




Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The project’s inputs—IDA credits—were to be used to finance the construction of sanitation facilities in Joal-
Fadiouth including extension of the sewerage network, construction of sewage pumping stations, and
installation of household and social connections to the sewerage system in Joal-Fadiouth, Diourbel, Mbour,
and Richard Tool. Additionally, the project was to finance the construction of a wastewater treatment plant
and a sludge treatment plant, and installation of on-site household sanitation facilities in Joal-Fadiouth. The
project’s outputs of improved sewerage networks in these towns would result in more people having access
to modern sanitation facilities. The PAD (p.23) states that Joal-Fadiouth was selected as a priority city for the
establishment of a sewerage system because of severe sanitation and environmental problems in the city
stemming from its location on the coast compounded by a high-water table and the population density. The
establishment of a functioning sewerage system would have been expected to lead to the project outcomes of
addressing those severe sanitation and environmental problems, but the PAD did not identify those problems,
nor were they captured by the project’s results framework. In general, the increase in access to modern
sanitation facilities with adequate wastewater and sludge treatment capacities should lead to outcomes such
as improvement in health and environment due to decrease in dumping of wastewater to the environment.
Furthermore, establishment of on-site sanitation facilities should be expected to decrease open defecation
and increase the security of especially women and girls. However, the outcome expected from project’s
intervention as formulated in the project objective, i.e., improved access to sanitation services, was closer to
output level in the results chain, and the project’s impact on socio-economic welfare of the beneficiaries was
not captured by the theory of change, such as improved health, decreased open defecation, and increased
security. Furthermore, the project’s theory of change did not address the sustainability of sludge removal and
treatment services. The PAD does not include any information on how sludge from on-site sanitation facilities
would be removed and treated in the sludge treatment facility in Joal-Fadiouth and the sustainability of this
process. Furthermore, like in the first objective, “in a financially sustainable manner” in the project formulation
was not defined. This review interprets this phrase as the “provision of sanitation services in a cost-efficient
way” that would ensure sufficient maintenance of the sewerage system resulting in sustained reliability of
sanitation services. The project design did not include any activity that would directly lead to an improvement
in the financial viability of the sewerage utility, nor the sustainability of sanitation services. The project
financed the preparation of a tariff study but the government decides on the tariff levels. While an indicator
was included in the results framework capturing the coverage of cash operating expenditures of sewerage
activities of the utility, the achievement of this indicator could not be fully attributed to the project’s activities.
Overall, the project’s theory of change for Objective 2 was sound regarding the achievement of the project
objective in improving access to sanitation services, albeit the expected results being closer to the output
level, but there were gaps as to how the project contributed to the provision of sanitation services “in a
financially efficient manner.”

Outputs

      Length of sewers constructed under the project. The project financed the construction of 100 km
        of sewers as targeted.
      New household sewer connections constructed under the project. The project financed the
       connection of 6,000 households to the sewerage network as targeted.
      On-site sanitation facilities constructed under the project. The project financed the construction of
       320 on-site sanitation facilities as targeted.



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



                            Outcomes

                                  People provided with access to "improved sanitation facilities” under the project. It was verified
                                   that 13 people benefited from one sewerage connection. This number is higher than the number of
                                   people (9) benefitting from each water connection, because there are multiple water connections per
                                   housing unit while there is generally only one sanitation facility in the same unit. The achievement
                                   reported in the ICR was 83,694 people against the target of 80,000. As was the case for the indicator
                                   that measured the number of people with access to improved water, this indicator simply counts the
                                   total number of sewerage connections and on-site sanitation facilities in a different way; hence, this
                                   indicator is an output indicator rather than an outcome indicator.
                                  Coverage of cash operating expenditures of sewerage activities of ONAS. This indicator was
                                   defined as the ratio of ONAS’ annual revenues from sewerage surcharges to its annual cash operating
                                   expenditures. This was included in the financing agreement as a covenant. Based on the financial
                                   reporting of ONAS, this ratio was 0.69 (or 69 percent) at appraisal. The target was to increase the
                                   ratio to 90 percent. The achievement at project closing in December 2021 was 96 percent. However,
                                   in September 2020, 15 months before project closing, this ratio was at 78 percent, and had a
                                   fluctuating pattern rather than a linear increase throughout project implementation. The significant
                                   jump in the ratio within the last year of project implementation was mostly due to the government’s
                                   decision in August 2020 to increase the sanitation fees for public sector from US$0.50 to US$1.27.
                                   ONAS used the project-financed tariff study and financial model to negotiate with the government for a
                                   tariff increase. The World Bank’s project team had a continuous policy dialogue with the government
                                   for tariff adjustments. These had contributed to the improvement in the financial viability of ONAS, but
                                   its sustainability depends on government’s regular adjustment of tariffs.

                            The project was highly successful in increasing the number of people with access to improved sanitation
                            services through the construction and expansion of sewerage network and construction of on-site household
                            sanitation facilities. However, the evidence is insufficient what development outcomes were achieved as a
                            result of these outputs such as improved health or reduction in open defecation. Additionally, the evidence is
                            insufficient to assess whether the sanitation utility has financial and technical capacity to sustain sanitation
                            services; ONAS’ financial viability depends on the government’s decision on adjusting tariffs and the utility’s
                            financial equilibrium had not been stable through to project closing. The project did not finance any activity to
                            strengthen the technical capacity of the utility in O&M of the sanitation network nor the sustainability of sludge
                            removal and treatment processes. But as was the case for Objective 1, the beneficiary satisfaction rate of 90
                            percent, which included both water and sanitation services, can be used as a proxy for the improvement in
                            sanitation services.

                            Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve access to sanitation services in
                            selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The project was highly successful in increasing access to both water and sanitation services. However, the
  theory of change for both objectives had gaps in how these services would be provided in financially manner.
  Additionally, the project’s result framework did not capture the project’s impact on service delivery aspects of
  availability, reliability, quality, and affordability. The project supported the sector reform through a tariff study
  and facilitating the preparation of tender documents for the performance contract to be signed with a private
  operator. These contributed to the government’s decision to adjust tariffs to cost-recovery level and improved
  the financial viability of both utilities. Furthermore, the beneficiary surveys show that the satisfaction rate with
  water and sanitation services is 90 percent. In light of these achievements, the project’s efficacy in achieving
  each project objective is rated Substantial; hence, overall efficacy is also rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

A “with project” and “without project” economic analysis was conducted at appraisal, which consisted of a cost-
benefit analysis of the water supply component, and an assessment of the cost-effectiveness of the sanitation
component (PAD, p.47). The assumptions used in the cost-benefit analysis were relevant. The consumer
surplus was calculated as the multiplication of the increase in water consumption by the difference of water price
before and after the project. The costs consisted of the investment costs of the water production and supply
network that was to be built and/or rehabilitated under the project and the incremental operation and
maintenance costs such as electricity consumption, chlorination, and 0.5 per cent of the investment cost for
maintenance. However, the benefits stemming from the elimination of time spent for water fetching and
reduction in health costs were not included in the cost-benefit analysis; therefore, the analysis was rather
conservative. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) calculated for the water component at appraisal was
14.4 percent, and the net present value (NPV) was US$14.6 million at a discount rate of 10 percent for a 30-
year period. A similar analysis was conducted at the time of the Additional Financing, which resulted in an EIRR
of 15.2 percent and an NPV of US$19.2 million.

For the sanitation related project investments, a cost-effectiveness analysis was conducted to compare
alternative sanitation services, i.e., sewerage services and on-site sanitation (PAD, p.50). Because of the high-
water table in most of Joal-Fadiouth that forbids infiltration and requires frequent emptying of traditional latrines,
sewerage connection stood out as the most cost-effective solutions for households that were closer to the sea
and on-site facilities for households located in areas with a lower water table. For sanitation investments in other
selected urban towns, the per capita cost of a sewerage connection was calculated at US$159 and that of an
on-site sanitation at US$141. The cost of a sewerage connection in Joal-Fadiouth was estimated at US$232, but
this was justified because of the technical design criteria and substantial savings in frequent pit emptying costs
for the beneficiaries in that town.



                                                                                                         Page 11 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



At project closing, an economic analysis was conducted using a methodology similar to the that used at
appraisal. In addition to the benefits identified at the time of appraisal, economic benefits associated with the
time-avoided by women and girls for fetching water were included in the analysis. Costs were updated with
actual project costs. The calculations resulted in an EIRR of 12.7 percent and an NPV of US$8.47 million. The
reasons for lower EIRR and NPV values, despite inclusion of the time-avoided for fetching water as a benefit,
were higher actual costs of the Blaise Diagne International Airport (AIBD - Aéroport International Blaise Diagne)-
Mbour feeder financed under the project and the higher cost of ALG3-AIBD pipeline financed by the African
Development Bank. Additionally, the ICR (p.15) states that “the estimate of savings on works (54%) at the time
of the Additional Financing was too optimistic.” Because of the inclusion of the time avoided for fetching water as
a benefit, the post-project completion analysis was less conservative compared to the analysis at appraisal and
additional financing. If this benefit, which is valued at the hourly minimum wage of 334 Senegal currency per
hour were excluded, the EIRR would be lower.

For the sanitation investments, a cost-effectiveness analysis was conducted at project closing. The per capita
investment cost of sewerage was US$151, which was US$9 cheaper than the estimate at appraisal.
Additionally, the economic benefits of the sanitation investments were estimated at US$6.7 per person per year
for emptying pits, and US$8 per person per year reduction in health costs—based on a rough estimate of the
cost of diarrheal diseases. These economic benefits were not estimated at appraisal or at the time of additional
financing. The ICR does not provide information about the per capita cost of sewerage investments in Joal-
Fadiouth.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, the financial impact of the project was estimated as the incremental revenue to be generated by
the water supply. These incremental revenues consisted of water sales as a result of the increased water
production and new water connections to be financed under the project. As in the economic analysis, the
incremental costs consisted of the investment costs and the operation and maintenance costs of the water
supply network. The assumptions used in the analysis were adequate to measure the financial impact of the
project. The analysis resulted in a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 8.3 percent. At the time of additional
financing, the FIRR was estimated at 11.4 percent because it was estimated that savings on works would be 54
percent. Using the same methodology, a financial analysis was conducted after project closing with actual
numbers and the FIRR was estimated at 10.3 percent. The decrease in the FIRR is attributable to the increase
in the project costs.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

There was continuity in the project team; task team leaders were selected from within the project team. The
credit commitment rate was maximized within the first year of project implementation. This was mostly because
of the preparation of the technical, environmental, and social studies related to the project activities financed
during preparation using the residual funds from the previous IDA-financed Water and Sanitation Millennium
Program (PEPAM - Programme d’Eau Potable et d’Assainissement du Millénaire). Including the savings from
the additional financing, all project funds were disbursed by project closing. The ICR does not report any issues
with procurement or implementation of safeguard policies that had an adverse impact on project implementation.
All project activities were completed on time. Project closing time extension of 18 months was necessary
because of time required to complete the project activities to be financed by the additional financing. The
restrictions imposed because of the onset of COVID-19 pandemic had a significant adverse impact on project




                                                                                                        Page 12 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



implementation after which disbursement slowed down. But a modified work program was implemented that
resulted in the completion of project activities without delay.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         71.00
 Appraisal                                                    14.40
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         78.90
 ICR Estimate                                                 12.70
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While the project objective was output-oriented rather than outcome-oriented and not sufficiently challenging
given the World Bank’s long-term engagement in Senegal and the water and sanitation sectors, the project
objectives were highly aligned with the World Bank strategy and the country context. The relevance of
objectives is rated Substantial. The project’s efficacy in achieving both project objectives is rated Substantial, so
is the project’s efficiency. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial viability of the utilities: SONES and ONAS revenues depend on the tariff level decided by the
government. Two tariff increases during project implementation sustained SONES’ financial equilibrium, but
ONAS had difficulties in maintaining a financial equilibrium. If tariffs are not regularly revisited and adjusted,
the utilities’ financial viability might worsen resulting in insufficient maintenance of the water and sewerage
networks. Furthermore, public institutions’ non-payment of sanitation bills poses a risk to the financial viability
of ONAS.

Availability of water: As a result of the boreholes constructed and the AGL3 connection established under
the project, the risk of insufficient water production in the short and medium-terms is low. However, because

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



of continuously increasing water demand and adverse effects of climate change, water production my fall
short of meeting demand in the long-term. To avoid such a situation, in addition to further investments in
water production, water conservation measures should be implemented along with a revision of the existing
tariff block structure which charges higher prices for higher water consumption amounts.

Technical capacity: Both SONES and ONAS have technical capacity to operate and maintain the water and
sewerage networks, respectively. The 15-year performance contract with a private operator will improve
SONES’ supervision of the water supply network. Therefore, the technical risk to adequate maintenance of
the water and sewerage networks is low. However, as explained in the first entry above, a worsening of the
financial viability of the utilities may result in insufficient maintenance of these networks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Addressing water shortages while increasing access to water and sanitation services was of high
  strategic relevance for Senegal to meet growing water demand in the Dakar region, to supply improved
  water to a higher number of people and decrease the significant gap between access to water and
  sanitation services outside of the Dakar region. The PAD (pp.9-10) lists four lessons learned but it is not
  clear how these lessons are reflected in the project design—accountability to build and maintain trust with
  customers, subsidizing access rather than subsidizing tariffs, attention to wastewater disposal because of
  increased access to water, and sharing of the lessons from the Brazilian experience on metropolitan and
  integrate urban management with the Senegalese authorities. The project had a simple and
  straightforward design, which mostly consisted of water and sewerage infrastructure investments and
  household and social connections. Technical, fiduciary, and safeguards aspects of the project were
  adequate. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was allowed to use residual funds from the IDA-financed
  PEPAM Project for the preparation of tender documents of the infrastructure investments to be
  implemented; hence, the project preparation was advanced when the loan became effective. This
  facilitated efficient use of project funds early in project implementation. The project replicated the
  implementation arrangements of previous IDA-financed projects in the sector—SONES implementing the
  water component, ONAS the sanitation component, and the overall coordination by PCU. SONES and
  ONAS were assessed to have sufficient project implementation capacity and experienced specialists in
  procurement, contract management, and financial management. However, the identification of risks and
  their mitigation measures was not adequate. The PAD did not include a Systematic Operations Risk
  Rating Tool in an Annex. Risks related to financial management and procurement were discussed under
  their relevant sections. The risk related to the ineffective adoption and implementation of the sector
  reform was identified as the residual risk. The technical assistance support to be given under the project
  and close political dialogue with the authorities were to mitigate this risk. The M&E system was adequate
  to capture the results of the infrastructure investments but had shortcomings in capturing the project’s
  impact on service delivery aspects and socio-economic welfare of project beneficiaries. Furthermore, the
  project’s focus on gender was superficial consisting of some general comments about the impact of
  improved access to water and sanitation services on women and girls’ lives without any attempt to
  capture these impacts systematically under the project




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



  Overall, the Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings in addressing service delivery
  and gender aspects.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve implementation support missions were held until the onset of COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020
 after which project implementation was supervised through phone calls and emails. Project task team
 leaders and other specialists were based in Senegal or Cote d’Ivoire. The presence of the project team in
 the region facilitated frequent contacts with the Senegalese counterparts even during the pandemic. The
 ICR (p.21) reports that Management Letters, Aide Memoirs, and Implementation Status and Results
 Reports were candid in reporting project’s performance. The project team was proactive in processing an
 additional financing to address the emerging water shortages in the Petite Cote and Mbour areas that
 contributed to the achievement of the project objectives. In addition to the project’s support to a tariff study
 and preparation of bidding documents for a performance contract, the project team maintained a close
 policy dialogue with the Senegalese authorities that resulted in the adjustment of the water and sanitation
 tariffs twice during project implementation and the conclusion of the performance contract with a private
 operator. The project team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project was adequate.
 The project closed with all funds accounted for and without any outstanding safeguards issue. The project
 team’s overall focus on the development impacts of the project—measured as increased access to water
 and sanitation service—was adequate, but there were shortcomings in the supervision of the project’s
 impact on water and sanitation services delivery, i.e., availability, reliability, quality, and affordability, and
 the socio-economic welfare of the beneficiaries, such as improved health and time-saved because of the
 elimination of water fetching, regarding especially women and girls.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings in the supervision of the
 project development impact on service delivery and socio-economic welfare of the beneficiaries.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change documenting how the key activities and outputs would lead to the expected
 outcomes of improved access to water and sanitation services in selected urban areas was sound (PAD,
 pp.28). However, there were gaps in the theory of change about how the project would contribute to the

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



 delivery of these services in a “financially sustainable manner.” The formulation of the project objective was
 simple but inadequate to capture the project’s development impact; the project objectives did not include
 any service delivery outcomes, such as reliability or quality of these services, nor was the sustainability of
 these services adequately defined. The project objective indicators were adequate to encompass the
 project’s achievement in improved access to water and sanitation services, but these indicators were all at
 the output level because of how the project objective was formulated. The results framework did not include
 any indicator measuring improvements in water and sanitation services delivery or other socio-economic
 outcomes expected from increased access to water and sanitation services. The indicators measuring the
 financial viability of the utilities were insufficient to capture whether the water and sanitation services would
 be delivered in a financially sustainable manner. Because of the simple design of the project, the
 intermediate results indicators were adequate to capture the project’s outputs in water and sanitation
 infrastructure investments; they were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and timebound. The data
 collection methods and analysis were appropriate for the investment activities. Since the project objective
 was to increase access to water and sanitation services, baselines were not relevant. M&E design and
 arrangements were sufficient; the utilities and the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) were responsible for
 data gathering from national databases and progress reports prepared by supervising engineers who were
 to be hired under the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PCU, SONES, and ONAS were responsible for M&E. The indicators included in the results
  framework were sufficiently measured and regularly reported. The M&E data were reliable and good
  quality; they were collected from progress reports and national databases, and the project’s institutional
  stakeholders had access to M&E data through a web-based interface. M&E implementation benefited
  from a comprehensive data system developed under previous World Bank-financed projects; hence,
  M&E functions and process are highly likely to be sustained after project closing. In addition to data
  collection, beneficiary surveys were conducted at the time of the Mid-Term review and project closing.
  However, the M&E design was not revised to include indicators to capture the project’s impact on the
  quality, reliability, sustainability, and affordability of water and sanitation services or the socio-economic
  welfare of project beneficiaries. The shortcoming in the M&E design to capture the delivery of services in
  a financial sustainable manner was not addressed, either.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were accessible through a web-based interface and communicated to project stakeholders
  through regular reports. An additional financing was approved based on the M&E findings related to the
  insufficient availability of water for Dakar and Petite Cote regions and the project was restructured to
  allow credit savings to drill more boreholes as M&E findings showed that number of negative holes was
  higher than expected. The M&E data were adequately used to provide evidence of the project’s results;
  however, they were closer to output level rather than outcome level. For example, the number of people
  with access to water, a project outcome, is simply a product of the number of household connections—a
  project output—and the estimated average number of people living in a household. Therefore, M&E data
  were mostly used to provide evidence for the project’s outputs, which was a result of the output-oriented
  formulation of the project objective.



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)




  Overall, the M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievement of the
  project objectives to increase access to water and sanitation service but there were moderate
  shortcomings in assessing the delivery of these services in a financially sustainable manner.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
   project site specific moderate negative impacts of project activities. An Economic and Social management
   Framework (ESMF), and the Environmental Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the Joal-Fadiouth
   sanitation works were prepared, consulted and disclosed in Senegal in March 2015 and on the World
   Bank’s InfoShop in April 2015. The ESMF was to be used a screening mechanism for the identification of
   other investment projects whose sites were not known at the time of appraisal. Upon the identification of
   those project sites during project implementation, ESIAs and Environmental and Social Management Plans
   were prepared for those sites. SONES and ONAS assigned specialists for the supervision of safeguard
   compliance. Excluding the project site of Tassette pumping station, all project sites had Contractor
   Environmental and Social management Plans, and Occupational Health and Safety plans. During project
   implementation on incident and two accidents were reported in 2020 that were addressed according to the
   plans in place. The ICR does not report any issues related to compliance with the environmental safeguard
   policy.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The PAD does not provide information why this safeguard policy was
   triggered. According to the Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet at Appraisal Stage, Report No: ISDSA12877,
   the outlet of the wastewater treatment plant in Joal-Fadiouth would pass through a marine protected area;
   therefore, this safeguard policy was triggered. The project activities would not result in a conversion or
   degradation of this natural habitat, and the treated wastewater discharge point would be beyond the marine
   protected area. The ICR does not report the implementation of this safeguard policy.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The PAD does not provide information why this safeguard
   policy was triggered. According to the Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet at Appraisal Stage, Report No:
   ISDSA12877, the project interventions areas had been inhabited for centuries and it was possible to
   encounter underground artifacts during construction. Therefore, this safeguard policy was triggered, and a
   chance find procedure was included in the ESMF. The ICR does not report any such artifacts encountered
   during project implementation.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): This safeguard policy was triggered because of the potential
  requirement of land acquisition for water production and rights of way for the water distribution networks. A
  Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed in Senegal and on the World Bank’s InfoShop
  at the same time of the disclosure of the EMSF. Project specific Resettlement Action Plans were prepared
  during project implementation, but they were initially based on the requirements of the national legislation,
  which did not fully comply with the World Bank’s safeguard requirements. Following an audit, necessary
  measures were taken to make the implementation of this fully compliant with the World Bank safeguard
  policy requirements, including the establishment of a grievance mechanism. The ICR does not report what
  those shortcomings were and how they were addressed. The Implementation Status and Results Report
  No:6 states that, as of June 2017, a Conciliation Commission of Mediation Committees had not been put in
  place in Tassette, and resettlement measures had been implemented. Additionally, ONAS was late in hiring
  a resettlement specialist. All these shortcomings in the implementation of this safeguard policy were
  addressed at the time of the project team’s following supervision mission in November 2018.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project benefited from the financial management arrangements set up in the previous IDA-financed
  PEPAM Project. The project coordination unit (PCU) of PEPAM Project was responsible for the financial
  management of the project. The PCU’s capacity was assessed to be sufficient for financial management.
  Since specific financial management activities were to be implemented by ONSA and SONES, the Project
  Implementation Manual was updated accordingly to take into account those activities. Project interim
  financial reports were submitted according to the schedule with occasional delays. The project team
  reported that the project’s financial statements were audited by an independent auditor with unqualified
  opinion. However, the audit reports included recommendations to improve the internal control
  arrangements. With the support of the World Bank specialists, the internal control arrangements were
  improved before project closing. There were also significant delays in payments to the contractors, which
  was addressed through an action plan. The ICR does not report any issues of corruption or misuse of
  funds associated with the project. At the time of project evaluation, all IDA funds were accounted for.

  Procurement

  Procurement was implemented in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement policies and procedures.
  Actual procurement and disbursement closely matched the procurement planning and disbursement
  estimated at the time of appraisal because of the advanced preparation of the technical, environmental,
  social and bidding documents of some investment activities. This allowed the start of bidding process
  during appraisal (ICR, p.18). The ICR does not report any issues with procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)




d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Because of insufficient evidence
                                                                                    on improvements in availability,
                                                                                    reliability, quality, and
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory                affordability of water and
                                                                                    sanitation services and the
                                                                                    sustainability of sanitation
                                                                                    services.
                                                                                    Because of minor shortcomings
                                                                                    in service delivery and gender
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory
                                                                                    aspects both at entry and during
                                                                                    project implementation.
                                                                                    Because of moderate
                                                                                    shortcomings in capturing
                                                                                    results of the technical
                                                                                    assistance activities on delivery
                                                                                    of water and sanitation services
Quality of M&E                   High                   Substantial
                                                                                    in a financially sustainable
                                                                                    manner and the project’s impact
                                                                                    on service delivery aspects of
                                                                                    availability, reliability, quality,
                                                                                    and affordability.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn two lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Close policy dialogue with the authorities can be critical in achieving project objectives. The
project team were located in Senegal and Cote d’Ivoire. In addition to the 12 formal supervision
missions, this proximity allowed frequent dialogue with the Senegalese authorities to solve issues
related to project implementation and resulted in a productive dialogue about water and sanitation
services sector reforms. As a result, the government adjusted tariffs twice during project
implementation that had a direct impact on improving the financial viability of the utilities in the short
and medium-terms and conclusion of a performance agreement with a private operator.

Without a robust results framework, outcomes in water and sanitation service delivery
aspects cannot be adequately captured. The project’s results framework was designed to capture

                                                                                                       Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)



the increases in the number of water and sewerage connections. These indicators were sufficient to
capture the results expected from the project’s intervention as formulated in the project objectives.
However, water and sanitation projects require a higher level of achievement that should encompass
improvements in service delivery aspects, such as availability, reliability, quality, and affordability;
especially so, in countries with low access rates like Senegal. The project’s framework lacked these
indicators. This can be extended to the coverage of project’s impact on socio-economic welfare of
the project beneficiaries, with a special focus on women and girls.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive view of the project. The evidence is appropriately referenced for the
achievement of water and sewerage connections and increase in water production increase, but there are gaps
in referencing evidence to the delivery of services in a financially sustainable manner. While the narrative about
the project’s performance was internally consistent, the analysis was restricted to the achievement of target
values and the project’s impact on service delivery aspects were ignored. Therefore, the ICR’s narrative was
more output focused rather than outcome. It was also more descriptive rather than evaluative. The parsing of
the project objective was complex making it unclear with respect to how the project’s achievements were
assessed. The report was broadly in line with the Bank guidance. The sections on Quality at Entry, Safeguards,
Fiduciary Compliance, and M&E Quality could have benefited from a much more detailed discussion in
accordance with the Bank guidance. Entries in the Lessons and Recommendations section respond to the
experiences gained during project implementation but they are more in the form of findings rather than lessons.
Some sections of the report were unnecessarily long, such as the section on sector context.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
FY16-SN Urban Water and Sanitation Proje (P150351)




                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
