     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA CAT DDO (P122738)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022998

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P122738                                  PA CAT DDO

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Panama                                   Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-80870                               30-Nov-2012                                          66,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Oct-2011                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          66,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           66,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       66,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Fernando Manibog            Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The development objective of this Development Policy Loan (DPL) operation as stated in the Program
Document (PD, page iv) was: "to enhance the Government of Panama's capacity to implement its
disaster risk management (DRM) program for natural disasters".



                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA CAT DDO (P122738)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The development objectives were to be achieved through reforms in one pillar/policy area "strengthening of
the policy and institutional frameworks for DRM".


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. An IBRD loan of US$66.00 million financed this single-tranche DPL with a Catastrophe Deferred
Drawdown Operation (CAT-DDO). The PD (page 3) notes that the standard drawdown period for a DPL with a
CAT DDO is three years, that is renewable four times for a total of fifteen years. The loan was fully disbursed.

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on October 18, 2011, and it became effective on March 7, 2012. The
operation was scheduled to close on November 30, 2012. The operation's closing date was renewed three times:
on May 1, 2014, May 27, 2017 and October 27, 2020. The operation closed on June 30, 2021.

Other changes. In April 2016, the Government requested a first withdrawal in the amount of US$25.00 million
(38% of the loan) to respond to the 2015-2016 El-Nino event. The withdrawal was used for financing urgent
water-provision interventions in the areas most affected by the drought.

The second renewal was on May 2014. According to the clarification provided by the team, the Government
requested withdrawal of the remaining US$41.00 million (62% of the loan) to cope with the effects of the COVID-
19 pandemic in March 2011. As the original LA excluded funding for pandemics, the agreement was
restructured to allow drawdowns for public health-related emergencies. During this renewal, the Government
established new, non-binding targets for the key outcome indicators in the original policy matrix.

The third renewal was approved on October 27, 2020, when the loan was fully disbursed. The ICR (paragraph
23) notes that for the first time a client government requested renewal of a fully disbursed DPL with a CAT DDO
operation. Both the Government and the Bank agreed on the benefits from the loan remaining active, in that it
would provide a suitable forum for continuing the DRM/Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) policy dialogue and
supervision of progress of Panama's DRM program. According to the clarifications provided by the team, this
extension enabled the government to maintain continued policy dialogue with the Ministry of Economy and
Finance and support the review and strengthening of policy reform targets. As part of the COVID-19 response,
the Government identified some critical areas to improve its DRM program.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context. Due to its geographic location, Panama is vulnerable to a variety of natural hazards. This
 vulnerability was manifested in December 2010, when intensive rainfall across Panama caused widespread
 flooding. In its wake, several areas of Panama lacked potable water for weeks. As the Government did not
 have enough contingency reserves for post-disaster rehabilitation activities, it was forced to request the
 National Assembly for temporary suspension of the financial limits of the Social and Fiscal Responsibility Law
 of 2008 (this law required the government to restrain spending for meeting the fiscal target, in the event of an

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PA CAT DDO (P122738)



economic slowdown or other external factors that caused the tax revenues to be lower than projected). Given
that natural hazards have regressive distribution effects as the poor are more vulnerable to such hazards,
mobilizing resources quickly in the event of natural hazards, having robust financial protection strategies
(including contingency facilities) for overall disaster risk reduction (DRR), and strengthening the Disaster Risk
Management (DRM) and Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) systems were important to the Government
strategy.

Government strategy. Before appraisal, the Government had taken several steps for moving towards
proactive management of disasters as opposed to treating them as adverse exogenous shocks. Following the
global adoption of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) in 2005, Panama was the first country in the Central
American region to develop a National Platform for DRR. At the regional level, Panama adopted the Central
American Comprehensive Risk Management Policy in 2010. The Government adopted four sector policies and
institutional actions to address DRR: (1) a comprehensive DRM strategy in 2010; (2) a Disaster Risk
Management National Plan (PNGR) for 2011- 2015 operationalizing the strategy; (3) the National
Emergencies Plan that complemented the PNGR plan and focused on emergency management and first
response; and (4) the Government's strategic plan for 2010-2014 that included CCA in its policy matrix.
Alongside these measures, the Government was finalizing a risk financing strategy and this operation
complemented the other financial tools of the Panama authorities to support the existing institutional
framework for DRM. The PDO was also relevant to the 2020 Government's Operational Plan for the
Prevention and Control of COVID -19 pandemic.

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for 2011-2014 identified strengthening DRM as a key area for Bank support. The PDO was well-aligned with
the third pillar of the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018-2021 "Bolstering resilience and
sustainability". The CPF recognized that Panama needs to continuously improve its fiscal and policy
management capacity to quickly respond to natural disasters and highlighted the need for mainstreaming risk
management in public policy for protecting critical infrastructure and services.

Previous Bank experience. When this operation was under preparation, the Bank was supporting the
government's DRM program through Technical Assistance (TA), Investment lending projects and a DPO. For
example, Panama was a participant in the Central America Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) initiative,
funded by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and supported by the Bank. Also,
the Metro Water and Sanitation Improvement and Water Supply and Sanitation in Low-income Communities
projects aimed to improve access to safe drinking water and sanitation. These projects complemented this
operation, given that in a catastrophe, the poor and vulnerable groups are exposed to higher risks of suffering
gastrointestinal illness. Finally, the First Programmatic Fiscal Management and Efficiency of Expenditures
Development Policy Loan, aimed to support the government objectives of strengthening fiscal management,
enhancing transparency, improving the efficiency of public spending and strengthening social safety net
programs.

This was the first DPL with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawback Operation (CAT-DDO) in Panama, aimed to
enhance the Government's capacity to implement its DRM program. Although the original LA excluded funding
for pandemics, the Bank restructured the loan agreement at the Government's request to fund COVID-19
pandemic related activities. The Bank processed the third renewal even though the loan was fully
disbursed, as both the Government and the Bank agreed that there would be benefits in continuing the DRM/
CCA policy dialogue and supervising progress of the Panama's DRM program. At appraisal, the Bank
concluded that Panama's macroeconomic outlook was adequate for supporting the DPL operation, based on



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PA CAT DDO (P122738)



the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) assessment of Panama's macroeconomic outlook. The analytical
underpinnings of this operation were sound (discussed below).

The Bank financing for this operation intended to provide Panama with: (i) a fiscal buffer for reducing the
impact of future disasters; (ii) ensuring that budget resources are not diverted from other development
programs; and (iii) providing bridge financing for immediate response - was appropriate use of Bank
resources, given that natural disasters disproportionately impact the poor.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

There was one policy area/pillar:

"Strengthening of the policy and institutional frameworks for DRM".

This pillar aimed to strengthen the Government's policy and institutional frameworks for implementing the
Government's DRM program. There were three prior actions (PAs).

PA 1. The Government adopted a Comprehensive National Risk Management Strategy (PNGIRD) in
2010. The PINGIRD identified five pillars to guide Panama's DRM goals: (i) developing financial mechanisms
for reducing the vulnerability of public investments through introducing DRR considerations in the investment
planning process; (ii) focusing on social development and compensatory measures to reduce vulnerability; (iii)
targeting environmental dimensions of DRM, particularly adaptation to climate change and water resources
management; (iv) focusing on governance and territorial management, stressing the relevance of local DRM
and other urban dimensions of risk, along with the pivotal role of sub-national level entities; and (v) identifying
key DRM actions to be implemented at the national and subnational levels.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on: (i) The Hyogo Framework for Action 2005 -
2015, by the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Secretariat. This framework provided
guidelines for implementing comprehensive DRM actions; (ii) Natural Disaster Hotspots, A Global Risk
Analysis", World Bank 2005, This work provided an analysis of the level of countries' risk to
hydrometeorological risks; and (iii) The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, by the United
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. This assessment provided a comprehensive review and
analysis of the natural hazards threatening mankind.

Developing an integrated and comprehensive DRM strategy at the national level demonstrates government's
commitment towards a more proactive approach for managing natural disasters. However, this prior action
focused only on upstream policies. Given that the operation was implemented over a period of twelve years
(2010 to 2022), there is little evidence of the extent to which the strategy helped realizing the five goals of the
PINGRID strategy (such as, developing financial mechanisms for reducing vulnerability of public
investments, focusing on compensatory measures, targeting environmental dimensions of DRM relating to
climate change adaptation and water resources management and governance and territorial management). It is
also not clear the extent to which the strategy helped in mainstreaming downstream key DRM actions at the
sectoral or subnational levels in the twelve years of this operation. Therefore, the relevance of PA 1 is as
moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA CAT DDO (P122738)



 PA 2. This policy area aimed to strengthen the institutional framework for implementing the DRM national
 policy. As a prior action, the National Civil Protection System (SINAROC) - the highest authority in
 Panama for DRM - adopted the updated National Disaster Risk Management Plan (PNGR) for 2011 -
 2015. The PNGR aimed at operationalizing the DRM strategy. The plan aimed to promote a multi sectoral
 approach for DRM policy harmonization and coordination and explicitly linked CCA to the DRR objective. The
 analytical underpinnings described above were relevant to this prior action.

 The adoption of a plan for DRM signifies that the Government is proactively managing natural disasters as
 opposed to treating them as adverse exogenous shocks. As with the prior action discussed above, given that
 twelve years had passed between 2010 and 2022, this prior action focused only on upstream activities. The
 ICR provides little evidence of a downstream causal chain of milestones leading to intended
 outcomes. Therefore, PA 2 is rated as moderately satisfactory.

 PA 3. As a prior action, the Government expanded the functions and responsibilities of the Directorate of
 Investment, Concessions and Risks of the State (DICRE) in the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) to
 operationalize the Disaster Risk Financing (DRF) strategic framework adopted in November 2014. The DICRE's
 mandate, included designing risk management programs for protecting government assets, developing cost-
 effective and accessible financing mechanisms for immediate liquidity that can be rapidly channeled to priority
 sectors, and reducing the impact of natural disasters at the individual, community and national levels.

 The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on the "Natural Hazards, Unnatural Disasters. The
 Economics of Effective Prevention", World Bank and United Nations, 2010. This report focused on the
 economics of reducing vulnerability to natural disasters and presented examples from round the world that
 demonstrated that government investments in ex-ante DRM measures to priority sectors can be more cost-
 effective than relying solely on emergency measures.

 The analytical underpinning of this prior action was sound. Given that a risk financing strategy would enable
 the country to be better prepared for financing natural disasters, this prior action was appropriate.
 Therefore, the relevance of this PA 3 is satisfactory.

 The PDO was highly relevant to the Government and current Bank strategy for Panama. PAs 1 and 2 aimed to
 strengthen the policy and institutional for DRM. PA 3 aimed to improve the disaster risk financing strategy.
 However, given that the project was approved twelve years ago, the results chain linking the PA 1 and 2 to the
 intended outcomes was not clear. It is also not clear whether these prior actions contributed to the intended
 outcome at the sectoral and subnational levels. Therefore, PA 1 and 2 are moderately satisfactory. PA 3 aimed
 at developing a risk financing strategy which would enable the country to be better prepared for financing
 national disasters was satisfactory. Assigning equal value to each prior Action, the simple average of the three
 Prior Actions is 3.66. Therefore, the overall relevance of design is moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PA CAT DDO (P122738)




Rationale

Pillar One. Strengthening the policy framework for DRM. This pillar aimed to strengthen the
Government's policy and institutional frameworks for implementing the Government's DRM program.
There were three results indicators.

Results Indicators (RI) 1 - 3. There were two original RIs: (i) The Ministry of Economy and Finance
(MEF) incorporated disaster risk criteria in the National Public Investment System (SNIP)and (ii) Increase
in the number of provinces with updated protocols for disaster preparedness and response.

An indicator was added when the operation was renewed in March 2020. (iii) The Panama City develops
emergency protocols for the recently inaugurated metro.

Reforms aimed to incorporate disaster risk criteria in the SNIP, increase in the number of provinces with
updated protocols for disaster preparedness and response and developing emergency protocols were
likely to increase the Government's policy framework for addressing DRM measures. The indicators
measured progress towards strengthening the policy framework for addressing DRM measures at the
central level and at the subnational levels (provinces and Panama City). The indicators were appropriate
and were verifiable. Therefore, the relevance of the results indicators is substantial.

Pillar Two. Strengthening the institutional framework for implementing the Government's DRM
program. This policy area aimed to strengthen the institutional framework for implementing the DRM
national policy. There was one results indicator.

RI 4. This indicator required that at least three ministries - the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF),
the Ministry of Housing and Territorial Development (MIVIOT) and the Ministry of Environment
(MIAMBIENTE) implement DRR priority actions identified in the PNGR. This indicator could be verified as
well as causally support the achievement of the intended project development objective of strengthening
the institutional framework for implementing Panama's DRM program. Therefore, the relevance of this is
indicator is substantial.

Pillar Three. Strengthening the framework for developing financial disaster risk protection
strategies. This pillar aimed to improve the framework for developing disaster risk protection strategies

RI 5 -6. . There were two results indicators: (i) The Government adopts the Disaster Risk Financing
Insurance (DRF) strategic framework prepared by the Directorate of Investment, Concessions and Risks
of the State (DICRE) in the MEF; and (ii) The Government formally adopts the operational plan for DRF.
These indicators could be verified and were appropriate for the intended objective of developing sources
of financing for disaster risks. Therefore, the relevance of the results indicators is substantial.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs) they support, baseline values, target
values, actual change in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                                             Target                  Actual
                                            Baseline                       Actual                   RI
               Associated     RI                           (including              change in
     RIs                                (including units                  value of             achievement
                  PAs     relevance                        units and                 target
                                           and dates)                      target                 rating
                                                             dates)                relative to

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PA CAT DDO (P122738)



                                                                              targeted
                                                                               change




PDO: Strengthening the policy and institutional framework for DRM.
RI 1. Disaster
risk criteria
incorporated
                                                                   Actual
in the                             Baseline (2011):     Target                 Target
               PA 1.   Substantial                                (2021):              Satisfactory
National                           Not incorporated. (2012): Yes              realized
                                                                   100%.
Public
Investment
System.
RI 2. Number
of provinces
with updated
                                                                   Actual
protocols for                      Baseline (2012):     Target                 Target    Highly
               PA 1.   Substantial                                (2016):
disaster                                   1          (2014): 4               exceeded Satisfactory
                                                                     10
preparedness
and disaster
response.
RI 3. Develop
emergency
                                                                   Actual
protocols for                      Baseline (2010):    Target:                 Target
               PA 1.   Substantial                                (2021):               Satisfactory
Panama City                                0         (2017): Yes              realized.
                                                                    yes
(subway)
metro.
RI 4. Three
ministries
carried out
Disaster Risk
Reduction
                                   Baseline (2012):     Target     Actual      Target    Highly
plans.         PA 2.   Substantial
                                           0          (2010): 3. (2017): 6.   exceeded Satisfactory
identified in
the National
Risk
Management
National Plan.
RI 5. DICRE’s PA 3.    Substantial Baseline (2010):     Target     Actual      Target Satisfactory
Disaster Risk                       Not adopted. (2014): Yes (2021):          realized
Financing                                                           Yes
and
Insurance
Strategic
Framework

                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   PA CAT DDO (P122738)



               (DRF) is
               formally
               adopted.
               RI 6:
               Operational
                                                       Baseline (2010): Target         Actual     Target
               plan for the     PA 3.    Substantial                                                      Satisfactory
                                                        Not adopted. (2014): Yes        Yes      realized
               DRF is
               adopted.

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To enhance the Government of Panama's capacity to implement its disaster risk management (DRM)
                program for natural disasters.

                Rationale
                Theory of change Reforms in this operation aimed to strengthen the policy and institutional framework for
                DRM and implementing a disaster risk financing strategy. Adopting a comprehensive DRM policy framework
                and associated guidelines were likely to strengthening the policy framework for DRM. Reforms aimed at
                implementing the National Risk Management Plan (PNGR) were likely to strengthen the institutional
                framework for DRM. Reforms aimed at providing a clear mandate to the Directorate of Investment,
                Concessions and Risks of the State (DICRE) in the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) were likely to aid
                in implementing a National Disaster Risk financing strategy. These activities together were likely to contribute
                to the intended outcome of enhancing the Government's capacity to implement its DRM program. The theory
                of change explicitly assumes that: (i) the Government will remain fully committed to strengthen its DRM
                capacity; and (ii) the Bank and the Government will continue with the policy dialogue to ensure that Disaster
                Risk Reductions (DRR) actions are carried out by the respective government agencies.

                Outputs.

                      The operation provided targeted technical assistance (TA) to the critical government institutions
                       responsible for formulating DRR and CCA policies and prioritizing DRR interventions. The government
                       institutions included the MEF, the Ministry of Housing and Territorial Management (MIVIOT), the
                       Ministry of Education (MEDUCA), the Ministry of Health (MINSA) and the National Aqueducts and
                       Sewers Institute (IDAAN). The operation provided TA on key DRR areas such as: (i) risk financing and
                       insurance; (ii) improving the country's understanding of its evolving disaster risk profile, including the
                       increasing risk posed by public health emergencies; and (iii) seismic and flood risk studies using the
                       Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Platform (the CAPRA initiative started in 2008, is a
                       partnership between the Coordination Center for the Prevention of Natural Disasters and the
                       Dominican Republic (CEPRENAC), the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Risk
                       Reduction (UN ISDR) and the World Bank/Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR). This


                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PA CAT DDO (P122738)



      initiative aimed to raise disaster risk awareness among countries in Central America by providing
      better tools to understand the levels of risks resulting from natural hazards.
     The National Civil Protection System (SINAPROC) prepared the National Disaster Risk Management
      plan for 2019-2030. The adoption of the plan was however temporarily delayed due to the
      government's ongoing response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Outcomes.

Strengthening the policy and the institutional framework for implementing the Government's DRM
program. (PA 1: RIs 1 -3)

     The Directorate of Investment Programming (DPI) in the MEF incorporated disaster risk criteria in the
      National Public Investment System (SINIP) in 2012. The DPI developed a budget classifier to track
      and report expenditures in DRR related activities for enabling the government agencies to track
      investment proposals and resources earmarked for exante DRM interventions. The methodology for
      implementing this system was piloted in 2017. The system is used for budget preparation since 2018.
      The DPI also incorporated disaster risk guidelines in the SINIP procedures and developed directives
      for integrating disaster risk considerations in public investment assessments. Finally, as part of the
      DPI's approval process for new infrastructure projects, the DPI developed guidelines describing the
      methodology for new investment proposals. These guidelines aimed to mainstream disaster risk
      analysis in public investment processes and incorporate corrective DRR/CCA considerations in the
      pre-investment phase of new public infrastructure projects and supervision of works during
      implementation. Applying these guidelines is now a requirement, and each new public investment
      proposal is required to meet certain disaster resilience criteria to get DPI approval, which is needed to
      obtain government financing.
     Four provinces updated protocols for disaster preparedness and response in December 2014 (as
      compared to one at the baseline in October 2012). New consolidated updated protocols were
      completed for six more provinces in 2016. With this, ten provinces had updated protocols for disaster
      preparedness and response when the operation closed, as compared to the original target of four.
     Emergency protocols were completed for the recently inaugurated "metro of Panama City" in 2017 by
      the Panama Metro as targeted.

Strengthening the institutional framework for implementing the Government's DRM program. (PA 2: RI
4).

     This indicator measured the number of ministries implementing DRR priority actions identified in the
      National Disaster Risk Management Plan (PNGR) for 2011-2015. Three ministries (the Ministry of
      Economy and Finance, the Ministry of Housing and Territorial Development, and the Ministry of
      Environment) implemented DRR priority actions in 2011 as targeted. Three more government
      agencies (the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, and the National Aqueducts and Sewers
      Institute) implemented relevant priority actions in 2014. With this, six government agencies
      implemented DRR priority actions, exceeding the original target of three.
     The National Policy for integrated Water Resources Management was updated by the National
      Environmental Authority. This updated policy introduced key elements of DRM in the water sector.




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         PA CAT DDO (P122738)



                      Strengthening the framework for developing financial disaster risk protection strategies. (PA3: RIs 5
                      and 6).

                            The Government adopted the Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance strategic framework strategy on
                             November 13, 2014. Panama was the first country in the Central American region with a legal
                             framework for Disaster Risk financing strategy. The strategy comprised five pillars: (i) improving risk
                             identification capabilities through using information from a probabilistic disaster risk analyses; (ii)
                             requiring assessments during the pre-investment phase of public investments and making risk
                             analysis mandatory for selecting, prioritizing and financing public investments; (iii) identifying sources
                             of financing for disaster risk financing, including though budget reallocations, contingent lines of credit,
                             post-disaster loans and co-insurance schemes; (iv) strengthening the domestic insurance market,
                             including through agricultural and micro-insurance schemes; and (v) strengthening the Directorate of
                             Investment, Concessions and Risks of the State (DICRE) to enable MEF carrying out its mandate for
                             designing and implementing financial protection schemes.
                            MEF with TA from the Bank, adopted a Five-year operational plan to implement the DRF Strategic
                             Framework.
                            With TA from the Bank, MEF conducted a cost-benefit analysis of potential disaster financing
                             strategies. Following this assessment, Panama joined the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance
                             Facility - Segregated Portfolio Company (CCRIF-SPC), as this sovereign insurance strategy was
                             deemed to provide optimal catastrophic insurance for Panama.

                       Drawdown of the Cat DDO.

                            In April 2016, the Government requested a first withdrawal in the amount of US$25.00 million to
                             respond to the 2015-2016 El-Nino event. The withdrawal was used for financing urgent water-
                             provision interventions in the areas most affected by the drought.
                            In March 2020, the Government declared a state of national emergency following the COVID-19
                             pandemic, which triggered the withdrawal of the remaining US$41.00 million of undisbursed funds to
                             support the government's response to the public health crisis.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The six results indicators were rated as substantial. Given that the indicators were either realized or surpassed,
overall efficacy is rated as satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                          Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA CAT DDO (P122738)



Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The operation's development objectives are highly relevant to the Government and the current Bank strategy for
Panama. The prior actions were based on solid analytical underpinnings. However, given that the project was
approved twelve years ago, the results chain linking the PA 1 and 2 to the intended outcomes was unclear. The
operation's efficacy is satisfactory. The original outcome targets were realized and targets for some indicators
were expanded when the project was renewed the second time. The expanded targets were realized. The Cat
DDO achieved the development objective and the operation helped by providing immediate liquidity to support
the Government's efforts to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. The overall outcome is satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a negligible risk to development outcome from lack of government
commitment. The government demonstrated its commitment to strengthening DRM during implementation
through actions aimed at (i) updating the National Civil Protection System; (ii) updating the National Disaster
Risk Management Plan (PNGR) by incorporating key lessons from the COVID-19 emergency response; (iii)
designing a National Meteorological and Hydrological Service (NMHS); and (iv) strengthening the Territorial
development in the MEF with a strong emphasis on incorporating DRR/CCA at all administrative levels
including into subnational planning.

The Government commitment to DRR during the implementation of this operation was also demonstrated by
its request to renew the operation even though the loan had been fully disbursed. The Government also
identified the need for a new DPL with Cat DDO for strengthening its capacity to respond to not only climate
and natural hazards, but for public health emergencies as well. Finally, on August 24, 2021, the Government
approved the creation of the Cabinet for Comprehensive DRM (GIRD cabinet) as a high-level policy
coordination entity under the direct oversight of the Presidency, with a mandate for ensuring implementation
of the DRM agenda in Panama. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the GIRD cabinet is
expected to approve the policy (PNGIRD) and Plan (PNGR) on a special session on October 13,
commemorating the International Day for Disaster Risk Reduction.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA CAT DDO (P122738)




The Bank prepared this operation based on the lessons from previous Bank-financed DPL with Cat DDO
operations in Costa Rica, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru and the Philippines. The lessons
included: (i) the need for proactively managing disasters rather than treating them as exogenous
shocks; (ii) adequate risk identification is required for efficient DRM; (iii) having an exante reconstruction
strategy for faster recovery after a disaster event; (iv) recognizing that governments can take many actions
for reducing disaster risk without incurring additional costs, such as by disclosing information about
hazards and risks to the public (such as through publishing maps of flood plains and seismic fault
lines); and (iv) securing a flexible source of funding to cover early recovery in case of a natural disaster.

Before this operation was conceived, the Bank team had already started a DRM dialogue with senior
representatives of key Government agencies including the MEF and disaster-sensitive line ministries. The
resulting design focused on addressing the key policy issues that the Government identified as critical for
improving its DRM capacity and its efforts to build resilience against natural hazards and the effects of
climate change.

The Bank prepared this operation in close collaboration with the IMF and other key partners working on
DRM initiatives in Panama and Central America, such as the Central American Coordination Center for
National Risk Prevention (CEPREDENAC), the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (UNISDR) in Central America, the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), the European Union (EU) and Japan International
Cooperation Agency (JICA).

The analytical underpinnings of this operation were sound (discussed in Section Three). The Bank
identified three risks at appraisal: economic, political and institutional risks. With mitigation measures,
economic and political risk was assessed as moderate. However, institutional risk was assessed as high,
as Panama's public sector institutions and fiduciary systems were relatively weak as compared to other
regional countries. The risk mitigation measures incorporated at design proved to be adequate during
implementation.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The supervision team provided support through frequent supervision and technical missions. Fourteen
Implementation Status Results (ISR) Reports were filed over the project lifetime of about nine years (implying
an average of twice a year missions). The missions included experts from Bank's Global practices as well as
international experts. The ICR (paragraph 57) notes that there were also other type of interactions, including the
participation of senior Government staff in Bank-sponsored regional technical meetings and workshops that
allowed the Bank team to advance the DRM/CCA dialogue. Collaboration and coordination between the Bank
team and the Government contributed to identifying emerging needs and timely response to those needs. This
was reflected in the two instances in which the Cat DDO was triggered. In the second instance, the Bank team

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA CAT DDO (P122738)



was able to swiftly obtain Bank Management approval for the removal of the Loan Agreement constraint that
limited the Government's ability to withdraw funds for addressing public health emergencies.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

This operation was not designed to directly support policies related to poverty reduction or social impacts.
However, the operation had positive impacts on the poor by supporting policies that helped to alleviate poverty.
For instance, the activation of the CAT-DDO during the severe drought of 2015- 2016 contributed to the
continuity of social development plans targeting the poor (ICR, paragraph 44).



b. Environmental

The Program Document (paragraph 107) noted that this operation was likely to have positive effects on the
environment and natural resources, by providing the Government with funding for measures that reduce
environmental degradation. There were no adverse environmental impacts during implementation.



c. Gender

This operation was not designed to directly support policies related to gender.



d. Other

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PA CAT DDO (P122738)




An unintended outcome was Panama's participation in regional efforts to coordinate disaster preparedness and
emergency response. Recognizing that Panama cannot address the multi-jurisdictional impact of climate change
alone, the Government took steps to: (i) better integrate its national Disaster Risk Reductions (DRR) efforts with
those of the Central American Integration System's (SICA), a specialized DRR body, the Coordination Center for
the Prevention of Natural Disasters in Central America and the Dominican Republic (CEPREDENAC); and (ii)
increased its participation in the regional activities of other specialized SICA bodies, such as the Council of
Ministers of Central America (COSEFIN) and the Regional Committee of Hydraulic Resources (CRRH).




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written. The evidence provided in the ICR is adequate to assess the performance of this
operation. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly shows the results between the policy reforms and
the intended outcomes. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation. The
ICR makes good use of annexes. The details provided in annex four and five enables the reader to get a better
picture of the operations' achievements.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The review draws the following main lessons from the ICR. which are based on the experience of implementing
this operation, with some adaptation of language.

1. A clear understanding of the Government's disaster risk reduction priorities and its immediate and
longer-term policy commitments can be useful in designing a successful DPL with a CAT DDO

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PA CAT DDO (P122738)



operation. Even before this operation was prepared, the Bank team engaged in a disaster risk reduction policy
dialogue with key Government authorities. This dialogue facilitated proper identification of policy instruments
that were important to the Government.

2. The timely assessment of progress is important, in the event of a renewal of a DPL with CAT DDO.
Such an assessment may uncover new areas or identify changes to the results framework. For example, for the
second renewal of this operation, although the Government had already met the targets for the results
indicators, the Bank and the Government agreed to adopt non-mandatory expanded values for some targets.
This expansion helped to advance the DRM policy dialogue and maintain the Government's access to the
Bank's specialized technical assistance.

3. The Bank's inclusion of public health emergencies as drawdown triggers for new DPLs with a CAT
DDO operations could be useful. In the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the difficulties
experienced in Panama due to the explicit exclusion in the Loan Agreement of public health as a drawdown
trigger demonstrated the need to explicitly indicate in the operation's Loan Agreement that certain public health
related emergencies can qualify for drawdowns.

4. The value added of a DPL with a CAT DDO may well go beyond its role as a source of quick liquidity
in the aftermath of a catastrophic event. This operation was renewed twice and the second renewal was at
Government request when the loan had been fully disbursed. This demonstrates that in addition to the financial
function of the instrument, borrowers value the policy advice and technical assistance as part of the operation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
