     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023072

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P101525                                  CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83690                               30-Jun-2020                                           150,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-May-2014                              31-Dec-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         150,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                          150,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                      150,000,000.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman         Kavita Mathur                     IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement dated July 23, 2014 (Schedule 1.
   page 5) and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) were " to improve the safety, accessibility
   and efficiency of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi City and Jianshui County
   ".

   The PDO is unpacked as stated below for this review as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



   PDO 1. To improve the accessibility of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi city and
   Jianshui county.

   PDO 2. To improve the efficiency of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi city and
   Jianshui county.

   PDO 3. To improve the safety of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi city and Jianshui
   county.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Mar-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two parts. (PAD, pages 5 -6):

   Mengzi Part. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$249.7 million (of this, US$100.0 million through IBRD
   financing). The actual cost was US$111. 6 million. (IBRD financing US$98.8 million). There were five
   components:

   1. Road Network Re-functioning and improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal US$145.6 million
   (IBRD financing US$30.8 million). The actual cost US$22.7 million (IBRD financing US$14.0 million). There
   were four sub-components: (i) changing the function of the Honghe avenue from a fast road to an urban
   arterial road; (ii) extension of the Jinhua road to create a short north-south traffic link; (iii) extension of the
   Zhaozhong road as an additional access road in the downtown area; and (iv) constructing a new Xuefu
   Road Bypass for diverting heavy traffic from the existing Xuefu road.

   The following activities were cancelled through the first level 2 restructuring (discussed below): (i) changing
   the function of the Honghe avenue was cancelled as Honghe Perfecture decided to implement a new
   tramway project in the same alignment, and (ii) activities of extending the Jinhua and Zhaozhong roads
   were cancelled due to significant delays in land acquisition and resettlement.

   2. Integrated Corridor Management. The estimated cost at appraisal US$44.6 million (IBRD financing
   US$32.7 million). The actual cost US$43.8 million (IBRD financing US$27.6 million). This component
   planned to improve three major corridors (Tianma, Beijing and Yinhe roads), and an Intelligent Transport
   System (ITS) to improve traffic management in the corridors.



                                                                                                         Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



A new sub-component was added to improve the core urban area integrated traffic management beyond
the three corridors to cover the entire core urban area. Activities included installation of ITS equipment at 60
additional intersections to synchronize traffic signals of major roadways in the core area, prioritize safety of
pedestrian crossings, and enable the traffic police to monitor real-time traffic.

3. Public Transport Priority. The estimated cost at appraisal US$43.8 million (IBRD financing
US$27.6 million). The actual cost US$37.8 million (IBRD financing US$34.9 million). This component
planned to provide the infrastructure for Mengzi's public transport services through: (i) three integrated bus
depots and two bus terminals; (ii) bus stops and bus bays; and (iii) ITS for bus operations.

The activities of constructing two bus depots and one bus terminal were cancelled due to significant delay in
land acquisition and resettlement and changes in Mengzi City's transport plan. A new subcomponent of
purchasing 45 hybrid buses, 120 electric buses and installing 60 electric bus charging stations were added
through the first Level 2 restructuring.

4. School Transport Safety Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal US$7.9 million (IBRD financing
US$5.5 million). The actual cost US$1.5 million (IBRD financed). This component planned to develop safe
school demonstration programs. Activities included: (i) a pilot on model school transport zone; (ii) home to
school transportation demonstration; and (iii) public campaign, training and technical assistance (TA) for
developing a transport management plan for schools, training and studies, procuring 15 school buses and
on-board monitoring units and constructing school bus stops.

The activity associated with home to school transportation demonstration was cancelled due to the
estimated high operation and maintenance cost, which the school could not afford.

5. Institutional Strengthening. The estimated cost at appraisal US$2.5 million (IBRD financing
US$2.1 million). The actual cost US$1.8 million (IBRD financed). Activities in this component: (i) financing
urban transport-related studies; (ii) project management and technical support; (iii) training and study tours;
and (iv) public communication and education campaigns.

Jianshui Part. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$103.0 million (of this, US$50.0 million through
IBRD financing). The actual cost US$78.0 million. (IBRD financing US$51.2 million). There were four
components:

1. Core Urban Area Integrated Transport Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal US$18.7 million
(IBRD financing US$12.5 million). The actual cost US$14.5 million (IBRD financing US$13.4 million). This
component planned to finance Integrated Corridor Management (ICM) improvements on three major
corridors in Jianshui's core urban area (Jianshui Avenue, Yinhui Road and North Chaoyang Road).
Activities in this component: (i) safety, accessibility and operation improvements on the corridors, and (ii) an
ITS to improve traffic management.

2. Public Transport Priority. The estimated cost at appraisal US$16.0 million (IBRD financing
US$7.9 million). The actual cost US$12.6 million (IBRD financing US$12.5 million). This component
planned to provide the infrastructure and equipment for improving Jianshui's public transport services
through: (i) constructing bus interchanges; and (ii) developing a bus locating and monitoring system and a
real-time passenger information system.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



  The activities in this sub-component were expanded to include construction of approximately 200 bus
  stops, purchase of 100 electric buses, and installation of 50 electric bus charging stations.

  3. Urban Road Network Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal US$64.4 million (IBRD financing
  US$25.8 million). The actual cost US$48.6 million (IBRD financing US$23.3 million). This component
  planned to finance the construction of the South Bypass, which will divert traffic from the historical
  downtown to the outskirts of the urban center.

  4. Institutional Strengthening. The estimated cost at appraisal US$1.2 million (IBRD financing
  US$1.0 million). The actual cost US$1.08 million (IBRD financed). This component planned to enhance the
  institutional capacity of Jianshui county through: (i) financing urban transport-related studies; (ii) project
  management and technical support; (iii) training and study tours; and (iv) public communication and
  education campaigns.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$348.7 million. The revised estimate due to the
  dropped activities was US$255.8 million. The actual cost was US$189.6 million.

  Financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$150.0 million. The loan was fully disbursed.

  Borrower contribution. A borrower contribution of US$255.8 million was planned at appraisal. Their actual
  contribution was less than planned at US$39.6 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 15, 2014, became effective on September 29, 2014 and was
  scheduled to close on June 30, 2020. However, the project closed 18 months behind schedule on
  December 31, 2021.

  Other changes. The Bank supported the following changes through a Level 2 restructuring in 2020.

        The project scope was modified (discussed above) with some activities dropped for Menghzi city
           (such as changing the function of the Honghe Avenue, extending the Jinhua and Zhaoozhag roads,
           constructing two bus-depots and one bus terminals, and the pilot on home to school transportation
           demonstration).
          Some activities were added for Mengzhi city (expanding the scope of integrated traffic management
           beyond the three corridors to cover the entire core urban area, purchasing 45 hybrid buses, 120
           electric buses and installing of 60 electric bus charging stations.
          Two new sub-components were added for Jiangshui country (purchase of 200 buses and 100
           electric buses, and installation of 50 electric bus charging stations.
          Funds were reallocated between components.
          The closing date was extended by 18 months from June 30, 2020, to December 31, 2021, to
           complete the revised scope of activities.

  Split Rating. The objectives were not revised. Some target indicators were revised, more activities were
  added, and new indicators were added. The overall level of ambition remained the same. Therefore, this
  review will not use the split rating methodology.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. With a population of 4.5 million (of which, 48% are ethnic minorities), Honghe
Hani and Yi Autonomous Prefecture (HAP) in the western region of China consisted of three cities and ten
counties. The project- intervened areas were in HAP's Mengzhi city and Jianshui county. The urban road
network in both Mengzhe city and Jianshui county was facing many challenges such as: (i) missing links in
the existing urban road network, which hampered mobility and accessibility of the entire area; (ii)
motorization was fast growing, with over 20% annual increase of motorization between 2010 and 2011; (iii)
investment decisions and urban road design which prioritized the movement of vehicles rather than the
movement of people and goods; (iv) limited public transport services; (v) high fatalities related to transport-
related accidents with 18 fatalities in Mengzhi and 31 in Jianshui in 2010; (vi) historical downtown was
congested with motorized traffic which limited tourism development and cultural preservation; and (vii) a low
capacity to tackle urban transport issues. Addressing these challenges was important for HAP.

Government strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Government strategy. At appraisal, the
Government's 12th Five Year Plan (FYP) emphasized the need for supporting infrastructure development in
minority-concentrated and border areas. China's 14th FYP for 2021 - 2025, highlighted the need for green
development and shared prosperity. In May 2022, China's State Council issued a new policy for developing
counties. The policy emphasized the importance of counties in the urban-rural development agenda and
explicitly mentioned improving public infrastructure in counties located near the borders. Under the
transport section, the policy articulated the need for improving urban roads, non-motorized lanes,
pedestrian environment, traffic management, road safety facilities, public transport terminals, public
charging infrastructure and a parking system.

Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016, emphasized among
other issues, the importance of actions to address urban transport issues. In particular, the CPS designated
"supporting greener growth" as one of its strategic themes of action, with "the promotion of low carbon
urban transport" as a specific outcome to pursue. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Current
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020-2025, around the engagement area "promoting Greener
Development" through "promoting low-carbon transport and cities" .

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has a long history of transport sector investments in China. This
project was however the Bank's first engagement in HAP, Mengzhi city and Jianshui county. The project
activities entailed urban road investments including investments aimed at improving and promoting public
transport in Mengzhe city and Jianshui country. These investments were likely to lead to the intended
outcomes of improving the accessibility and efficiency of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of
Mengze city and Jianshui county. In addition, this was the first project in China to systemically introduce
road safety measures, with activities aimed at raising awareness and behavior change in schools. Given
the PDO continues to be relevant to the Government and Bank strategy for China, relevance of the PDO is
high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
                                                                                                        Page 5 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                Improve the accessibility of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi city and Jianshui
                county.

                Rationale
                Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
                The intended outcomes were measurable. Activities such as constructing the Xuefu road bypass to divert
                heavy traffic away from the existing road, constructing public transport facilities (bus stops, bus depots and
                bus changing stations), were likely to improve accessibility of trips in the core urban areas of Mengzhe city.
                Likewise, constructing a south bypass in Jianshui county for diverting motorized traffic from the historic
                downtown and constructing bus stops and changing systems, were likely to improve accessibility of trips
                in Jianshui county. The theory of change assumes accuracy of population and economic growth projections
                and that Jianshui would ban motorized traffic in the downtown area.

                Outputs. (ICR. page 13 and pages 45-46).

                Mengze city. These activities were completed as targeted.

                        The 4.6 kilometers (km) Xuefu road was constructed for diverting traffic away from the existing road.
                        12.7 km of the Tianma road, Yinhe road and Beijing road were upgraded (with bus stops, bus priority
                         lanes, road safety measures (such as pedestrian crossings, parking management, installation of traffic
                         control and monitoring equipment).
                        Bus reform was completed as targeted. Prior to the reform, public bus services were provided by two
                         private bus operators. Services were sporadic and unreliable due to the lack of formal operating
                         agreements. Mengze municipal government completed the buy-out of the two private bus operators in
                         2019 and established the Mengze Transport Development and Investment Company to provide public
                         transport services.
                        403 bus stops, two new bus depots were upgraded. An Intelligent Transport System and equipment
                         for bus priority was provided. 165 e-buses and 17 charging stations were provided (these buses
                         replaced 65 older and inefficient diesel buses). The Mengze government further sought to enhance
                         the accessibility of public transport by providing "free ride" and "free use of shared e-bike" days on the
                         last Friday of each month to attract riders and offered "wedding buses" for rent for transporting guests
                         of large weddings to venues.
                        Two traffic controls systems were installed.

                Jianshui county. These activities were completed as targeted.


                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)




      6.4 km of the South Bypass road was constructed, for diverting traffic from the historic downtown to
         the outskirts of the urban center as targeted.
        9.1 km of Jianshui Avenue, Chaoyang North road and Yinghui road in the downtown area were
         upgraded (with bus stops, bus priority lanes, road safety remedy measures, pedestrian crossings,
         parking management, traffic control and monitoring equipment).
        Bus reform was completed. However, due to delays in reaching a buy-out agreement with two private
         bus companies, the reform was completed only a few months before project closure. The ICR notes
         that the newly established bus company plans to launch a county wide campaign to promote the
         improved services.
        90 new bus stops and two new bus depots were constructed. 100 e-buses and 30 charging stations
         were provided.
        Jianshui county banned private car traffic on the historic downtown and implemented traffic-calming
         measures. The project financed the integrated corridor management on the urban roads adjacent to
         the downtown, including improving public transport and pedestrian movement, and diverted the traffic
         to the newly constructed Southern pass. Within the historic downtown, the estimated modal shift from
         motorized trips to walking trips annually was five million by residents and eight million by tourists.
        Two traffic control systems were installed.

A total of 394 people were trained in Mengze city and Jianshui county. There were no targets for this
indicator.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were aimed to increase the number of people with access to urban transport
services in Mengze city and Jianshui county.

      The number of people with access to urban transport services (i.e. the total number of people within
       300m of public transport services) increased from 195,000 (baseline) to 263,400 in Mengze city when
       the project closed, exceeding the target of 260,000.
      The number of people with access to urban transport services increased to 113,100 in Jianshui
       county, exceeding the target of 111,000.

The construction of Xuefu road bypass which diverted heavy traffic away from the existing road; construction
of public transport facilities (bus stops, bus depots and bus changing stations), improved accessibility of trips
in the core urban areas of Mengzhe city. Likewise, construction of south bypass in Jianshui county which
diverted motorized traffic from the historic downtown, and construction of bus stops and changing
systems, improved accessibility of trips in Jianshui county. The efficacy of this objective is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the efficiency of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi city and Jianshui county.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)




Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities described above were also relevant to this objective. The causal
links between the activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.
The activities described above in Mengze city and Jianshui county were likely to improve the efficiency of trips
taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengze city and Jianshui county.

Outputs.

In addition to the outputs described above, the following output was relevant for this objective.

      Both Mengze city and Jianshui county phased out diesel buses and replaced them with e-buses which
       generated Green House Emission (GHE) savings and reduced air pollution.

Outcomes. (ICR, page 15).

The outputs mentioned above were expected to contribute to the outcomes of: (i) reducing the travel time of
public transport users during peak hours on the project corridors; and (ii) increase annual public transport
ridership.

      The travel time by public transport users during peak hours reduced from 22.5 minutes at the baseline
       to 14 minutes in Mengze city, exceeding the target of 17.5 minutes,
      The travel time by public transport users during peak hours reduced from 20 minutes at the baseline
       to 13 minutes in Jianshui county, exceeding the target of 15 minutes.
      The annual public transport ridership in Mengze city increased to 9.21 million passenger trips, short of
       the target of 16 million passenger trips.
      The annual public transport ridership in Jianshui county increased to 5.83 million passenger trips,
       short of the target of 14.50 million passenger trips. Although the targets were not realized, the average
       public transport ridership in Mengze city was higher than the national average, and the performance of
       Jianshui county was about the national average. According to the ICR, the statistical data of the
       Ministry of Transport showed that bus passengers in cities declined by 31.8% from 2015 to 2020 in
       China. The decline in public bus journey were partly due to the restrictions in the wake of the COVID-
       19 pandemic which were outside the project control, and partly due to the delays in implementation of
       the bus company reforms, accelerated increase of private cars and emergence of e-bikes and e-bike
       sharing program. The ICR notes that ridership in public buses is expected to pick up, with the lifting of
       COVID-19 restrictions.
      According to a user satisfactory survey conducted at closure, the user satisfaction rate with bus
       journeys increased from 30% to 66% in Mengze city and 72% in Jianshui county, exceeding the
       target. In general, user satisfaction was higher among female users (69% in Mengze and 77% in
       Jianshui county).

Although the targets for annual public ridership were not met, this review concludes that this was partly due to
factors over which the project had no control. Therefore, efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the safety of trips taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengzhi city and Jianshui county.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and
the intended outcomes were monitorable. The outputs of activities described together with upgrading schools
with traffic calming infrastructure, equipment and management plans and technical assistance on road safety
and public communications and education campaigns can be expected to improve the safety of road trips
taken by residents in the core urban areas of Mengze city and Jianshui county.

Outputs (ICR, pages 48 - 49).

In addition to the outputs described above which were also relevant to this objective, the following outputs
were relevant for this objective.

      19 school zones were upgraded with traffic calming infrastructure, equipment and management plan
       as targeted.
      19 schools implemented "model school transport zone" pilot as targeted.
      17 junctions were installed with Intelligent Transport System in Mengzi city and Jianshui county, as
       targeted.
      15 school safety technical assistance was delivered and 394 people were trained on aspects
       pertaining to school safety.
      Intelligent Traffic System (ITS) was installed in 98 junctions in Mengze city and 55 junctions in
       Jianshui county. The ITS system enabled all the major intersections to synchronize traffic signals of
       major roadways in the core urban area, enable the traffic police to monitor real-time traffic and
       respond quickly to accidents. The average response time of traffic police reduced from fifteen minutes
       to ten minutes in Mengze city.
      Public communication and education campaigns were held for behavior change.

Outcomes.

The outputs of activities described above were aimed at reducing the number of fatalities in the project
intervened areas.

      The number of fatalities in Mangze reduced from the peak of 30 in 2017 to 12 in 2021, short of the
       target of seven fatalities. The number of fatalities in Jianshui remained the same at eight as at the
       baseline and did not reduce to six as targeted.

While it is true that many external factors such as increase in car ownership could have contributed to the
outcome, this review concludes that the project at best made a modest contribution to realizing the outcome.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given that two of the three outcomes were realized, overall efficacy is rated as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for the physical investment components in Mengze
   city and Jianshui country. These components accounted for approximately 98% of the actual project cost. The
   quantifiable benefits were assumed to come from: (i) passenger travel time savings; (ii) vehicle operating cost
   savings; and (iii) reduction of traffic accident costs, due to the road safety measures of the project. The other
   non-quantifiable benefits of the project were assumed to come from factors such as reduced vehicle pollution,
   improved air quality, improved institutional capacity for urban transport planning, operation and management
   and improved urban competitiveness.

   The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for Mengze was city 21.5%, as compared to the ex-ante
   EIRR of 15.78% and the ex-post EIRR for Jianshui county was 22.2%, as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of
   13.77%. The overall simple average ex-post EIRR was 21.85% as compared to the ex- ante EIRR of 14.77%.
   The ex-post EIRR in both Mengze city and Jianshui county was higher than the ex- ante EIRR due to the cost
   savings and prioritization of cost-effective measures during project restructuring.

   Administrative shortcomings. There were delays in land acquisition and resettlement issues. This led to
   delays in implementation during the initial years. This was exacerbated by delays during implementation, due to
   a combination of factors such as transport plan changes, leadership changes and lack of coordination between
   Honghe Prefecture government and Mengze City government. Such factors contributed to the delays in
   implementing bus reforms. These factors, together with the physical restrictions following the COVID-19
   pandemic, contributed to the extension of the project closing date.

   However, the loan was fully disbursed. Most of the planned activities were completed within the estimated costs.
   Cost savings realized due to competitive bidding was used for funding additional activities.

   Taking these into account, efficiency is rated as substantial.


   Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      98.00
Appraisal                                                   14.77
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      98.00
ICR Estimate                                                21.85
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and Bank strategy is High. Of the three PDOs, two of the
PDOs were realized. Overall, efficacy is rated as substantial. Efficiency is substantial. Taking these ratings into
account, overall efficacy is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The ICR (paragraph 87) notes that the project activities continue to be relevant
to the national and the Mengze city priorities regarding promoting public transport. The ICR also notes that
the assets including the infrastructure and Intelligent Traffic System are new, and that e-bus
subcomponent includes eight years maintenance contract with the suppliers.

However, it is not clear if there would be adequate funds for maintaining the road assets created under the
project. There is also a modest risk to development outcome given that: (i) ridership on the public transport
will not increase to the extent expected due to the restrictions imposed following the COVID-19 pandemic;
and (ii) there is a safety risk, given that the number of fatalities due to road accidents had not declined as
expected when the project closed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



  The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons from urban projects implemented by the Bank in the
  past. The ICR (paragraph 64) notes that a former top executive of a leading world bus operator was hired
  to advise project preparation and capacity building efforts.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. This included: A Project Steering Committee (PSC)
  chaired by the Vice Governor of HAP, and comprised department heads of relevant prefectural agencies,
  the Mayor of Mengzhi city and the Governor of Jianshui county to oversee project preparation; A Project
  Management Unit (PMU) established at the HAP Housing and Urban-Rural Development Bureau
  (HURDB), responsible for overall project management and coordinating project execution in Mengzhi city
  and Jianshui county; and two project execution offices (PEOs) established in Mengzhi city and Jianshui
  county for fiduciary management (PAD, paragraph 30).

  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal including a substantial risk because of the the
  weak implementation capacity, given that the project required close coordination amongst various public
  entities in both the city and county. The mitigation measures incorporated at design included setting up
  by PSC which included department heads from both Mengze city and Jianshui country. With mitigation
  measures, the overall project risk was rated as modest at appraisal (PAD, page 8). The arrangements
  made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Fifteen Implementation Status Results (ISR) reports were filed over the over the project lifetime of eight
 years (implying twice a year supervision missions). The ICR (paragraph 85) notes that the task team spent
 extensive efforts in mobilizing global expertise to support the project. The support provided by the team
 aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10). The ICR also notes that Bank's
 Global Leader for Urban Transport was one of the task team leaders. The Borrower's ICR in Annex Five
 confirms that the Bank provided strong support and guidance at all stages of project planning, design,
 implementation and monitoring and evaluation. The Borrower's ICR also states that when the project
 encountered problems, the supervision team aided in addressing the issues. The ICR does not provide
 details but states that there were frequent changes in Task Team Leaders during the project lifetime.

 Overall Bank performance is satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key results indicators - the number of people with access to urban transport services, the annual
 ridership on urban transport and the number of fatalities - were for the most part, appropriate for monitoring
 project performance. The indicators could be monitored.

 However, there were some shortcomings. The targets related to road safety and bus ridership were
 ambitious. This led to the non-realization of the targets in both Mengze city and Jianshui country. There
 were no key outcome indicators for monitoring the institutional strengthening components of the project.
 Given that bus reforms are an important component of the project, the project could have benefitted from
 an indicator for monitoring this aspect. While the ICR mentions that a user survey was carried out, it does
 not provide the details of the methodology used in administering the survey.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that data on project implementation were reported to the Bank regularly in
  the required templates. The project had dedicated staff on M&E. The M&E indicators were revised during
  restructuring. However, the deficiencies in M&E design pertaining to the institutional dimension of the
  project and the targets for road safety and bus ridership were not rectified during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The data on M&E was used during the Mid-Term Review to discuss remedial actions (such as dropping
  some activities). The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that the Intelligent Transport System (ITS) is used by the
  traffic police to date for monitoring road safety activities.

  In sum, M&E is rated as modest in view of the shortcomings in M&E design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal; Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment. The adverse environmental impacts of the project (such as, construction
   related impacts, disposal of waste and wastewater generated at the bus interchanges and depots and noise
   from the newly constructed roads), were expected to be site-specific and small scale. Environmental


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



   Management Plans (EMPs) for Mengzi and Jianshui were prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to
   address the adverse environmental impacts (PAD, paragraph 63). The ICR does not mention of adverse
   environmental impacts during implementation.

   Physical Cultural Resources. This safeguard was triggered as some activities involving small scale civil
   works on three existing roads, were in the vicinity of the the Jianshui old town. The PAD (paragraph 64)
   notes that based on site investigation and consultations, the EMP concluded that the project would not have
   any significant impact on the physical cultural resources. The ICR does not mention any issues with the
   safeguards on Physical Cultural Resources during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at
   appraisal to address land acquisition issues at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 38). The ICR (paragraph 81)
   notes that the resettlement activities were carried out according to the RAPs during implementation.
   Compensation were paid to the project affected people before the commencement of the project activities.
   Every affected family received a local bank account in which the compensation was paid directly to the
   affected parties.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial assessment at appraisal. The financial
   management risk was rated as modest at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that the project had an
   adequate financial management system. The project accounting and financial reporting were as specified
   in the loan agreement and all the project audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 82)
   notes that although there were procurement problems due to the lack of capacity in the earlier years of
   implementation, but there were improvements over time. The ICR does not report any case of mis-
   procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The Government raised awareness on improving public transport and encouraging modal shift as a means
   to tackle greenhouse emissions and local air pollution.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)



Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 There were shortcomings in
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest
                                                                                 M&E design.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Strong government commitment can help in converting historical areas into pedestrian-
only zones. In this project, the Government banned motorized traffic from the historic downtown
area and made this area into pedestrian-only zones.

2. Given that road safety is emerging as an urban issue globally, it would help if more
attention is paid to designing better road safety indicators. The ICR notes that there is no
widely available methodology for forecasting road accidents and fatalities. It would also help if trends
in road fatalities in project-intervened areas are compared with the national or state trends to
indicate the extent to which the outcomes could be attributed to project activities.

3. An approach which combines supply-side road safety and demand-side measures can
help in addressing road safety issues. The lesson from this project is that combining both supply-
side road safety measures (such as incorporating road safety infrastructure investments on roads)
with demand-side measures (such as, rigorous enforcement of parking management) are likely to
help addressing road safety issues.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. The theory of change presented in the text clearly articulates the links between project
activities, outputs and outcomes. The analysis and evidence provided in the ICR is adequate to assess project
performance. The photographs provided in the text enables the reader to better visualize the changes after the
project. The ICR candidly acknowledges the difficulties of attribution due to external factors over which the
project had no control. The Borrower's ICR in the Annex provides useful information.

However, there were some minor shortcomings. The information provided in the ICR on environmental
compliance and continuity of leadership is sparse.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Tran (P101525)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
