     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023036

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P112719                                   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-46330,IDA-56980,IDA-56990             31-Dec-2015                                      132,854,892.12

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Aug-2009                               30-Nov-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          55,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          143,445,185.30                                             0.00

 Actual                                      132,854,892.12                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Hassan Wally              Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original PDO. The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage Project
   (BSSP) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 10) and aimed to:

   "mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater pollution and improve the efficiency and
   sustainability of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand."


                                                                                               Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



   Revised PDO. The PDO was revised in 2015 as part of a Level 1 Restructuring that included Additional
   Financing. The PDO of the BSSP as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 6) was to:

   "reduce wastewater pollution and improve the performance of utilities responsible for wastewater
   management in Bukhara and Samarkand."



   Parsing the PDO.

   1. The original PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   (a) To mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand (PDO 1);

   (b) To improve the efficiency of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand (PDO 2); and

   (c) To improve the sustainability of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand (PDO 3).

   2. The revised PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

   (a) To reduce wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand (PDO 1); and

   (b) To improve the performance of utilities responsible for wastewater management in Bukhara and
   Samarkand (PDO 2).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Jun-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Physical Investments (appraisal cost: US$62.40 million, of which IDA would finance: US$51.88
   million, additional financing (AF): US$99.14 million, actual cost: US$52.74 million, AF: US$80.03
   million). This component included the following two sub-components:


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



1.1. Rehabilitation of Bukhara Sewerage System. This would include: (a) rehabilitating and replacing
existing sewers; (b) rehabilitating existing wastewater
pumping stations; (c) expanding (2.5km) the sewer system; (d) rehabilitating the Bukhara Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP), including rehabilitating and replacing equipment, financing minor civil works and
enhancing the plant's energy efficiency; (e) providing operational equipment; and (f) providing engineering
consultants and other rehabilitation-related technical assistance (TA).

1.2. Rehabilitation of Samarkand Sewerage System. This would include: (a) rehabilitating and replacing
existing sewers; (b) rehabilitating existing wastewater pumping stations and constructing an additional one;
(c) expanding (4.8km) the sewer system; (d) rehabilitating the Main Wastewater Treatment Plant and the
Farhad Wastewater Treatment Plant, including rehabilitating and replacing equipment, financing minor civil
works and enhancing the Plant's energy efficiency; (e) providing operational equipment; and (f) providing
engineering consultants and other rehabilitation- related TA .

2. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (appraisal cost:US$1.04 million, of which IDA
would finance: US$0.87 million, AF: US$4.29 million, actual cost: US$0.07 million, AF: US$1.25
million). This component would focus on improving utility management and consumer orientation by
training staff and introducing better communication and public awareness efforts in the two vodokanals. This
component included the following two sub-components:

2.1. Institutional strengthening and capacity building of Bukhara Vodokanal (BVK) and local
communities. This would be achieved through: (a) development of communications strategies and public
awareness raising campaigns; (b) staff training in utility management with an emphasis on improving the
consumer orientation; and (c) establishment of a Pilot Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System
(SCADA) to enhance responsiveness to emergencies and to routine maintenance.

2.2. Institutional strengthening and capacity building of Samarkand Vodokanal (SVK) and local
communities. This would be achieved through: (a) development of communications strategies and public
awareness raising campaigns; (b) staff training in utility management with an emphasis on improving the
consumer orientation; and (c) establishment of a Pilot Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System to
enhance responsiveness to emergencies and to
routine maintenance.

3. Feasibility Studies for Future Investments (appraisal cost US$1.07 million, of which IDA would
finance US$ 0.89 million, actual cost: US$0.48 million). This component would finance consultant
studies for future Government priority investments in the water supply/sanitation sectors. It would be
managed by the central government.

4. Project Management (appraisal cost US1.64 million, of which IDA would finance US$:1.35 million,
AF: US$1.5 million, actual cost: US$1.56 million, AF: US$0.69 million). This component would finance
the strengthening of Project Coordination Unit (PCU), including its branches in Bukhara and Samarkand.
Under this item, funds would also be provided for monitoring and evaluating (M&E) project activities
including supporting: technical, environmental, social monitoring, project audits, training and financing of
operating costs.

Revised Components.
The structure and order of the components were revised. The change included consolidating the original
components 2 (Institutional Support) and 3 (Feasibility Studies) and prioritizing them as component


                                                                                                Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



  1(Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building), reflecting the renewed emphasis on institutional
  strengthening and performance beyond infrastructure, and building on the growing reform agenda.
  Component 1 was recategorized as component 2, and component 4 as component 3.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost of the project was estimated at US$66.16 million including US$2.32 million and
  US$3.45 million physical and price contingencies, respectively. The project received additional IDA
  financing in the amount of US$105.00 million, which increased the total cost to 171.16 million (see below for
  details). This amount was revised downwards to US$143.45 million. The actual cost according to the ICR
  Data Sheet (page 2) was US$136.82 million.

  Financing. The project was originally financed through an IDA loan of US$55.00 million (revised down to
  US$53.45 million). In 2015, the project received additional IDA financing of US$105.00 million (revised
  down to US$90.00 million). The total IDA Credit was US$160.00 million (revised amount US$143.45
  million). The actual disbursed amounts were US$50.89 million and US$81.97 million for the original IDA
  Credit and the AF, respectively. The total disbursed IDA amount was US$132.85 million (ICR Data Sheet,
  page 2). The ICR (paragraph 20) stated that in 2020 the project was restructured and US$15.00 million of
  IDA funds were cancelled. According to the ICR (paragraph 20) the cancellation of funds was due to cost
  savings from competitive procurement bidding.

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to contribute US$8.00 million of counterpart funds.
  According to the ICR (footnote #10) the borrower contributed US$3.90 million of counterpart funds. The
  lower than expected counterpart contribution was due to challenges faced by the Government. The ICR did
  not elaborate on the nature of these challenges.

  Dates. The project was approved on August 4, 2009 and became effective eight months later on April 3,
  2010. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted in September 30, 2013, which was about three
  years and five months after effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, this Review
  finds that conducting the MTR 3.5 years after effectiveness was reasonable. The project closed on
  November 30, 2021, about six years beyond the original closing date on December 31, 2015. The six years
  extension was to accommodate the implementation delays and allow enough time to complete
  activities. These delays were also in the context of major political and sectoral changes following a change
  in political leadership in 2017. There was a significant push for reforms across the sector, and frequent
  changes to the project’s authorizing environment. These included the creation of the line ministry (Ministry
  of Housing and Communal Services - MHCS) and formation of regional WSS utilities, among others, as well
  as new internal procedures for procurement clearances. Implementation delays had been aggravated by
  the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including restrictions on imports of goods and equipment, as well
  as human resource capacity issues associated with the pandemic.

  The project was restructured four times, the first was a Level 1 and the remaining three were all Level 2
  restructurings as follows:

  1. On June 23, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$37.99 million, in order to approve an Additional
  IDA financing of US$105 million, revise the PDO, revise the Results Framework (RF) and targets, change

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



   components and cost, extend the loan closing date by three years and six months from December 31, 2015
   to June 30, 2019, change in disbursements arrangements, change in legal covenants, and change in
   implementation schedule.

   2. On November 2, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$69.54 million, in order to extend the AF loan
   closing date by 18 months, until December 31, 2020, to enable sufficient time to complete ongoing
   activities, revise the RF, and change the implementation schedule.

   3. On March 25, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$96.29 million, in order to change the
   components and cost, cancel US$15.00 million financing, and reallocate funds between disbursement
   categories.

   4. On December 22, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$103.61 million, in order to extend the AF
   loan closing date from December 31, 2020 to November 30, 2021, and revise the RF.

   Rationale for Changes and impact on the Theory of Change (ToC). The project costs were
   underestimated in feasibility studies, counterpart financing was removed from project funding sources, and
   the SDR experienced a significant devaluation against the US dollar. Hence, an additional financing was
   required to scale up the project and cover the financing gap from the parent project. The revision of the
   PDO made it measurable and attributable by focusing on wastewater pollution removal rather than
   environmental outcomes. The change also broadened the project’s ambition as the project’s objectives
   were changed to address utility performance more holistically including customer relations aspects.

   Overall, the changes were relevant and justified. While the PDO was revised, this did not impact the ToC.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The sewerage systems in Bukhara and Samarkand were more than 40 years old
and needed to be replaced. Deferred maintenance needed to be addressed through a combination of crash
preventive maintenance and rehabilitation. The project aimed to improve service delivery and manage the
environment in a sustainable manner.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank benefited from the experience and trust developed with the central,
regional, and municipal governments during the recent implementation of the Bukhara and Samarkand
Water Supply Project (BSWSP). This project would also benefit from improved capacity of the Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) which under BSWSP became adept at implementing Bank financed projects. The
project also drew on the recommendations in the Bank’s 2007 Municipal Services Sector Review Note as
well the experience under the Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Health Project (closed in 2008).

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the objectives of
the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for Uzbekistan (CAS, 2008) by addressing the need to (a) improve
service delivery and (b) manage the environment in a sustainable manner.



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



               At completion, the PDO remained in line with the current Bank Country Partnership Framework for
               Uzbekistan (CPF, FY16–FY20). Focus areas under the CPF were based closely on the Uzbekistan
               Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, FY16–FY20), which identified a significant need to further develop
               water infrastructure and to strengthen the Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) sector management.
               Specifically, under focus area (c) public service delivery, where the CPF identifies two core actions highly
               relevant to BSSP: 1. Increasing access and improving the quality of water supply and sanitation
               services and 2. Promoting energy security and efficiency and reducing the economy’s energy
               intensity. These were reflected in the operational programming in the CPF, including three WSS-related
               operations, one of which was BSSP.

               Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the
               Government's National Environmental Action Plan (1998) and National Action Plan for Environmental
               Hygiene of the Republic of Uzbekistan (1999), in which upgrading urban sewerage and municipal
               wastewater treatment facilities was a priority.

               At completion, the PDO remained in line with Government's strategy and plans in the WSS sector.
               Specifically, with the priorities of the Program for the Comprehensive Development and Modernization of
               Water Supply and Sewerage Systems (2017–2021) which was the key sector strategy at the time of project
               closing. It prioritized integrated measures such as continued reconstruction and rehabilitation of
               infrastructure; adoption of modern technologies, information systems, and automated billing; and the
               introduction of sustainability-aligned tariffs, with the view of improving public service delivery.

               Level of PDO
               The original PDO was pitched at an ambitious level to address the development outcome. The revised PDO
               was more realistic and was pitched at an adequate level to address the development outcome.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The original and revised objectives were both in line
               with Bank's CPF as well as with Government's priorities for the WSS. The revision of the PDO made
               it measurable and attributable by focusing on wastewater pollution removal rather than environmental
               outcomes. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would finance the rehabilitation and
expansion of the Bukhara and Smarkand sewerage systems including pumping and treatment stations. These
activities would rehabilitate and expand sewerage systems including energy efficient pumps, and
wastewater treatment station with energy efficient equipment would be completed and operational. These
activities were expected to increase household access to sewerage service and increase the pollution
removed from wastewater through wastewater treatment plants. This would result in reducing the
environmental impact from wastewater pollution.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. The project assumed that
households would connect to sewerage service through self-funding or support from local governments; 2.
The project interventions would be sufficient to mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater despite
other non-project related impacts; and 3. Public awareness campaigns would be able to effectively change
customer behavior.

While the stated activities were relevant and connected to the PDO, improving environmental outcomes
proved to be a broad target and beyond the full scope of the project. Hence, the PDO was later revised to
make it more focused, measurable and attributable to the project activities. The stated assumptions were
questionable, because poor customers might not be able to connect if they do not receive support, and
environmental impacts proved to be broad and beyond the full scope of the project.

Outputs/Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs)

1. 49.48 km and 34.35 km sewer lines replaced in Bukhara and Samarkand (59% and 100% of the original
targets achieved).
2. 51.46 km and 91.70 km new sewer lines laid in Bukhara and Samarkand (125% and 155% of the original
targets achieved).
3. 24,464 and 14,691 households connected to the public sewerage system in Bukhara and Samarkand
(544% and 105% of the original targets achieved).

Outcome

In the original design, PDO 1 was to be measured through two indicators: 1. Pollution load on downstream
communities measured by sewerage removed at WWTP (5-Day Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD5)
tons/year), and 2. Collection of sewerage into the WWTP (tons/year). For the first indicator, the project
achieved 1,765 BOD5 tons/year compared to an original target of 1,950 BOD5 tons/year, and a baseline of
1,590 BOD5 tons/year for Bukhara Vodokanal (BVK) (achievement rate 48%). Results were better for
Samarkand Vodokana (SVK) where the project achieved 3,201 BOD5 tons/year compared to an original
target of 3,050 BOD5 tons/year, and a baseline of 2,450 BOD5 tons/year (achievement rate 125%). For the
second indicator, the project achieved 2,006 tons/year compared to an original target of 2,200 tons/year, and
a baseline of 2,000 tons/year for BVK (achievement rate 3%), while for SVK, the project achieved 4,042
tons/year compared to an original target of 3,400 tons/year, and a baseline of 2,700 tons/year for BVK
(achievement rate 192%).



Summary of Efficacy Assessment of PDO1. While the project met or exceeded most targets for its IRIs, it
fell short on meeting the outcome targets for BVK, but achieved or exceeded targets for SVK. However, the
afore-mentioned outcome indicators were not enough to measure environmental impact from wastewater

                                                                                                Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



(ICR, paragraph 26). The PDO was phrased at a high level, but the original RF indicated that improved
environmental impact was to be achieved through better treatment, additional wastewater connections,
elimination of wastewater losses through damaged sewers. There was clear evidence of increased pollution
load removed and increased collection of wastewater, as well as additional beneficiaries and decreased
sewer breakages. The project achieved mixed results against its outcome indicators, but given the
insufficiency of adequate indicators to measure the outcome, the rating for PDO 1 is Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To reduce wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would finance the rehabilitation and
expansion of the Bukhara and Smarkand sewerage systems including pumping and treatment stations. These
activities would rehabilitate and expand sewerage systems including energy efficient pumps, and wastewater
treatment station with energy efficient equipment would be completed and operational. These activities were
expected to increase household access to sewerage service and increase the pollution removed from
wastewater through wastewater treatment plants. This would result in reducing the wastewater pollution in
Bukhara and Samarkand.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. The project assumed that
households would connect to sewerage service through self-funding or support from local governments; 2.
The project interventions would be sufficient to mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater despite
other non-project related impacts; and 3. Public awareness campaigns would be able to effectively change
customer behavior.

The stated activities were relevant and directly connected to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. The revised
PDO was more focused, measurable and attributable to the project activities. However, the stated
assumptions were questionable, because poor customers might not be able to connect if they do not receive
support.

Outputs

1. 49.48 km and 34.35 km sewer lines replaced in Bukhara and Samarkand (59% and 100% of the revised
targets achieved)
2. 51.46 km and 91.70 km new sewer lines laid in Bukhara and Samarkand (125% and 155% of the revised
targets achieved)
3. 24,464 and 14,691 households connected to the public sewerage system in Bukhara and Samarkand
(544% and 105% of the revised targets achieved).

4. By project closing, a two-phased rehabilitation of the Samarkand WWTP (serving a population of 250,000)
and the construction of an entirely new WWTP in Farkhad neighborhood (serving a population of 8,300) were

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



both completed and commissioned. Prior to the project, in Samarkand effluent from the existing sewer
network was discharged with only partial compliance with national standards, while in Farkhad, collected raw
sewerage was discharged into the Zarafshan River (ICR, paragraph 28).

Outcome

      The reduction of wastewater pollution was primarily driven by rehabilitation/construction
         of Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTPs) and by increased household connections. Also, while not
         measured under the project, it is plausible to assume that reduced sewer blockages, breakdowns, and
         wastewater spills had a positive impact on reducing wastewater pollution.
        The project exceeded the target of 3,100 tons/year of BOD5 removed from Samarkand WWTP with a
         final value of 3,148 tons/year, and an additional 53.1 tons/year from Farkhad WWTP.
        14,691 households were connected to the sewerage system exceeding the revised target of 14,000.
         Sewerage blockages and breaks, which resulted in raw sewerage spills and wastewater pollution,
         decreased from 1,056 per year in 2009 to 345 in 2021, or 67%, exceeding the revised target of 700.
        The project also financed a two-phased rehabilitation of the Bukhara WWTP. The first phase
         rehabilitated the WWTP’s capacity to handle wastewater up to 50,000 m3/day. By project completion,
         the plant was able to treat all wastewater collected in line with national standards (daily inflows of
         sewerage reached 43,960 m3/day by 2021, ICR, paragraph 29). The WWTP removed 1,765 tons
         BOD5/year compared to a revised target of 2,000. Prior to the project, the effluent was discharged
         without complying with national standards. The ICR (paragraph 29) explained that while the plant was
         able to treat all wastewater currently received, the target was not met due to the quantity of sewerage
         currently received, and the achievement of this target was not affected by the incomplete works under
         Phase II.
        In Bukhara, sewerage coverage increased from 56 to 70%, with 24,464 households (122,320 people)
         gaining first-time access to sewerage services and significantly exceeding the target of 4,500
         households. Sewerage blockages and breakdowns decreased from 1,404 per year in 2009 to 589 in
         2021, or 58%, exceeding the target of 600 per year.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project met or exceeded its IRIs (except one) , and outcome targets
were met or exceeded. Phase II of the Bukhara WWTP was expected to be completed with the secured
Government financing. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in reducing
wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the efficiency of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand.

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would train utility staff on O&M,
customer orientation, financial management, and corporate management. The project would support training
on the implementation of supervisory control and data acquisition systems (SCADA), and run public
awareness campaigns. This was expected to improve data acquisition and management, improve the
capacity of utilities staff, increase awareness of customers with regards to the need of regular payments and
the benefits of sewerage connections, and increase revenue as a result of new household connections. This
would result in improved energy efficiency in sewerage systems and wastewater treatment plants, improved
operational and financial sustainability of utilities, and reduced sewerage blockages and repairs. All this
combined would result in the improvement of the efficiency of wastewater management in Bukhara and
Samarkand. Anticipated long-term outcomes included improved public health and sustainable development.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. The project assumed that
households would connect to sewerage service through self-funding or support from local governments; 2.
The project interventions would be sufficient to mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater despite
other non-project related impacts; and 3. Public awareness campaigns would be able to effectively change
customer behavior.

The stated activities were relevant and directly connected to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However,
the stated assumptions were questionable, because poor customers might not be able to connect if they do
not receive support, and public awareness campaigns does not necessarily change people’s behavior.

Outputs

The RF did not have any outputs indicators under this objectives.

      Energy efficiency was achieved due to modernization of WWTPs with variable speed blowers and
       process automation (ICR, paragraph 31). However, the ICR did not provide further details on the
       number of speed blowers installed.
      All six of Samarkand’s existing pumping stations were rehabilitated during the original project, with two
       additional pumping stations constructed with the AF (ICR, paragraph 31).
      Out of 16 pumping stations in Bukhara city, 10 were replaced and 2 rehabilitated in the original
       project, and a further 4 replaced during the AF (ICR, paragraph 31).

Outcome

Improving the efficiency of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand was driven by improving
energy efficiency at the corresponding WWTPs. At the Bukhara WWTP, energy intensity decreased from 4.1
to 2.5 kWh/kg BOD5 removed, exceeding the target of 3.0 and representing an energy cost saving of 39%. At
the Samarkand WWTP, energy intensity decreased from 4.0 to 1.90 kWh/kg BOD5 removed, exceeding the
target of 3.0 and representing an energy cost savings of 51% (ICR, paragraph 31). The results achieved
under the project represented an estimated cost saving of US$112,960 for Bukhara and US$268,884 per year
for Samarkand. The ICR (paragraph 31) explained that a score less than1.5 kWh/kg BOD5 removed was
considered good according to benchmarking studies, while a score higher than 5 kWh/kg BOD5 removed
suggested low efficiency.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The above-mentioned results demonstrated that the project significantly
improved energy efficiency of wastewater management. The targets for the outcome indicator were both
exceeded as noted above. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the performance of utilities responsible for wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would train utility staff on O&M,
customer orientation, financial management, and corporate management. The project would support training
on the implementation of supervisory control and data acquisition systems (SCADA), and run public
awareness campaigns and support the development of feasibility studies for future projects. This was
expected to improve data acquisition and management, improve the capacity of utilities staff, increase
awareness of customers with regards to the need of regular payments and the benefits of sewerage
connections, and increase revenue as a result of new household connections. This would result in improved
energy efficiency in sewerage systems and wastewater treatment plants, improved operational and financial
sustainability of utilities, and reduced sewerage blockages and repairs. All this combined would result in the
improvement of the efficiency of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand. Anticipated long-term
outcomes included improved public health and sustainable development.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. The project assumed that
households would connect to sewerage service through self-funding or support from local governments; 2.
The project interventions would be sufficient to mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater despite
other non-project related impacts; and 3. Public awareness campaigns would be able to effectively change
customer behavior.

The stated activities were relevant and directly connected to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However,
the stated assumptions were questionable, because poor customers might not be able to connect if they do
not receive support.

Outputs

1. 1,102 utility staff trained (110% of the revised target achieved).
2. SCADA system operational in Samarkand WWTP and Farkhad WWTP (revised target achieved).
3. Three FS completed (revised target achieved).



Outcome



                                                                                                Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



Energy efficiency and operational and financial sustainability were achieved with High and Substantial
efficacy, respectively, as discussed under original PDO2 and PDO3. Improving performance would be
assessed through: (a) coverage of services and (b) customer service aspects.

By project completion, 545,775 people received either new access to the sewer network or are ready to
connect to sewers in front of their houses, exceeding the revised target of 500,000 people. This number does
not include households who already had connections before the project, and who now receive higher levels of
services (ICR, paragraph 36).

Improving customer service was achieved through training of utility staff and public awareness outreach.
According to the ICR (paragraph 37) "training improved the professionalism of utilities as demonstrated by
enhanced customer information systems and data utilization and more rapid response to incidents." A pilot
survey using a mobile application in Bukhara showed that out of 134 respondents, 94% were satisfied with
their level of service in 2021. However, the impact of training on the performance of utilities was not explicitly
monitored (ICR, paragraph 37). With implementation delays, the focus of the project was more on the
completion of large infrastructure components, and the communications and public awareness program
including training became "less of a priority" (ICR, paragraph 37). A pilot survey using a mobile application in
Bukhara showed that out of 134 respondents, 94%were satisfied with their level of service in 2021.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its target on beneficiaries and improved energy
efficiency and operational and financial sustainability. The pilot beneficiary survey demonstrated a high level
of satisfaction among approximately 100 of the customers. That said, there was no evidence to demonstrate
actual improved customer service and nothing to show for actual public awareness outreach. Overall, efficacy
of achieving this objective is rated Modest.




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the sustainability of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would improve the capacity of utility
staff by the provision of training, support the operationalization of the SCADA system, and support public
awareness campaigns, support feasibility studies for future projects. These activities would improve the
capacity of utility staff, increase revenues from new household connections, reduce blockage and repairs, and
improve financial sustainability of utilities through increasing revenue and decreasing costs. As a result the
sustainability of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand would be improved. Anticipated long-
term outcomes included improved public health and sustainable development.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. The project assumed that
households would connect to sewerage service through self-funding or support from local governments; 2.

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



The project interventions would be sufficient to mitigate the environmental impact from wastewater despite
other non-project related impacts; and 3. Public awareness campaigns would be able to effectively change
customer behavior.

The stated activities were relevant and directly connected to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However, it
was not clear how supporting the development of feasibility studies would contribute to the achievement of
the PDO. Also, the stated assumptions were questionable, because poor customers might not be able to
connect if they do not receive support, and public awareness campaigns does not necessarily change
people’s behavior.



Outputs

1. 1,102 utility staff trained (110% of target achieved).
2. SCADA system operational in Samarkand WWTP and Farkhad WWTP (target achieved).

3. Three FS completed (target achieved).

Outcome

Improving sustainability of wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand was assessed through two
main elements relating to the financial and operational sustainability of the two utilities. Financial sustainability
was measured by OCC (the ratio of total operating revenues over total operating costs), while operational
sustainability was measured by the number of sewer blockages. Prior to the project, both Vodokanals
were receiving significant Government subsidies to pay debt obligations and cover exchange rate losses, and
incurring financial losses caused by low tariffs and high energy costs, among other reasons (ICR, paragraph
33). By project closing, the Bukhara Suvtaminot had an OCC of 1.65 (exceeding the target of 1.45) and
Samarkand Suvtaminot 1.36 (partially achieving the target of 1.40). The project achieved mixed results on
OCC targets where it was exceeded for Bukhara Suvtaminot and partially achieved for Samarkand
Suvtaminot. The ICR (paragraph 33) noted that OCC was volatile through implementation due to increased
operational costs associated with large infrastructure development.

Operational sustainability of the sewerage system improved as evidenced by a decrease in blockages from
1,404 per year in 2009 to 589 in 2021 in Bukhara, exceeding the target of 600 per year; 51.46 km of new
sewers were laid (41 km target) and 49.48 km replaced (82.70 km target). The ICR (paragraph 34) noted that
prior to the project, the number of blockages in the older parts of the Bukhara sewerage system was about
160 times as high as the blockage rate in well-managed US utilities. In Samarkand, sewerage blockages
decreased from 1,056 per year in 2009 to 345 in 2021, exceeding the target of 700; 91.7 km of new sewers
were laid (59.2 km target) and 34.35 km replaced (34.35 km target).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project achieved mixed results. While the targets for operational
sustainability were exceeded, targets for financial sustainability were only partially achieved. That said, and
with a 100% increase in tariffs in 2021, it is plausible to assume that going forward financial sustainability of
wastewater management will experience further improvements. Therefore, the efficacy with which this
objective was achieved is rated Substantial, despite some shortcomings.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)




                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Objectives. The project achieved mixed results against its outcome indicators, but given the
                            insufficiency of adequate indicators to measure the outcome, the rating for PDO 1 was Modest. The project
                            significantly improved energy efficiency of wastewater management. The targets for the outcome indicator
                            were both exceeded as noted above. The rating for PDO 2 was High. As for PDO3, the project achieved
                            mixed results. While the targets for operational sustainability were exceeded, targets for financial
                            sustainability were only partially achieved. That said, and with a 100% increase in tariffs in 2021, it is
                            plausible to assume that going forward financial sustainability of wastewater management will experience
                            further improvements. Therefore, the rating for PDO3 was Substantial.

                            Overall efficacy before restructuring is rated Modest due to insufficiency of indicators to measure the outcome
                            of the first objective.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Insufficient evidence
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Revised Objectives. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in reducing
                            wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand. Specifically, the project exceeded the revised target of
                            3,100 tons/year of BOD5 removed from Samarkand WWTP with a final value of 3,148 tons/year, and
                            an additional 53.1 tons/year from Farkhad WWTP. The project also reduced sewerage blockages and breaks,
                            which resulted in raw sewerage spills and wastewater pollution, from 1,056 per year in 2009 to 345 in 2021,
                            or 67%, exceeding the revised target of 700. Therefore, PDO1 is rated Substantial. The project exceeded its
                            target on beneficiaries and improved energy efficiency and operational and financial sustainability. Also,
                            anecdotal evidence point to a high level of satisfaction among customers. PDO2 is rated Substantial.

                            Overall, the project resulted in improved access to sanitation, improved wastewater collection and treatment,
                            and improved utility performance and sustainability, particularly in energy efficiency and operational
                            performance. Therefore, overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, but barely so. There was a lack of adequate
                            indicators to comprehensively measure the project achievements related to operational sustainability, and the
                            original targets for financial sustainability were only partially achieved.



                                                                                                                             Page 14 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

     Applying a typical cost-benefit analysis to the project was not possible because the water
      supply/sewerage tariffs were tightly controlled by the central government, and there were no meters or
      sewerage tariffs, levied and collected independently from water supply services (PAD, Annex 9).
     A cost-effectiveness assessment was considered in qualitative terms, identifying the expected benefits,
      including improved health of residents due to reduced pollution. The analysis concluded that
      interventions in sewer rehabilitation were urgent, and the project should prioritize network rehabilitation
      due to ageing of critical infrastructure and associated declining levels of service performance.
     At the AF in 2015, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted with the quantification of costs and benefits.
      With the estimation of the costs of investments and incremental benefits, the cost-benefit analysis
      estimated the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at 13% in Bukhara and 14% in Samarkand.
     A financial analysis was conducted to investigate cost recovery levels in SVK and BVK. The analysis
      looked at the connection/interaction between annual tariff increases, annual net income, cash flow
      deficits, and the financial working ratio. However, the PAD did not include and explicit estimate for the
      financial analysis.

ex post

     The economic value of investments were reassessed at closing. This included updating estimated
      benefits as well as actual project costs incurred, to evaluate implementation efficiency. The analysis was
      conducted as an incremental analysis to the one done in 2015, where changes during implementation
      were compared to expected outcomes.
     For Bukhara, the revised cost-benefit analysis showed a lower, EIRR at 12%, while for Samarkand, the
      revised analysis showed an increase in the EIRR to 16%.
     Financial Analysis. Both Suvtaminots were independent regional water and sanitation companies, with all
      consumers within the same region charged a standardized tariff. As a result of sector reforms to aid
      sustainability, water and sanitation tariffs were raised by more than 100% in 2020, effective from January
      2021. According to the ICR (paragraph 42) tariff increases resulted in significant increases in revenues,
      and both Suvtaminots’ financial statements showed improved cost recovery from fee collections.
     Implementation Efficiency. The project was implemented over a 12 years period compared to an
      estimation of 6 years at appraisal. In total, the project was extended by 71 months. While cost savings
      from competitive procurement in the AF were a major source of efficiency, project delays and poor-
      quality feasibility studies in the parent project, which underestimated project costs, had a negative impact
      on implementation efficiency (ICR, paragraph 41). Implementation delays were exacerbated by the
      impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including restrictions on imports of goods and equipment, as well as
      human resource capacity issues associated with the pandemic (ICR, paragraph 18). Implementation

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



       efficiency in Bukhara was negatively affected by spending on phase II without associated benefits,
       although positively affected by a higher level of new household connections than estimated, as well as
       due to cost savings of around 15%.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The project experienced significant implementation delays. The under
estimation of costs at appraisal necessitated additional financing to complete the project activities. The AF was
significantly larger than the parent project (US$105 million versus US$55 million for the parent project). While
the parent project experienced higher actual costs, the AF benefited from cost savings that amounted to 15% of
the allocated funds (ICR Annex 4, paragraph 19). Despite the extended implementation period, the project did
not fully complete the secondary treatment of the WWTP in Bukhara and missed the target for pollution removal.
The ICR (Annex 4, paragraph 6) noted that works were ongoing to complete these works using Government
funds. The EIRRs at completion were slightly lower for Bukhara (12% compared to 13% at appraisal) and
slightly higher for Samarkand (16% compared to 14% at appraisal). Finally, the ICR (Annex 4) noted that the
rehabilitation of existing sewers resulted in significantly fewer blockages as well as the energy efficiency at the
WWTP achieved beyond the planned level. Overall, Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original Objectives. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall efficacy was rated Modest due to
insufficiency of indicators to measure the outcome of the first objective. The project significantly improved
energy efficiency of wastewater management. While the original targets for operational sustainability were
exceeded, there were insufficient indicator as outcome level to fully measure operational sustainability, and the
original targets for financial sustainability were only partially achieved. Efficiency was rated Modest. The project
experienced significant implementation delays and costs were much higher than anticipated at appraisal.

Based on a High rating for Relevance of Objectives and Modest rating for each of Overall Efficacy and
Efficiency, Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Revised Objectives. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project
succeded in reducing wastewater pollution in Bukhara and Samarkand as evidenced by exceeding targets on

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



BOD5 and significantly reducing sewerage blockages. The project also partially achieved its targets on financial
sustainability, and with reduced sewerage blockages, it is plausible to assume that operational sustainability
improved, however, more indicators were needed to comprehensively measure this aspect. Efficiency was rated
Modest. The project experienced significant implementation delays and costs were much higher than
anticipated at appraisal.

Based on a High rating for Relevance of Objectives, Substantial rating for Overall Efficacy and Modest rating
for Efficiency, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Split Rating

                                Before Restructuring       After Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives         High                       High
Overall Efficacy                Modest                     Substantial (weak)
PDO1                            Modest
PDO2                            High
PDO3                            Substantial
Revised PDO1                                              Substantial
Revised PDO2                                              Modest
Efficiency                      Modest                    Modest
Outcome Rating                  Moderately Unsatisfactory Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical Value of Outcome
                                3                          4
Ratings
Disbursements (US$)             US$37.99 million           US$94.81 million
Share of disbursements (%)      28.60%                     71.39%
Weighted Value of Outcome
                                0.86                       2.86
Rating
                                                           Moderately
                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                                           Satisfactory
Final Outcome Rating
                                (0.86 + 2.86 = 3.72
                                                           (0.86 + 2.86 = 3.72
                                rounds up to 4)
                                                           rounds up to 4)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed two main risks that could potentially impact the development outcome:


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



1. Technical risk related to the operationalization of wastewater infrastructure. While infrastructure
works were successfully tested and commissioned, the incomplete status of the second phase of the
Bukhara WWTP poses a risk to development outcome. The ICR (paragraph 80) noted that the GoU secured
an estimated US$3.5 million for the completion of the remaining works, which were estimated to be
completed by September 2022. The Government also retained the Project implementation Consultant (PIC)
from the project to continue working on the site to enable successful completion. However, inadequate
reinvestment in WSS services more generally, particularly since this has been a persistent challenge in the
sector, remains a long-term risk. That said, recent tariff increases suggest a positive change and the ability of
utilities to plan for preventative maintenance works (ICR, paragraph 80).

2. Institutional risk at the utility level related to operational and financial performance. There are still
gaps in capacity and utilities still struggle to attract and retain skilled employees (ICR, paragraph 81). These
risks were expected to be partially mitigated through support from the on-going Bank funded Water Services
and Institutional Support (WASIS) project, which will moderate risks to the institutional development under
BSSP.

The following risk is emphasized by IEG:

3. Environmental Risk. It is important to ensure that the operation and maintenance of the rehabilitated
water treatment plants continue to be supported. Lack of funding and poor maintenance could result in
shortcomings in treating wastewater which will undermine the environmental achievements under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        The project was developed to respond to the Government of Uzbekistan's (GoU) long-standing
          request to finance priority sanitation investments in Bukhara and Samarkand cities (ICR,
          paragraph 48). The project objectives were in line with the GOU’s priorities for the Water Supply
          and Sanitation sector (see section 3 for details). Also, the involvement of the Bank brought in
          needed external funding and technical know-how for sustainable operations and good
          maintenance (PAD, paragraph 4).
         The project was developed as a follow-up operation to the Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply
          Project (BSWSP) (P049621), which only focused on water supply. It mainly aimed to tackle the
          large-scale environmental pollution from limited wastewater treatment (ICR, paragraph 5).
         The project design featured infrastructure rehabilitation combined with institutional reforms. To
          enable better financial oversight, design had a centralized financial management through the
          PCU. However, financial management remained challenging throughout implementation.
         Implementation readiness was poor. The ICR (paragraph 51) acknowledged that the project was
          not ready for implementation at Board approval. Feasibility studies significantly underestimated
          capital expenditure costs, and detailed designs and bidding documents were not prepared. This
          had a significant negative effect on the project in that it needed additional financing that nearly
          tripled the original allocation and delayed the project with 6 years.



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



        Technical documentation suffered from poor quality which was exacerbated by limited capacity of
         implementing agencies and the need to hire a Project Implementation Consultant (ICR, paragraph
         51). All of which resulted in significant implementation delays
        Seven risks were identified at appraisal related to economic, financial, institutional, and fiduciary
         risks. The overall risk rating was moderate. Despite that fiduciary risks including financial
         management and procurement risks (both rated Substantial) were well-identified from the
         predecessor project, they still posed challenges during implementation (ICR, paragraph 49).
        M&E design suffered from a notable shortcoming. The Results Framework (RF) lacked indicators
         to realistically measure/assess the environmental impact of the original PDO (see section 9a for
         more details).

  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. While the project capitalized on the predecessor
  project experience, implementation readiness was poor and mitigation measures were not enough to
  counter the substantial fiduciary risks. Also, poor feasibility studies resulted in a gross under estimation of
  costs, which necessitated additional financing to cover the financing gap. Finally, M&E design suffered
  from a notable shortcoming as the original PDO was pitched at a higher level of impact beyond the scope
  of the project, this was later addressed through a revision of the PDO. Based on the afore-mentioned
  information, QAE suffered significant shortcomings and is therefore rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 22 implementation support missions over the12 year life of the project. The
 project benefited from having task team leaders based in the country and able to provide daily hands-on
 support. Project restructurings were utilized to address design weaknesses and financing gaps. However,
 despite these efforts and the lengthy implementation duration, works were not completed at the Bukhara
 WWTP.

 Despite some shortcomings, the Bank team guided the project with a good amount of flexibility through
 challenging implementation conditions and managed to achieve most of the expected outcomes.

 Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Summary of Bank Performance Assessment. QAE suffered significant shortcomings as noted above
 and supervision successfully guided the project under challenging implementation conditions. Based on the
 assigned ratings for both criteria and with the outcome rating in the satisfactory range, Bank Performance
 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and
        the results indicators as reported in the PAD. Overall, the ToC in the ICR reflected the relation
        between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and long-term outcomes. However, the original PDO
        was pitched at a high level that was not captured by the outcome indicators in the Results
        Framework.
       The original PDO was to be assessed through five PDO outcome indicators: 1. Pollution load on
        downstream communities measured by sewerage removed at WWTP; 2. Collection of sewerage
        into the WWTP; 3. Energy efficiency at the WWTP and wastewater pumping station; 4. Financial
        working ratio; and 5. Number of sewer blockages per year. While all five indicators were
        measurable, with reasonable targets and included baseline data, they were not sufficient to
        comprehensively capture the broad environmental impacts under the original PDO.
       The RF included seven intermediate outcome indicators. These were linked to the project activities,
        measurable, and with reasonable targets.
       Overall, M&E design lacked indicators that could realistically measure the environmental impact of
        the project. Otherwise, the RF was well designed and included relevant indicators, baseline values,
        and reasonable targets. The RF also included a useful description of how the indicators should be
        used during implementation. However, some indicators focused largely on outputs and not
        outcomes, for example, by recording number of staff trained without linking this to the outcome of
        better utilities performance (ICR, paragraph 65).



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation suffered from several shortcomings during implementation. First,
         the management information system (MIS) described in the PAD was not established; Second,
         establishment of the SCADA systems at the Farkhad and Samarkand WWTPs was delayed (ICR,
         paragraph 66); Third, implementation suffered from low capacity in utilities to implement M&E
         activities as their focus was on addressing major procurement challenges (ICR, paragraph 67);
         Fourth, M&E specialists positions remained vacant despite that they were planned as part of the
         core implementation team; and Fifth, customer satisfaction surveys were only implemented as a
         pilot despite being part of M&E design to collect meaningful information about project
         interventions along with data on general levels of satisfaction with services (ICR, paragraph 67).
        M&E functions were eventually assigned to PICs, which were increasingly able to provide data for
         the RF, collected through site supervision and their growing embeddedness within utilities’
         operations.
        The PDO was revised as part of the 2015 restructuring to be more measurable and attributable to
         the project activities. Also, the RF was streamlined to better capture the progress toward the
         project’s objectives. The indicator financial working ratio was corrected to operating cost coverage

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



           (ICR, paragraph 66). The 2015 restructuring also clearly assigned M&E roles with day-to-day
           M&E to utilities, in line with efforts to increase their management authority in the project.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 68), "M&E utilization did partly allow to inform project
         management and course correction." M&E data enabled the Bank and the project management
         to take necessary corrective actions through project restructuring to ensure achieving the project
         objectives.
        However, M&E utilization could have benefited from a thorough review during implementation to
         address any weaknesses, in terms of results and capacity to carry out M&E.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design lacked relevant indicators to assess the original
  PDO. This was corrected through restructuring and revision of the PDO during implementation. M&E
  implementation suffered from several shortcomings as noted above, and most importantly the customer
  satisfaction surveys were not implemented as envisioned. Improvements made during project
  implementation enabled the M&E system to generate sufficient information to assess the achievement of
  the objectives. Finally, utilization was limited and could have benefitted from conducting the envisioned
  customer surveys. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

 a. Safeguards
   The Environmental risk rating of the project was Category B (Partial assessment). Four safeguard policies
   were triggered under the project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
   7.50). An exception to OP/BP 7.50 was granted due to the project’s focus on rehabilitation of existing
   infrastructure. The project was expected to significantly improve the environment due to expanded coverage
   and more efficient sewage services in both cities. Also, it was expected to help lower health risks due to the
   poor sanitation and pollution generated by constant sewer leaks. Possible negative environmental impacts
   would be minor site-specific, short-term and easily identified/addressed by mitigation measures and good
   construction practices.

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 71) "environmental and
   social safeguards were a persistent challenge for the project." Safeguard compliance was negatively
   impacted by the absence of central safeguards oversight. Utilities had limited environmental and social
   management capacity and lacked qualified specialists within their institutions. The PCU did not have the
   position of environmental safeguards specialist to ensure proper oversight of sub-projects and report on
   compliance. The quality of safeguard documentation, coordination between different parties, and the speed



                                                                                                   Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



  and effectiveness with which non-compliance issues were addressed were all negatively impacted by the
  lack of qualified staff with the implementing partners and contractors (ICR, paragraph 71).

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 72) "there were no large-scale
  resettlement activities under the project and most of the works were carried out within existing facilities or
  along roadways." Four Resettlement Action Plans were prepared, with adequate compensation paid to
  project-affected parties by project closing. However, during implementation, inconsistencies in social
  safeguard policies were a challenge. For example, there were instances of project-affected persons not
  being compensated for project impacts on time due to lack of capacity to prepare and implement the
  Resettlement Action Plans.

  The ICR did not provided an explicit statement on compliance with safeguard policies, but stated that "the
  project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory environmental and social safeguards rating (paragraph 72)."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). FM suffered from systemic issues across much of the country's portfolio.
  There were challenges associated with inadequate capacity of public sector accounting; poor financial
  reporting and audit arrangements; weak internal controls, including an underdeveloped internal audit
  system; and weak legislative oversight (ICR, paragraph 74). The project experienced late submission of
  interim unaudited financial reports, late submission of audited project financial statements, and delayed
  documentation of expenditures incurred. The ICR (paragraph 74) noted the following key reasons the led
  to noncompliance with financial management/disbursement requirements: "(a) the PCU was understaffed
  and faced high staff turnover during most of the project implementation period, leading to a heavy workload
  on those still within the unit and (b) due to lack of experienced specialists in the market to implement
  international financial institution-funded projects, it took time to build PCU staff capacity." FM was
  rated Moderately Satisfactory at closing, with no pending actions (ICR, paragraph 74).

  Procurement. While procurement was implemented in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement and
  Consultant Guidelines and in accordance with the provisions of the Financing Agreement, it was often the
  central cause of major delays. The project lacked a proper procurement strategy (ICR, paragraph 75). The
  ICR (paragraph 75) reported that interviews (conducted as part of the ICR preparation) revealed
  that procurement capacity was identified as a key constraint, including quality, integrity, and efficiency
  issues. Procurement challenges included the absence of a single institution for procurement-related
  activities and weak capacity for drafting, reviewing, and managing contracts. Other challenges included
  poor quality packages and many cases of retendering. The Bank team provided training to address specific
  areas of need to improve procurement capacity. Procurement improved after additional implementing
  responsibility was given to utilities, supported by the project implementation consultants (PICs).
  Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---


                                                                                                    Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



d. Other
   "The project was expected to benefit poorer households through access to sewers, and the overall
   environmental benefits of the project would have positive effects for households living downstream of the
   two cities. In addition, having operational sanitation systems was a necessity for the growth and
   development of the tourism industry in Bukhara and Samarkand, and which was not the case in 2009. A key
   economic driver for both cities, the development of the tourism sector will contribute to shared prosperity
   through jobs and increasing income (ICR, paragraph 46)."



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               M&E design and Implementation
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest                    both suffered from significant
                                                                               shortcomings.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Successful public sector reforms require a gradual approach with sectoral reforms and
enough time for changes to materialize. Public sector reforms require time, trust, and flexibility,
and realism in timing and the achievement of results. In a country context where the WSS sector is
still maturing, additional time should be built into project implementation, recognizing that these
changes are likely to have a profound effect on implementation. This also has implications for the
lending instruments that best support public sector reforms. For example, a series of interventions
with a number of credits/loans linked to the Government’s medium-term program toward incremental
changes has proved successful in achieving a more ambitious intervention. Also, support through
selective entry points can show success and can form the basis for later progress, even in difficult
areas such as public service reform. Sector reform requires strong country ownership and to this
end the Bank needs to tailor its support to the pace of reform.

2. Implementation readiness is a critical element of projects that if not appropriately
addressed may lead to unnecessary implementation delays. Projects need to be ready for
implementation to reduce delays that carry over the entire project period and hinder holistic project
implementation. In BSSP, delays that originated due to lack of readiness resulted in increased
pressure over time to deliver on major, but late, construction works, which had a negative impact on
softer project interventions and can be argued to have lowered project ambitions in these areas.
Initial implementation delays can be reduced by completing more works during project preparation

                                                                                                  Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



such as (a) preparation of request for proposal for consulting services, (b) approval of feasibility
studies by the Government, (c) preparation of tender documents for the first contract packages, and
(d) advance actions for the procurement of consulting services or construction contracts.

3. If project design does not reflect clear implementation roles for implementing entities, it
may impede decision-making in complex projects. The involvement of too many entities in
project activities, particularly in procurement decision-making, can cause major delays and reduce
the authority of implementing entities to make required decisions. The BSSP's experience
demonstrated that the lack of project management autonomy was a key contributor to the poor
performance of the project in its early years. Also, the interference from national entities in the day-
to-day project activities can be an additional impediment for progress if not planned for in design.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. While M&E implementation faced challenges, enough data was collected to track the
progress of activities and assess the achievement of the PDOs. However, customer satisfaction surveys were
only implemented as a pilot. These would have collected meaningful information about project interventions
along with data on general levels of satisfaction with services.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the
project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. Discussion
of outcomes was adequate. The efficiency analysis could have benefited from including a comparison of costs
of similar works under different projects.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation
experience and candidly reported on shortcomings. However, reporting on safeguards did not include an
explicit statement on compliance and one safeguard stated in the PAD was not reported in the ICR (Physical
Cultural Resources (OP 4.11).

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with minor shortcomings.




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BUKHARA & SAMARKAND SEWERAGE PROJECT (P112719)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                Page 25 of 25
