     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023099

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P110099                                     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-44370,IDA-57600                         28-Feb-2014                                        42,058,800.55

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2008                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             38,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              44,527,403.33                                             0.00

 Actual                                          42,058,800.55                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Wendy Schreiber Ayres       Peter Nigel Freeman           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated July 14, 2008 (page
   4) was to improve the Recipient’s management and investment planning of the water resources in the Indus
   River system.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Sep-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component A. Capacity building of and support to the federal institutions in water resources
   planning and management (cost at appraisal US$17.0 million, actual cost US$7.04). This component
   focused on reinforcing the mandates of the federal institutions and addressing the impediments to better
   performance. It supported capacity building of and support to federal institutions involved in water resources
   planning, management, and development. The component included, among other activities, support for
   building human resources and institutional capacity in federal institutions, and support for developing
   studies, strategies, and plans for improving water resources planning and management. It contained four
   subcomponents. The first focused on building capacity of the Ministry of Water and Power (MoWP) in
   regulation, policy, and planning. The second focused on building capacity of the Indus River System
   Authority (IRSA) in system planning, management, and operations. The third supported developing
   financing strategies for water and hydropower, including through public-private partnerships. The fourth
   focused on supporting the Planning Commission and financing feasibility studies for small dams and water
   storage facilities.

   Revised component A. Under the first restructuring, several activities were dropped, including (a) a
   strategy for enhancing productivity of water use and irrigation efficiency; (b) an assessment of beneficiary
   participation and benefit sharing among stakeholders of projects; (c) action plans for asset development,
   ownership, and operations; (d) capacity building and development of enabling framework; (e) studies for
   financing hydropower projects through private-public partnerships; and (f) advisory services for hydropower
   projects. Through the Additional Financing (AF), activities totaling US$10.57 million were added to
   component A. These included financing for upgrading of (a) the Nandipur Irrigation Research Station; and
   (b) of the Hyderabad and Karachi Soil Mechanics Hydraulics Research Laboratories; and establishing (c) a
   laboratory for survey, drawing and soil testing at the Irrigation Unit/Division in Balochistan. It also provided
   funds to scale-up efforts to increase transparency in the inter-provincial water allocation system contribute
   to water conveyance efficiency in the Indus Basin Irrigation System. Finally, it provided support for the
   establishment of an international center for national and international coordination and cooperation. Under
   the restructuring of March 2020, all of the activities added during the AF were dropped due to cancellation
   of US$25 million to reallocate funds for the government’s response to Covid-19.

   Component B. Improvement in water resources management and development (cost at appraisal
   US$17.0 million, actual cost US$25.82). This component focused on providing strategic support to the
   Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA). This included among others support for (a) upgrading
   of existing tools, databases, models and management systems; (b) sediment management studies for the
   Indus system; (c) preparation of a power investment plan; and (d) preparation of feasibility studies and
   design for easily implementable hydropower projects.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



  Revised component B. Under the first restructuring, funds released from component A were added to
  component B for the detailed design of hydropower projects, which was underfunded. Any residual funds
  would support new activities to assist the Federal Floods Commission (FFC). Through the AF, activities
  totaling US$17.15 million were added to component B. These included: (a) enhancements for hydropower
  generation and development planning and flood resilience; (b) upgrading of the Concrete, Cement, Steel
  and Soil Dynamics Lab of the Central Material Testing Laboratory at WAPDA; and (c) preparation of
  feasibility studies for one of the five priority hydropower projects under the Indus Cascade Hydropower
  Development Plan. Under the restructuring of March 2020, most of the activities added during the AF were
  dropped due to cancellation of US$25 million to reallocate funds for the government’s response to Covid-
  19.

  Component C. Project management and additional studies (cost at appraisal US$4.0 million, actual cost
  US$9.20). This component focused on supporting the government, particularly the MoWP, with financing for
  project management, including coordination of all project related activities, monitoring and evaluation of
  project impacts and technical and financial audits. It also provided support for enhancing capacity of staff of
  the federal institutions, particularly at IRSA.

  Revised component C. Through the AF, activities totaling US$7.23 million were added to component C.
  These included: (a) additional support for project management; (b) additional strategic studies, including
  those identified in the National Flood Protection Plan IV; and (c) additional capacity building and training
  programs for government officials. Under the restructuring of March 2020, procurement of vehicles, office
  equipment, and planned strategic studies were dropped. Given Covid, restrictions the remaining planned
  professional training was dropped.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$38 million. Following the AF, the project cost rose
  to US$72.95 million. The actual cost at closing date, June 30, 2022 was US$41.84 million after US$25
  million had been cancelled.

  Financing: The project’s cost was financed through two IDA Credits totaling US$42.06 million, of which
  US$41.84 million was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower did not contribute to the project’s cost.

  Restructuring:

  First Restructuring. The project was restructured on March 15, 2012 to drop some activities that were being
  undertaken by other government agencies, and reallocate funds to new priorities that emerged following the
  2010 floods. These measures were expected to improve project management and progress towards
  achieving the PDO.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



   Second Restructuring. The project was restructured on January 13, 2014 to extend the closing date by 12
   months to February 28, 2015, to allow completion of ongoing activities, including the National Flood
   Management Plan and to allow the Government to prepare its request for the AF.

   Third Restructuring. The project was restructured on February 12, 2015 to extend the closing date by eight
   months to October 30, 2015 to allow time to process the AF for the project (the request was received on
   December 19, 2014) and to allow time for (a) completion of the Improvement of Water Resources
   Management study (which required hydrologic measurements in one low-flow and one high-flow season)
   and (b) finalization of the National Flood Management Plan.

   Fourth Restructuring. The project was restructured on September 30, 2015 to extend the closing date by
   three months to January 31, 2016, to allow time to complete the (a) establishment of a data center at the
   FFC as part of the 'Development of National Flood Protection Plan-IV' (NFPP-IV); and (b) processing of the
   AF.

   Fifth Restructuring. The project restructuring was approved on November 30, 2015 to provide AF of
   US$34.95 to scale up existing activities and to enhance capacity to address basin level management of the
   Indus water resources. Other changes included (a) extending the closing date by five years and five months
   to June 30, 2021 to allow time to complete the activities planned for the AF, (b) updating the results
   framework to reflect the scale up; (c) revising the disbursement estimates reflecting the additional credit and
   extended implementation period; and (d) revising the components and costs.

   Sixth Restructuring. The project was restructured on March 17, 2020 to cancel US$25 million in response to
   a government request following the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. Other changes included (a) revising
   the results framework to reflect the reduced scope of the project, (b) revising the components and costs, (c)
   reallocating funds between disbursement categories, and (d) revising the disbursement estimates.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 26, 2008 and became effective on September 22, 2008. The
   project closed on June 30, 2021, seven years and five months after the original closing date of February 28,
   2014.

   Split Rating. As the project scope became more ambitious, a split rating is not applied.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal

The key challenge for Pakistan was to sustain its recent growth to significantly reduce poverty, requiring
continued sound macroeconomic management and further improvements in the investment climate. In
particular, Pakistan’s infrastructure needed significant investment to support its growth and service delivery
goals. Approximately 40 percent of the population lacked access to power. The infrastructure challenge was
particularly acute with respect to water, as Pakistan relied on the largest contiguous irrigation system in the
world to provide basic food security (90 percent of food production and 25 percent of gross domestic
product). However, the country’s infrastructure was deteriorating and in need of rehabilitation. Reforms

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



were also needed to improve the allocation of water and the efficiency of its use. Pakistan had begun
increasing its investments in irrigation infrastructure. Yet, there remained a need for significant new
investment in not only irrigation, but also in other uses of water, including hydropower generation and
urban-industrial and domestic supplies (only 50 percent of the population was served by a formal water
supply system and only 10 percent was served with sanitation services). At the same time, there was
uncontrolled pollution of surface and groundwater from agriculture, industry, and rapidly growing cities.

Alignment with Country Priorities

The PDO was well-aligned with Pakistan’s socio-economic development and water supply and sanitation
sector priorities. Specifically, the project contributed to two of the government’s objectives, as laid out in
federal and provincial plans. The first was to achieve an efficient, sustainable, affordable, and consumer-
oriented electric power system that meets the needs of its people and economy. The second was to
achieve sustained growth in agriculture, with enhanced productivity of farms and generating linkages for
rural non-farm economy (Country Partnership Strategy for fiscal 2015–2019, Annex 1(b) page 1 and 3).

Alignment with Bank Strategy

The project’s objectives are assessed as fully aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as laid out in its
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for fiscal 2015–2019, which specifies energy security as a top priority
for growth. The project sought to address the development problem of lack of access to energy supplies by
supporting policy and institutional reforms needed to produce more and lower-cost power generation in
Pakistan. The project also aimed to strengthen multiple sector institutions for management and investment
planning of water resources through provision of technical assistance and advice. The project objectives
correspond to Outcome 1.1: reduced load shedding, Outcome 1.2: reduced cost of electricity production,
Objective 1.3: improved financial sustainability of the electric power sector, all under Results Area 1:
Energy. The project objectives also correspond to Outcome 2.2: increased productivity in farms in selected
irrigation schemes under Results Area 2: Private Sector Development (CPS, pp. 14–18).

The Bank’s 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Pakistan also highlighted “improve energy
sector performance” and “improve management of water resources as the reform priorities for the country.”
These priorities are reflected in the draft Country Partnership Framework (CPF) fiscal 2022–26 under the
‘Green and Clean Pakistan’ Program of the government. The project thus continues to remain fully aligned
with the current SCD and the draft CPF.

Previous World Bank Experience

The World Bank has a long history of partnership and collaboration in the water sector in Pakistan. As a key
partner and principal donor, it provided support to several main interventions in the development of the
Indus Basin Irrigation System (IBIS), including: (a) facilitating the Indus Water Treaty negotiations between
Pakistan and India in the 1950s; (b) establishing of the Indus Basin Development Fund that supported the
construction of Mangla and Tarbela Dams and several inter-river link canals and barrages that enabled the
implementation of the Indus Treaty; (c) formulating the Salinity Control and Reclamation Program in 1968;
(d) formulation of the Revised Action Plan for Irrigated Agriculture in 1979; (e) assisting in the Water Sector
Investment Planning Study in 1991 that led to the Inter Provincial Water Apportionment Accord of 1991 and
the establishment of the Indus River System Authority (IRSA); (f) developing, perhaps most importantly, the
Irrigation and Drainage Strategy of 1994 (Pakistan: Irrigation and Drainage – Issues and Options, Report
11884-PAK) that led to a major shift in the direction of the irrigation and drainage sector of Pakistan and


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



               implementation of current institutional reform agenda; and (g) the formulation of the Pakistan Water CAS
               (Pakistan’s Water Economy Running Dry, 2005, Report 34081-PK) that highlighted the recent issues that
               the water sector was facing and outlined an approach to address them. The two largest provinces, Punjab
               and Sindh, which manage more than 85 percent of the IBIS, embarked on far reaching irrigation reforms
               and made significant progress on the reform agenda. Altogether, the Bank had supported more than 48
               operations in irrigation, drainage, and water resources development and the power sector prior to the
               approval of the Water Sector Capacity Building and Advisory Services Project (WCAP).

               However, while the objective remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary response
               to a development gap in Pakistan, a significant shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the project formulation
               around what outcomes would be achieved through improving management and planning of water
               resources. The causal chain between funding and outcomes was clear, albeit with most targets at output
               level, as the objective was closer to the output level, rather than the outcome level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: “To improve the management of water resources in the Indus River system.”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project’s theory of change indicated that the project’s inputs—IDA’s financial and technical assistance
                             support—would directly lead to the achievement of project outputs, which in turn would lead to the project’s
                             outcomes. The activities consisted of (a) capacity building of staff of water sector institutions; (b) preparation
                             of feasibility studies for small dams and water storage facilities. The key outputs were (a) officials of MoWP,
                             IRSA, and WAPDA trained on water policy, planning, and management; and (b) strategic sectoral
                             environmental and social assessment of the Indus Basin prepared; and (c) upgrading of telemetry stations to
                             improve measurement of water flow. In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of
                             improved management of water resources. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid
                             and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions. The activities,
                             if completed, would be sufficient to provide a critical mass for the expected change.

                             The key assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) capacity building of and support to federal
                             institutions in water resources management; (b) capacity building in regulation, policy, and planning of the
                             MoWP; (c) capacity building of IRSA in system planning, management, and operation; (d) and capacity
                             building of the Infrastructure Project Development Facility (IPDF) and WAPDA in developing strategies for the


                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



water and hydropower sector would take place during the project period and would contribute to
improvements of water resources management.

The assumptions would have been reasonable if the effectiveness of this capacity building had been properly
defined and could be monitored. However, the results framework was comprised of outputs rather than
outcomes. Quantitative targets for additional indicators were provided when the Additional Finance (AF) was
approved. The AF enabled better tracking of results. It also expanded the project scope but this was short-
lived because the Government of Pakistan requested the cancelation of US$25 million to respond to the
Covid-19 pandemic. The evaluation accordingly had to measure progress against the end-of-project targets
set at AF.

Outputs

Compared against the end-of-project targets

Only one of the five output targets was fully achieved.

      No strategic assessments for improved water management were carried out. The target set in the
         Project Paper for the AF was seven.
        80 staff in federal institutions trained on water resources management, hydropower related issues,
         and project management. The target set in the Project Paper for the AF was 90.
        80 telemetry stations upgraded. The target set in the Project Paper for the AF was 90.
        Seven decision support tools and models for water resources management established and/or
         upgraded. The target set in the Project Paper for the AF was five.
        Two labs and facilities for water resources management established and/or upgraded. The target set
         in the Project Paper for the AF was four.

Outcomes

Compared against the end-of-project targets

PDO Indicator (Modern tools Operationalized) was not fully achieved.

1. Eight modern tools were operationalized and used for decision making. The revised target set in the
Project Paper for the AF was 13, up from six in the PAD.

PDO Indicator (Direct Project Beneficiaries) was not fully achieved.

2. Some 200 people, staff of water institutions, directly benefited from the project, (1 percent female). The
target set in the Project Paper for the AF was 250, (1 percent female).

The PDO indicator targets were not fully achieved. The efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is
modest.



Rating


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To improve the investment planning of water resources in the Indus River Basin."

Rationale
A direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes. The
activities consisted of (a) upgrading of tools, database, models, and management systems; (b) studies of
sediment management carried out; (c) asset management plans completed; (d) feasibility studies of run-of-
the-river hydro projects completed. The key outputs were (a) integrated Indus basin model revised; (b)
sediment management study for the Tarbela Reservoir carried out; (c) WAPDA engineers trained on dam
safety; (d) detailed design and tender documents for the Tarbela fourth extension hydropower project and the
Dasu run-of-the river hydropower projects completed; (e) feasibility study of constructing underground dams
carried out and potential small dam sites identified; and (f) National Flood Protection Plan developed

In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of improved investment planning in the
Indus River Basin. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcome were valid and direct, and the
outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions.

The key assumption leading to this objective was that improved investment planning of water resources in the
Indus River Basin would be achieved by (a) upgrading existing tools, databases, models, and management
systems; (b) preparing feasibility studies for hydropower projects; (c) preparing sediment management
studies for the Indus system; (d) preparing asset management plans; and (e) and carrying out dam safety
inspections, preparing studies, and training engineers. The activities, if completed, would be sufficient to bring
about the expected change.

Outputs

Compared against the end-of-project targets

Two of the three output activities were fully achieved and one was nearly achieved.

      Eight studies for investment planning developed, including improved resettlement plan, and study on
       policies for benefit sharing among stakeholders on hydropower projects. The target set in the Project
       Paper for the AF was seven.
      One assessment was carried out for improved operations of hydraulic infrastructure, including a
       sediment assessment study. This met the target set in the Project Paper for the AF.
      Sediment management studies and flushing tests for the Tarbela Reservoir were carried out. This met
       the target set in the Project Paper for the AF.

Outcomes

Compared against the end-project targets

PDO Indicator 2 (WCAP detailed design) was not fully achieved.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)




                                  Two investments informed by WCAP activities and outputs were approved for detailed
                                     design/implementation. The target set in the Project Paper for the AF was three, and the original
                                     target was two.

                            The PDO indicator target was not achieved. The efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is rated
                            Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Modest. The objective to improve the management of water resources in the Indus
                            River system was not achieved and is rated Modest. The objective to improve the investment planning of
                            water resources in the Indus River system was also not fully achieved and is rated Modest. Overall efficacy is
                            rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency. No economic analysis of the project was conducted at appraisal, because the project
   was primarily a capacity building and training program, for which economic analysis is not required, according to
   the PAD, paragraph 57. However, an economic analysis was conducted for the interim Implementation and
   Completion and Results Report (Report Number: ICR00001663), in preparation of the AF. It concluded that the
   project’s relatively small investment in capacity building and technical assistance made a significant contribution,
   particularly in improving the investment planning to address the country’s power crisis. It calculated a net
   present value based on the assumption that the absence of the project, the investments in the Tarbela Fourth
   Extension Hydropower Project and the Dasu Hydropower Stage I Project would be made and the benefits
   realized, but with significant delays.[1]

   Under the optimal project implementation schedule (that is, zero delay due to the support of the project) the
   combined net present value (NPV) of Tarbela and Dasu projects is estimated at US$2,784.2 million. This value
   falls to only US$1,589.1 million, if the project implementation is delayed by five years in the absence of project
   support, which is equivalent to avoided benefit loss of US$1,195.1 million (or US$2,784.2 million less
   US$1,589.1 million).[2] The assumptions and methodology used in the cost-benefit analysis were appropriate.

   The economic analysis also noted that the project’s support resulted in the identification of the best possible
   design of the Dasu Hydropower Project with the lowest unit investment cost, and considerably lower

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



resettlement of people, and 13 percent less land flooded than the next best alternative. The project’s also
selection of the least cost option for the Tarbela Hydropower Project.

The economic analysis was updated at project completion, using the same assumptions and methodology as
used for the interim ICR (ICR, page 15–17). It calculates the NPV of the two hydropower projects following a
five-year delay to be US$1,485.1 million, and the value of the avoided benefits to be US$1,299.1 million
(US$2,784.2 million less US$1,485.1 million).

Value for money. The project focused on achieving value for money. It supported the strengthening of existing
institutions and agencies, instead of creating new ones, and trained existing staff. It financed the upgrading of
decision support tools already in use, supporting development of newer tools only where no comparable tools
were already in place. Terms of reference for studies were carefully reviewed to ensure that they were
appropriate, required inputs from experts with appropriately defined skill levels, and costing was realistic.
Adherence to these was carefully monitored during implementation and contributed to efficient use of resources.

Design and implementation efficiency. The project closing date was extended by seven years and five
months to allow adequate time to complete ongoing contracts, to absorb the AF. However, between AF project
effectiveness (February 5, 2016) and project closure (June 30, 2020) only a further US$6.78 million was
disbursed. The ICR (paragraph 21) comments that the government’s changing sector priorities resulted in slow
disbursements. US$25 million was cancelled from the project (72 percent of the AF of the project) on March 17,
2020. Time overruns and cancellations detracted from efficiency given, the opportunity cost of capital and the
service fee that borrowers continued to pay on Bank loans.

The economic analysis prepared at project completion indicates that the project provided significant returns in
relation to its costs. However, the significant delays in implementation and the cancellation of a portion of the
credit, reduced overall efficiency. Efficiency is rated Modest.

[1] Tarbela Fourth Extension Hydropower Project (P 157372) with project cost US$840 million was approved on
March 20, 2012; Dasu Hydropower Stage I Project (P 121507) with project cost US$1,288.40 million was
approved on June 10, 2014.

[2] The assumptions and methodology followed those of the economic analysis of the investments in the
hydropower plants as specified in the respective PADs, with the only modification being the year benefits would
be realized.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With substantial relevance of objectives, modest efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is considered to be high. The project focused on strengthening the
water sector institutions, overall institutional development takes time, and the client needs to mainstream
capacity-building interventions in the overall planning and design of hydropower projects in the Indus River
Basin and in the management of water resources. The Project Management and Policy Implementation Unit
(PMPIU) was responsible for the dissemination of the studies during the project implementation period.
However, the PMPIU was dissolved at project closure, and no other agency has been assigned the roles
performed by the PMPIU. Thus, there is high risk that the feasibility studies and other studies supported
under the project are not widely disseminated and, therefore, do not inform future policy and planned
investments. In addition, political instability and governance presents risks to the development outcome
because of possible political pressures related to reforms in the sector that could challenge continued
progress and undermine governance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the objective of improving management and investment planning of water resources in
  the Indus River system through provision of technical assistance and support for capacity building was of
  high strategic priority. The project was based on an analysis of the sector background and the lessons
  learned from the World Bank’s multi-decade-long engagement and experience in the water sector in
  Pakistan, in general, and support to management of the IBIS, more particularly. The key lessons adopted
  in the project design included (a) use of simple and streamlined procedures governing implementation,
  reflected in the authorization of the PSC to approve any changes, additions, and inclusion of
  studies/activities, according to evolving needs; (b) designating the project director of the PMPIU to
  manage and coordinate the project on a day-to-day basis; (c) limiting the technical assistance to federal
  institutions—rather than also including provincial institutions—and the main river system to reduce the
  project’s overall complexity; and (d) packaging of consultant contracts and technical assistance to avoid,

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



  to the extent possible, lengthy procedures and overheads in procurement and supervision of contracts
  (PAD, paragraph 37).

  The project’s approach was straight forward, with support for strengthening water sector institutions, for
  building capacity of human resources, and for preparing feasibility studies, detailed designs, and bidding
  documents for future investments. The project activities were sufficient to achieve the project objectives.
  The technical aspects of the project were sound. The project supported activities to increase the
  country’s capacity to manage water resources and improve investment planning, both necessary to
  address the development problem of lack of access to energy supplies. Creation of the PMPIU to serve
  as the secretariat to the PSC, and overall project management, and coordination of implementation was
  appropriate, given the large number of implementing agencies involved. Mitigation measures for fiduciary
  risks, including provisions for extensive staff training, were appropriately built into project design.

  However, project implementation arrangements were too complex, with five implementing agencies,
  some of which had little capacity to carry out the project in compliance with the Bank’s policies and
  procedures. .

  Overall, the quality at entry had several shortcomings. The indicators in the results framework were not
  well-specified and were revised during the preparation of the AF. Many activities were dropped because
  they duplicated activities financed by others. Although most risks were appropriately identified, the
  mitigation measures to address the low implementing capacity of some of the implementing agencies
  were inadequate, which led to implementation delays and the eventual transfer of implementation
  responsibilities for feasibility studies for small dams (sub-component A4) from the Planning Commission
  to the PMPIU. In addition, the provisions for procurement as specified in the Financing Agreement were
  confusing to staff of the implementing agencies, leading to delays in procurement. Giving the PSC the
  role of approving any changes, additions, and inclusion of studies/activities slowed implementation,
  because decisions had to wait until the PSC met, which was often no more than than four times a year, in
  some years less often and in one year it did not meet at all.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Six task team leaders led project preparation and implementation, five based in Islamabad allowing
 consistent follow up. The handover between task team leaders was handled well to ensure continuity in
 client relationships and supervision. Close supervision ensured that the implementation teams focused on
 development impact, such as improving management and investment planning in the Indus River Basin.
 However, this did not resolve delays in implementation and speeding up disbursements.

 Some 15 implementation support missions were held during project implementation, one every six months
 or so. Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and Result Reports were of high quality and candid,
 thoroughly covering all key issues and providing practical recommendations on how to address challenges,
 such as proposing dropping activities that were not progressing and adding new ones that were ready for



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



 implementation. The Bank team proactively revised the project’s performance ratings, in response to
 changes in implementation progress.

 Supervision of safeguard and fiduciary aspects of the project was appropriate. The Bank team identified
 slow-moving activities and low-performing implementing agencies and restructured the project to shift
 resources to better-performing implementing agencies and to activities directly addressing the country’s
 energy shortage (Interim ICR, paragraph 35). In response to persistent issues with implementation, the
 Bank team restructured the project an additional five times to extend the project closing date, adjust
 activities, and amend the results framework in response to the AF and later to the cancelation of US$25
 million.

 The Bank team was flexible and responsive to emerging needs of the client. For example, at the request of
 the government, it prepared the AF. The Bank team used the opportunity of the restructuring to revise the
 results framework, providing more clearly-defined indicators and updating the targets to reflect the project’s
 increased scope. However, the results indicators could have been revised much earlier during the previous
 restructurings, and focused more on outcomes than outputs. Finally, the Bank team prepared the request
 to cancel US$25 million in response to the government’s request to instead use the funds to respond to
 Covid-19.

 The overall risk rating was revised to Substantial from Moderate, primarily because of concerns that
 political pressures could reverse reforms and undermine governance in the sector, and because of
 potential resistance to the transfer of water resources management activities to IRSA.

 However, Bank performance in supervision had significant shortcomings. In response to the deficiencies in
 capacity of the implementing agencies and shifts in government priorities, the Bank team could have been
 much more proactive in restructuring the project by providing for partial cancellations of the AF. The team
 could also have restructured the project following the cancelation of project funds to lower targets in the
 results framework. In addition, the Bank team

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately unsatisfactory, due to significant shortcomings in the
 proactive identification of and resolution of challenges. For example, revising the role of the PSC should
 have come as soon as it was evident that it met infrequently, slowing project implementation. Weaknesses
 in the results framework should have been tackled much earlier, and revisions should have included more
 outcome-oriented indicators. Revising the roles of the weaker implementing agencies should have taken
 place much sooner during project implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was sound, specifying how the key activities and outputs led to the outcomes as
 reflected in the results framework. The project development objectives of improving management and
 investment planning of water resources in the Indus River system were clearly specified. However, the
 indicators in the PAD meant to track the project’s achievements were not poorly specified. The results
 framework was revised during the restructuring of March 2012, and again during the restructuring for the
 AF in November 2016 to address the shortcomings, but the new indicators still were not sufficient to
 measure the outcome of the project. Although the PDO indicators presented in the Project Paper for the AF
 were measurable, they were nearly all at the output rather than the outcome level. The intermediate results
 indicators, tracking outputs, such as strategic assessments for improved water management carried out
 under the project, were adequate to capture the contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs toward
 achieving the project’s objectives. The proposed data collection methods were adequate for all indicators.
 Overall, the project implementing agencies had the capacity to implement the M&E arrangements.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the early years of project implementation, data collection focused on intermediate results
  indicators, because the PDO-level indicators were poorly defined. M&E implementation improved once
  the results framework was revised during the restructuring for the AF. The implementing agencies
  collected the data related to the activities for which they were responsible and reported them to the
  PMPIU, which compiled the quarterly progress reports. Reported results were discussed and verified
  during each mission.

  However, no attempts were made to document the outcomes that were not included in the results
  framework. For example, the project teams could have explained what changed as a result of upgrading
  labs and decision support tools and of providing training in various topics. Recognizing the challenges,
  the Bank and government teams reached agreement that the PMPIU would hire an M&E specialist to
  prepare two comprehensive M&E reports prior to project closure (ISR, dated September 1, 2020). These
  reports were not delivered until close to project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  The quarterly progress reports prepared by the PMPIU, provided detailed status updates on progress
  towards outputs and disbursements. The Bank and government teams drew on their contents to make
  adjustments to planned activities during project implementation. For example, when the Bank and
  government teams noted that the progress with some activities was below expectations, the Bank
  restructured the project in March 2012, dropping duplicate and under-performing activities and adding
  those with higher strategic relevance.

  The M&E system as designed and implemented was eventually sufficient to assess the achievements of
  the project, producing outputs that plausibly contributed to the PDO of improving the management and
  planning of water resources of the Indus River system. However, there were shortcomings in capturing
  other aspects of the results chain, such as how the outputs strengthened capacity of the water
  institutions in improving management and planning of water resources. Additional data are required to
  monitor the changes that take place as a results of training, upgrading decision support tools,


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



  constructing and rehabilitating laboratories, and preparing feasibility studies. These data can be
  collected through surveys and other data collection methods.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal the project was assigned Environmental category “B,” to ensure oversight of the preparation of
   specific environmental and social assessments carried out in the context of hydropower feasibility studies
   financed by the project. Two safeguard policies were triggered during preparation of the project:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The ISR dated March 30, 2021 stated that the project closed
   with a satisfactory overall safeguards rating. No specific environmental and social assessments were
   carried out for the project, either for the feasibility studies nor for the construction and extension of the
   PMPIU office in February 2011. As a part of the preparation of the AF, an Environmental and Social
   Management Plan was prepared to minimize potential adverse environmental impacts of constructing and
   refurbishing provincial irrigation departments, such as noise, dust, and occupational and safety risks of
   construction workers and of people living or working nearby.

   Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project did not support physical works other than
   the installation of flow measuring stations. None of the studies for which financing under the AF were
   proposed qualified as a "detailed design and engineering study" (that is, a study which would be
   implementation-ready and on the basis of which construction bids could be issued) for which a riparian
   notification is required. Therefore, the project was granted an exception to notification of riparian countries
   under paragraphs 7(b) of the Bank’s policy OP 7.50.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The project had an adequate financial system which provided accurate and
   timely information, with reasonable assurance, that funds were being used for intended purposes. The
   project team prepared annual budgets on the basis of planned activities identified in the procurement plan.
   The Supreme Audit Institution audited the project’s financial statements which submitted them on time to
   the Bank (ICR, paragraph 79), The audit report of FY2019–20 raised a few queries, which were later
   addressed by the client. The ICR does not note whether audit reports were unqualified or provide
   information on the timeliness of submission of the interim financial reports. There were no known issues of
   corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project. All project funds were accounted for at project
   closing. Overall, fiduciary compliance was Satisfactory (Financial Management Supervision Report,
   October 2021).



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



   Procurement. WAPDA and the PMPIU were responsible for procurement of contracts under their
   components. The PMPIU also provide procurement assistance to IRSA, IPDF and Planning Commission.
   Procurement risk after mitigation was assessed as moderate.

   Procurement the most part was carried out as per the Financing Agreement and the World Bank’s
   Procurement Framework for Investment Project Financing, although with significant delays, given client
   reluctance to follow the Bank’s procurement advice on how to deal with the confusing provisions in the
   Financing Agreement (Aide Memoire, for the June 2019 mission, paragraph 9). Delays were also due to
   the absence of a qualified procurement specialist at the PMPIU for significant periods of time.

   Procurement complaints at the IPDF were proactively addressed by the implementing agency and the
   World Bank. No mis-procurement was declared. Overall, procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  Both quality at entry and quality
                                 Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  of supervision had significant
                                 Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

      To avoid implementation delays, the role of the PSC should be limited in its terms of
         reference to providing overall policy guidance and general oversight of Project
         implementation, and not to making decisions on adjustments to project activities. The
         PSC was given responsibility to make decisions regarding changes in project activities, in the
         expectation that this would be faster and more flexible than seeking government approval for
         each change. However, the PSC, which comprised representatives of multiple stakeholders,
         proved difficult to convene, which significantly slowed implementation.



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



        Where the results frameworks focus on outputs, supplementary data are required to
         measure the outcomes of institutional strengthening projects. The outcomes of projects
         that support capacity building and technical assistance are difficult to assess on the basis of
         outputs alone. Additional data are required to monitor the changes that take place as a
         results of training, upgrading decision support tools, constructing and rehabilitating
         laboratories, and preparing feasibility studies. These data can be collected through surveys
         and other data collection methods.

        Overcoming capacity gaps requires continuous and tailored support. The agencies
         implementing the project had very different capacities for implementation. To build the
         capacity of the weaker agencies requires precise identification of capacity gaps and the
         provision of expertise from outside of the agencies. Capacity building should also comprise
         more than just trainings, and include study tours, ad hoc technical assistance, and support in
         “soft skills” such as capacity for coordination. More intensive efforts to build the capacity of
         weaker implementing agencies would help to close the capacity gaps.

        Project management arrangements need to be maintained throughout the project
         period to ensure smooth implementation. A key reason for the underperformance of the
         AF was the lack of a full-time dedicated project director and the frequent turnover of staff,
         and the chronic understaffing of the PMPIU. The following measures could strengthen
         management of future projects: (a) use existing government systems and staff as much as
         possible to avoid creating parallel systems and build their capacity aimed at fostering a
         dedicated cadre of experts in the public sector, (b) encourage implementing agencies to
         procure experts with compensation commensurate with the market.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is clearly written and is largely consistent with the
guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s activities, including a detailed annex summarizing the
efficiency analysis. The ICR also provides a good theory of change analysis in regard to the causal links and
the full results chain.

However, the ICR could have been more outcome-focused, providing evidence of how the outputs generated
by the project have been used to improve the management and planning of water resources. Moreover, it could
have been more forthright about the strategic issues that needed addressing to avoid the delays that plagued
the project. It could have provided information on compliance with procurement, the timeliness of submission of
interim financial reports, the opinions of the external audits, and whether all outstanding funds had been
returned to the Bank at project closure.




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Water Sector Capacity Buidling Proj (P110099)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                               Page 18 of 18
