     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023033

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P127338                                       BZ Climate Resilient Infrast.

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Belize                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84160                                    31-Aug-2019                                         29,378,670.87

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Aug-2014                                   30-Aug-2021

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               29,378,670.87                                               0.00

 Actual                                           29,378,670.87                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Fernando Manibog               Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 15),
   the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were "to enhance the resilience of road infrastructure against
   flood risks and impacts of climate change; and to improve the borrower's capacity to respond promptly and
   effectively in an eligible crisis or emergency."




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



   The objective was revised at restructuring (see Dates below) "to enhance the capacity to promote climate and
   flood resilience in road infrastructure designs."

   This review will parse the PDO into the following objectives against which project performance will be
   assessed:

          to enhance the resilience of road infrastructure against flood risks and impacts of climate change.
          to enhance the capacity to promote climate and flood resilience in road infrastructure designs
           (revised).
          to improve the borrower's capacity to respond promptly and effectively in an eligible crisis or
           emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-May-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Climate Resilient Infrastructure: (US$21.5 million at appraisal; revised to US$2.6 million at
   restructuring, US$2.6 million actual). This component was to finance feasibility and engineering studies of
   critical road infrastructure and associated drainage and flood mitigation systems within the primary and
   secondary road network in the priority areas. The activities to be financed included riverbank strengthening,
   small scale flood mitigation improvements, rehabilitation and replacement of critical small‐scale bridges,
   slope stabilization, and road improvements. A first indicative sub‐project was 16 km of the Philip Goldson
   Highway (PG Highway) from the airport junction to mile 20. Additional sub‐project sites were to be identified
   at implementation. At restructuring (see Dates below), activities to be financed were limited to feasibility and
   engineering studies of critical road infrastructure in the priority areas.

   2. Technical Assistance for Improved Climate Resilience Management: (US$4.9 million at appraisal;
   revised to US$4.3 million at restructuring; US$3.6 million at closing). This component was to finance
   technical assistance (TA) to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Transport and Works (MOTW),
   renamed the Ministry of Infrastructure and Housing Development,(MIHD), and the Ministry of Natural
   Resources and Agriculture (MNRA), renamed the Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR). The capacity
   building TA activities were to mainstream climate resilience in physical and investment plans and
   strengthen climate resilient asset maintenance. Specifically, the TA was to finance the following:

          In MNR, assist its Land Information Center to consolidate existing geographic information system
           (GIS) databases, establish data sharing protocols and platform management, manage data and

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



         training programs; and support its physical planning unit to mainstream climate resilient factors and
         disaster risk information in land use and territorial planning.
        In MIHD, implement its road maintenance strategy, identifying measures and developing technical
         standards for capital investments to incorporate appropriate climate risk mitigation strategies
         including flood resilient road infrastructure to strengthen its operations and maintenance (O&M) and
         asset management capacities.

  3. Project Management and Implementation Support: (US$2.0 million at appraisal; US$1.9 million at
  closing). This component was to finance services, training, operating costs, and goods for project
  management and implementation.

  4. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC): (US$1.0 million at appraisal; revised to
  US$20.51 million at restructuring; US$20.86 million at closing). This component was to finance immediate
  response to an eligible crisis or emergency, defined as “an event that has caused, or is likely to imminently
  cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact associated with natural or man‐made crises or
  disasters,” including a disease outbreak (ICR, footnote 10). As a flexible instrument, its activation did not
  require restructuring (ICR, footnote 12) but was to be financed by reallocating uncommitted funds from other
  components at the time of activation. This component was updated at restructuring (see Dates below) to
  finance two sub‐components. The first was to finance the increase in two social protection cash transfer
  programs (US$12.5 million) - the Building Opportunities for Our Social Transformation (BOOST), and the
  Belize COVID19 Cash Transfer (BCCAT) programs. The second was to finance the Agriculture Relief
  Program (US$8 million) to finance the support to farmers affected by the prolonged drought and market
  contraction in Belize.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original project cost was US$30 million. This was revised at restructuring (see Dates
  below) to US$29.4 million. The loan disbursed the full amount.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) fully financed this loan.

  Borrower Contribution: None

  Dates: The project was approved on August 27, 2014 and made effective on April 29, 2015. The Mid Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on November 27, 2017. The original closing date was on August 31, 2019.
  The project was extended by a total of 24 months to close on August 30, 2021. There were three level 2
  restructurings:

        On May 18, 2018, to introduce changes to the results framework indicators because of the reduced
         scope of the first component. The output and outcome indicators and their corresponding targets
         were revised accordingly and rationalized to provide a standard framework for resilient transport
         operations (RES31915, paragraph 5).
        On May 20, 2019, to extend the project closing date by 24 months from August 31, 2019, to August
         30, 2021.The extension was to address two aspects of delays in implementation. The first, brought
         by the lack of coordination among the Ministry of Economic Development and Investments (MEDI),
         the Ministry of Works (MOW), and the Project Management Unit (PMU). The second, brought by the
         complex technical design of the Philip Goldson Highway to withstand future extreme natural events

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



         On May 5, 2021, to change the PDO, and component costs by reallocating US$19.5 million of
          uncommitted loan funds from components 1 (infrastructure) and 2 (TA) to CERC. The COVID19
          pandemic response activated CERC and financed two sub‐components to augment the country’s
          social safety net programs.

   Split Rating: A split rating was applied to derive the project outcome. The scope of the project was revised
   to reduce the level of ambition of the infrastructure component at the first restructuring, and the PDO was
   revised to increase level of ambition of the social protection component at the third restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Belize is a middle‐income country and is categorized as a small island developing state
(SIDS). Among the SIDS, it was ranked 3rd most vulnerable to risks of disasters from natural hazards, and
5th in vulnerability to risks from climate change. The country experienced frequent floods posing great risk
to infrastructure and socio‐economic activity. The project was to enhance climate and disaster resilience of
critical road infrastructure that would reduce risks along key economic and social transportation routes,
ensure access to relief services in the event of a natural disaster, and improve capacity for resilient
decision‐making processes.

Country Plans: The government’s long-term development vision was embodied in its Horizon 2030:
National Development Framework 2010-2030, The PDOs were relevant to this plan, evident in its relevance
to national sector policies for transport and agriculture. Both sectors highlighted the importance of
addressing environmental sustainability, and including disaster and climate risks, in development
planning. 70 percent of Belize’s population live near primary and secondary road networks. The 2013
National Climate Resilient Investment Plan (NCRIP) which aimed to systematically reduce climate and
disaster risk in Belize guided project preparation. The financing requirements of the structural, technical and
policy interventions were estimated at US$112.5 million (ICR, footnote 5).

World Bank Partnership Strategy: The PDOs were relevant to the World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY18-22 for Belize. This project was directly relevant to its two
focus areas: (a) fostering climate resilience and environmental sustainability; and (b) promoting financial
inclusion and social resilience. This CPF was informed by the 2016 Belize Systematic Country Diagnostic
(SCD). The overarching goal of the CPF was to support Belize in strengthening its economic resilience. The
CPF recognized the special characteristics of a small state with capacity and absorptive constraints. The
PDOs were also aligned to the World Bank's Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) initiative.
The project activities promoted improved institutional capacities, systems, and infrastructure designs to
address climate and disaster risks. These efforts were aligned to the GRID Pillars 2‐Protecting Poor and
Vulnerable Peoples and 4‐Strengthening Policies, Institutions, and Investments for Rebuilding Better.

World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The World Bank Municipal Development
Project (MDP, P111928) preceded this operation. It initiated a dialogue and established mechanisms to
design, manage and implement climate resilient and disaster risk management projects in Belize. MDP
investments in drainage, road, community infrastructure reduced flood impacts in vulnerable areas. Local
executives from other municipalities became interested in implementing similar works. The MDP also

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



               developed the capacity of the Social Investment Fund (SIF) and gave the Project Management Unit (PMU)
               experience in multi‐sectoral coordination. The World Bank, through the Global Facility for Disaster
               Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) assisted Belize in developing the NCRIP and added value by identifying
               the structural, technical and policy interventions that would strengthen the country's climate and disaster
               resilience.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial because the PDOs at closing were relevant to both
               the country's plan and the Bank's partnership strategy for the country.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the resilience of road infrastructure against flood risks and impacts of climate change

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: At appraisal, the TOC was reflected in the results framework (PAD, Annex 1) to show the
                             causal links between inputs from the four components to produce nine outputs to achieve three outcome
                             indicator targets.

                             Inputs were to be in two parts: first, physical investments to rehabilitate roads and river crossings, and
                             second, technical assistance to build capacity of the government to manage climate resilient infrastructure.
                             These were to include training in GIS analysis, spatial data management, road maintenance, road
                             maintenance fund, flood risk analysis and disaster risk mitigation. These inputs were logically derived from
                             the activities and project components.

                             Outputs were to be the construction of flood-resistant non-rural roads, drainage, culverts, and flood-resistant
                             river crossings. The technical assistance was to generate hazard maps, trained staff in flood risk analysis
                             and disaster risk mitigation, creation of a road maintenance unit in MOWT, and methodologies to track flood
                             risk reduction investments. Outputs were also to include the operationalization of the National Land Use
                             Policy plan and the adoption of an Integrated Planning Framework for land resources. These outputs were
                             reasonably attributable to the inputs above.

                             Outcomes targeted the residents who were to benefit from the improved roads, the reduced impact
                             from flood events measured by the reduced number of days that interrupted access to these roads and
                             making available flood risk data to stakeholders for incorporation into their respective national plans. These
                             outcome indicators were more at an intermediate rather than at outcome level (see Section 9 M&E Design
                             below). While target beneficiaries were a reasonable indicator of the reduced impact from environmental and
                             natural hazard risks, others could also have been used, e.g., road service standards met, facilitated increase

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



in trade and commerce, efficiency in travel time, improved safety of pedestrians, commuters, or vehicles.
Strengthened capacity in building flood-resilient roads was to be met by the availability of flood risk data to
stakeholders. The TOC included the following assumptions to increase the likelihood of achieving this
objective: the government has approved the proposed disaster resilient policies and tools; trained staff was
retained; and resources to sustain outputs were in place. There was no indication that this last assumption
materialized.

Outputs:

      17 river crossings and culverts were improved (the original target of 12 was exceeded).
      9 km of non-rural roads were rehabilitated (the original target of 30 km was not achieved).
      101 individuals were trained (the target of 115 was almost achieved).
            o The Ministry of Transport and Works (MOTW renamed Ministry of Infrastructure and Housing
              Development, MIHD) trained 20 people (3 females, 17 males) in GIS analysis (the target of 20
              was achieved); 35 people were trained in road maintenance (the original target of 100 people
              was not achieved), and 10 people were trained in flood risk analysis (the original target of 15
              was almost achieved).
           o MNR, through the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI), trained 36 staff in GIS analysis
              (6 females, 30 males) (no target).
      MNR also completed the following:
           o Established NSDI as a platform to harmonize data collection, storage and sharing of
              information on flood vulnerability, LiDAR maps, and other relevant data across sixty
              government and statutory bodies. NSDI Data collection guidelines were developed to
              strengthen the operational capacities of the NSDI. The target was achieved.
           o Generated a total of 33 localized hazard maps and related data layers that included flood
              hazards, sea walls, hurricane shelters, police stations, fire risks, agriculture, education centers,
              and urban land use at the global, national, and local levels (the target of 25 maps and layers
              was exceeded).
           o Updated the National Land Use Policy on September 7, 2018, incorporating climate resilience
              and disaster risk management in infrastructure planning. The Bank Task Team clarified that
              this draft was not presented to the cabinet for approval. MNR also prepared an implementation
              road map and action plan, a communication strategy and plan, and a resource mobilization
              strategy on January 29, 2019 (ICR, paragraph 33). The Bank Task Team clarified that since
              this Land Use policy was not approved by the cabinet, the above plans and strategies were not
              implemented.
      MIHD was to acquire a road maintenance management information system (MIS) in place of a
       planned road maintenance unit (ICR, paragraph 90) but this was dropped when CERC was activated.
       The original target was not achieved.

Outcomes:

      The NSDI shared its data across sixty government and statutory bodies. Institutions and line
       ministries used NSDI data to prepare climate resilient development plans. The target to make flood
       risk data available to all stakeholders for inclusion in national plans was achieved.
      Data from methods and surveys noted above was used to develop hydrological models to determine
       flood risk and strengthen the disaster and climate resilient design of the PG Highway.
      At closing, the cabinet had not yet approved the updated National Land Use Policy.

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)




      The indicator - number of days that the improved roads would be accessible after flood events- was
       replaced at the 2018 restructuring (see below). With a baseline of 20 days, the original target of 10
       days was dropped,

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest. Some gains in building
capacity to manage flood resistant road investments were evident in the adoption of designs for future road
investments.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not changed.

Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: The TOC was revised. The May 2018 restructuring reduced the scope of the
project components. The target values of input, output, and outcome indicators were revised to better
establish the causal link that would test the revised TOC. Additional inputs were to replace the reduced scope
of the infrastructure investments.

Revised inputs: The target values of the road, crossings, and culverts to be rehabilitated were revised.
Investments were to be added to improve off-site and road drainage. These revised inputs were logically
linked to the expected outputs and expected outcomes to achieve the objective. The capacity building inputs
were rationalized to enhance capacity of technical teams to analyze disaster and climate resilience of
investments and clarified the indicators to better establish the causal link that would test the theory of change
and be less subjective. Added inputs included hydrological and geological assessments.

Revised outputs The target values of the rehabilitated non rural roads, river crossings, and culverts were
adjusted because of the reduced scope of the infrastructure investments. The revised outputs were also to
include the length of improved flood-resilient off-site and road drainage, hydrological and geological
assessments, and a standardized results framework for future Bank-financed resilient transport operations.
The capacity building outputs were redefined with less subjective indicators. These revisions were reasonable
to strengthen the causal link of inputs to outputs to outcomes.

Revised outcomes were limited to direct beneficiaries from the 6 communities of the project area.
The length of time that the improved roads would withstand flood events replaced the number of days in
which roads remained inaccessible after flood events. No new assumptions were introduced.

Revised Outputs:

      9 km of non-rural roads were rehabilitated (the revised target of 26 km was not achieved).
      17 river crossings, culverts were improved (the revised target of 50 was not achieved).



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)




      Two new outputs were: 2 km of improved off-site drainage (the target of 6 km was not achieved) and 3
       km of roadside drainage (the target of 10 km was not achieved).

Revised Outcomes:

      The project design adopted a 25-year return period standard for roads to withstand a flood event
       (baseline of 50 years, the target was achieved). This new standard was used to design the PG
       Highway as first road in Belize to be designed to this standard. The new standard was to be used in
       future infrastructure design and construction

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this revised objective is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. Adopting new standards showed some evidence of enhanced capacity to design climate
resilient road investments. This outcome, however, reflected the moderate shortcoming that the actual
construction has not tested the resilient road design. The National Land Use Policy Implementation Road
Map was developed but not yet implemented. There is a reasonable expectation that this would be achieved
in the short term.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To enhance the capacity to promote climate and flood resilience in road infrastructure designs

Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: The May 2021 restructuring revised the PDO entirely, leading to a second
revision of the TOC. Output and outcome indicators were limited to what had already been achieved since the
procurement of the road works was cancelled. Funds were to be reallocated to CERC as emergency
response to COVID19 and the prolonged drought.

Revised Inputs: The revised inputs were to be limited to designing climate resilient roads. The capacity
building inputs that were achieved under the first revision above remained.

Revised Outputs: All outputs associated with rehabilitating the roads to climate resilient standards were to
be dropped. Outputs were now limited to climate resilient designs of the road investments. The revised
outputs could be reasonably attributed to the revised inputs.

Revised Outcomes: The direct beneficiary target value was increased but this was associated with
the families receiving emergency support through social and agriculture assistance programs under CERC.
The revised outcomes included how the LIDAR and DSDI data were used to arrive at disaster and flood
resilient road infrastructure designs. No additional assumptions were made.

Revised Outputs:

      The following outputs were dropped:

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



              o
              Number of river crossings/culverts;
              o
              Length of off-site drainage;
              o
              Length of roadside drainage;
              o
              Length of rehabilitated non-rural roads;
              o
              Updated Inventory of primary roads assets;
              o
              Primary road condition survey conducted and reported;
              o
              Number of localized hazard maps generated and shared.
      A new material testing laboratory was constructed and equipped for use by MIDH to independently
       test and verify geophysical and hydrological site conditions and the integrity of construction material,
       such as aggregate, asphalt, and concrete.
      The new outputs achieved their respective targets:
            o The final design for the Philip Godson Highway (PG Highway) met climate and
              disaster‐resilient standards and was delivered on April 2020.
            o Methodologies were adopted and surveys were conducted to track flood risk reduction
              measures to be included in the design, construction, and maintenance of road investments.
              These included (i) LIDAR surveys that captured topographic data for 17 percent of Belize (the
              target of 12.7 percent was exceeded). LiDAR is a remote sensing method that uses a pulsed
              laser light to measure variable changes in elevation heights; (ii) flood inundation models;
              (iii) primary road condition survey; and (iv) an updated inventory of primary roads assets.

Revised Outcomes:

      The NSDI data, including hazard maps and layers informed the PG Highway resettlement
       negotiation packages. Location maps were generated for Project Affected People (PAP). Access
       to the NSDI data allowed institutions to integrate resilience in design processes and decision‐making.
       NSDI can be updated with new information to capture evolving climate and disaster risk information.
      The LiDAR data was used to assess flood risk and integrate climate and disaster risk resilience
       in the design of new road investments. MIHD used the new design standards for new infrastructure
       projects across Belize to replace culverts, bridges, and roads to be financed by other international
       financing institutions. These included the Mile 38 bridge and culverts, the George Price Highway, and
       the Nago Bank Road in northern Belize, the Roaring Creek Bridge, the new Haulover Bridge, 59 km of
       roads, 6 new bridges, and 3 rehabilitated roads under the BZ $140 million Coastal Road.
      The Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) is expected to finance the PG Highway.
       The US$24 million 24‐month construction project was submitted to the CABEI board in April, 2022.
       The project was expected to start in the second half of 2022.
      The MIHD used the material testing laboratory to test the strength of existing road infrastructure and
       the quality of materials for new projects. No further outcomes were reported.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this revised objective is rated Substantial also with moderate
shortcoming as noted above.



Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the capacity to respond promptly and effectively respond in an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The original TOC followed the practice allowed IPF projects financed by IDA, IBRD and
trust funds to include a CERC component to provide swift response in the event of an eligible crisis or
emergency. Crisis or emergency was “an event that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major
adverse economic and/or social impact associated with natural or man‐made crises or disasters.” Such
events may include a disease outbreak (ICR, footnote 10).

Input was to be the preparation of an Operations Manual. This would outline an emergency action plan to
train staff and disburse funds for an eligible emergency or crisis.

Output was to be the CERC Operations Manual and completion of training.

Outcome was to be the beneficiaries of CERC funds and an enhanced capacity of the government to
respond to an emergency. A critical assumption to increase the likelihood that this objective would be
achieved was that an eligible emergency or crisis was to occur. Two emergencies activated CERC during
implementation.

Outputs:

      The CERC Operations Manual was completed (the target was achieved).
      CERC training was conducted for officials from the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the National
       Emergency Management Office (NEMO), SIF, and the PMU on institutional mechanisms to prepare
       for the 2017 hurricane season. Training also involved maintaining an up‐to‐date registry and list of
       pre‐qualified suppliers and contractors in the relevant ministries (the target was achieved).
      Information technology (IT) equipment were procured. Investments included a server and software to
       run the NSDI, desktops and laptops, printers and plotters, tablets for data collection, and satellite
       phones and GPS equipment for field‐based activities.

Outcomes:

      MIHD has a database of pre‐qualified suppliers and contractors to identify contractors with standard
       pricing to deploy in future emergencies.
      The IT equipment enhanced capacities in processing speeds and storage capacity, collection of data,
       assessment of damage, and dissemination of emergency information. For example, the 2020 Tropical
       Storm Eta, caused flooding in Cayo, Belize and Stann Creek districts. MNR used tablets, satellite
       phones, and GPS equipment to rapidly conduct emergency assessments of affected areas and define
       response plans in coordination with NEMO.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Systems were in place to
respond to an emergency evident in the government response to Storm Eta (before CERC was activated).




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the capacity to respond promptly and effectively respond in an eligible crisis or emergency.

Revised Rationale
The objective was not changed.

Revised Theory of Change: CERC was activated. Unused funds from components 1 (infrastructure
investments) and 2 (capacity building) were to be reallocated to CERC. Implementing CERC was to
demonstrate the enhanced government capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or
emergency.

Revised Inputs: The emergency action plan was to prescribe the use of the cash transfers for social
protection. Funds were to assist vulnerable families to alleviate the impact of COVID19 including farmers
experiencing agriculture market contractions due to COVID19 and the long drought that began in 2019.
Funds were to be used for drought relief; and agricultural inputs, support for post-harvest management,
technical assistance, and financial support to protect farmers from further economic loss, volatile demand,
and to strengthen food security.

Revised Outputs: The cash transfers were to be distributed under three programs - the Boosting
Opportunities for Our Social Transformation (BOOST), the Belize COVID19 Cash Transfer (BCCAT), and the
Agriculture Relief programs. These revised outputs could be reasonably attributed to the CERC inputs.

Revised Outcomes: Two new PDO outcome indicators were added. These were vulnerable beneficiary
families receiving social protection and agricultural relief support. These indicators were more at an
intermediate rather than outcome level but were reasonable. Qualitative assessments at closing added
evidence of outcome.

Revised Outputs: New outputs were added:

      2,269 vulnerable households affected by COVID19 received payments under the vertical expansion of
         the BOOST Program (the original target of 2,300 households was substantially achieved).
        20,510 households received payments under the BCCAT program (the target of 10,500
         households was exceeded).
        57 percent of BCCAT households in Categories II and III benefited (the target of 75 percent was not
         achieved).
        6,740 farmers received cash compensation under the Agriculture Emergency Assistance Program
         (AEAP) (the target of 5,543 farmers, was exceeded).
        2,481 female farmers received cash compensation under the AEAP. MOA targeted female farmers
         who registered because they were deemed more vulnerable to the crises affecting the agriculture
         sector (the target of 2,029 female farmers was exceeded).




                                                                                                Page 11 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)




                                    A qualitative assessment of beneficiary satisfaction with support from CERC to mitigate impacts of
                                     COVID19 was conducted, as targeted.

                              Revised Outcomes:

                                    Overall, CERC beneficiaries included 176,535 direct beneficiaries or 44,785 households (the revised
                                     target of 90,081 persons was exceeded); 40.2 percent were female beneficiaries (the target of 51
                                     percent was not achieved). Beneficiaries included poor and vulnerable families, pregnant women,
                                     children, the elderly (those not receiving pensions); persons with disabilities, households affected by
                                     the COVID19 but were excluded from the existing social safety net programs; and farmers
                                     experiencing losses due to both COVDI19 and the prolonged impacts of the 2019 drought in the
                                     northern and central regions of the country.
                                    86,560 individuals received support from social assistance programs or unconditional cash transfers
                                     (the target of 92,355 beneficiaries was almost achieved) The target was expressed as the number of
                                     families in the main text but Annexes 1 and 4 reported this as individuals.
                                    86,829 farmers received emergency support under the Agriculture Emergency Assistance
                                     Program. Over 21,000 households benefited from the agriculture emergency assistance programs
                                     with over 12,700 households receiving climate resilient voucher packages to build greenhouses, install
                                     drip irrigation systems, and buy seeds for cash crops; another 8,500 households (including nearly
                                     2,500 women‐headed households) farming less than 20 acres of land receiving direct cash transfers
                                     of US$ 250 per household.

                              Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this revised objective is rated Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the original objectives is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the
                            project to achieve the first objective is rated Modest while the efficacy of the project to achieve the second
                            objective is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale

                                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 22
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



         The efficacy of the project to achieve the revised objective 1 is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the project to
         achieve the unrevised objective 2 but with revised indicators is rated Substantial. The revised overall efficacy
         of the project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         The efficacy of the project to achieve the revised objective 1, revision 2 is rated Substantial. The efficacy of
         the project to achieve the unrevised objective 2 with revised indicators is rated Substantial. The revised
         overall efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, a cost benefit framework incorporated climate change scenarios. Each sub-
project feasibility study was to include an economic analysis comparing the costs of the interventions against
estimated benefits from selected climate scenarios. The analysis used a 12 percent discount rate. The Net
Present Value (NPV) of the investments ranged from US$25.7 million to US$35.1 million. The estimated
Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) ranged from 23 to 26 percent (PAD, paragraph 44 and Annex 6,
paragraph 3).

At closing, a comparable cost benefit analysis was not conducted. The first restructuring reduced the road
investment to only a section of the PG Highway from the international airport junction to mile 20. Lack of
financing cancelled a second potential segment. A subsequent restructuring dropped the infrastructure
investments altogether. Funds were reallocated to finance the social protection response to COVID 19 and
drought assistance.

Economic efficiency of the project focused on the benefits from the emergency assistance under CERC. These
included the following:

              Under Social Protection: BOOST added six months of conditional cash grant payments to over 2,200
               households. BCCAT provided unconditional cash transfers for six months to over 21,300 households
               who were not BOOST recipients. Beneficiaries reported that they used the assistance for food,
               medicine; pay utilities such as water, electricity, and internet bills; and pay school related expenses.
              Under the Agriculture Emergency Assistance. The agriculture emergency assistance programs
               benefited over 21,000 households. Over 12,700 households received vouchers for seeds, fertilizers,

                                                                                                             Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



       irrigation equipment, poultry and animal stock, animal feed, fencing material, and veterinary supplies.
       Almost 8,500 households received direct cash transfers of US$ 250 per household. The value of the
       outputs, plus the benefit derived from a revitalized agricultural sector that kept food prices low was
       reported to exceed the US$ 9.3 million costs of the programs but no figure was provided. Over 99
       percent of the recipients of the agriculture emergency relief stated that they were very satisfied or
       satisfied with the benefits received.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency. The project was extended by 24 months. Deficient early
inter‐ministerial coordination led to delays. The PMU was unable to address early procurement and contract
management challenges (see Section10 Procurement below). After funds were reallocated to CERC, loan
proceeds were fully used within 14 months without financial issues (See Section 10 Financial Management
below). The social protection component was administered using existing procedures to cover assessment,
approval, enrollment, and payment. BOOST beneficiary households were enrolled in its database. BCCAT
households were selected from applicants to the COVID 19 assistance. Electronic system processing of the
social protection support led to its efficient delivery. BOOST beneficiaries availed of the existing countrywide
network of credit unions. BCCAT beneficiaries availed of mobile payments systems the government established
with the National Bank of Belize and Digicell. The government used its own resources to cover the
administrative costs of the programs (ICR, Annex 4).

Overall, the project efficiency is rated Modest. Implementation risks were not adequately mitigated resulting in
procurement delays. The original cost benefit analysis was not comparable between appraisal and closing
because no analysis was conducted at closing. A quantitative least cost analysis was not prepared; hence the
project's cost effectiveness could not be ascertained. Infrastructure investments were cancelled. Although CERC
was activated and was efficiently administered, the project was extended for a total of 24 months.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The split rating of the overall outcome of the project is Moderately Satisfactory. See calculation below.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



                                                                                  Restructuring
                                                                         May 18,   May 20,    May 5,
                                                            Original
                                                                         2019      2019       2021
Relevance of Objective                                                        Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1 - to enhance the resilience of road
infrastructure against flood risks and impacts of climate   Modest      Modest
change
Objective 1 Revised - To enhance capacity to promote
                                                                                    Modest      Substantial
climate and flood resilience in road infrastructure designs
Objective 2 -To improve capacity to respond promptly and
                                                            Substantial Substantial
effectively in an eligible crisis or emergency
Objective 2 with Revised Indicators                                                 Substantial Substantial
Overall Efficacy                                            Substantial Substantial Substantial Substantial
Efficiency                                                                     Modest
Outcome                                                     MS          MS          MS          MS
Numerical Value of Outcome                                  4           4           4           4
Disbursement (in US$ millions)                              4.64        2.17        16.21       6.2
Share of Disbursement                                       15.8        7.4         55.4        21.2
Weighted Value of outcome rating                            0.635       0.297       2.219       0.848
Final Outcome Rating =0.635+0.297+2.219+0.848= 4 = MS
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the project outcomes:

      Risk from delayed construction of the PG Highway. The PG Highway was the first road to be
       designed with measures to manage climate and flood risks and enhance road safety. However, if
       CABIE financing for the construction of PG Highway is not secured, the resilient measures and
       capacities built may not be realized. Construction delays will also pose risks. Vendors have begun to
       relocate along the PG Highway and may require new resettlement plans. To mitigate this risk, the
       government will need to pursue renewed commitments from CABEI to complete the road.
      Risk from reduced government commitment to maintain technological improvements
       introduced by the project. In this project, technological improvements were introduced. Investments
       in the NSDI and materials laboratory require resources and staffing to sustain the built capacity.
       Regular meetings were held early after the establishment of the NSDI committees. But coordination
       committees were no longer meeting regularly. The NSDI is not yet fully operational. The investments
       in equipment requires maintenance and training. The ICR mission in February 2022 noted that staff
       trainings and equipment calibration are needed at the material testing laboratory.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team designed the project noting its substantial relevance to the country's plans and the Bank's
  strategy for the Small Island Developing State (SIDS). With the help of a Multi Criteria Evaluation
  process, the NCRIP prioritized key investment in roads because of its critical link to the economic
  development of the country, and where 70 percent of its population lived near primary and secondary
  road networks. The country continues to be vulnerable to meteorological hazards (ICR, paragraph 3 and
  footnote 6). The Bank team conducted adequate analysis of the technical, social, and environmental
  aspects of the project. Lessons from prior operations such as those from the Disaster Vulnerability
  Reduction Projects in the Caribbean, the prior Municipal Development Project in Belize, and the projects
  under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience informed project design. Among these were evidence-
  based decision making, integrating flood management and preventive maintenance to reduce disaster
  risk (PAD, paragraphs 30-33).

  Mitigating measures were identified to reduce implementation risks such as action plans, additional staff,
  and training programs. Selecting the Belize Social Investment Fund's (SIF) Project Implementation Unit
  (PMU) that had just completed the Bank-financed municipal development project in Belize was intended
  to reduce implementation risks. However, the mitigating measures to address the risk posed by the
  innovative and complex technical design of a disaster and climate resilient
  road investment proved inadequate. Significant weaknesses in the design of the M&E system were noted
  such as the lack of sufficient indicators to reflect project outcomes although assessments at closing
  addressed this shortcoming (see Section 9 M&E below).

  Overall, the assessment of Bank performance to ensure the quality at entry is rated Moderately
  Satisfactory primarily due to the inadequate mitigating measures to address implementation risks.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 16 supervision missions over the seven-year implementation period, including
 virtual missions during the pandemic. The Bank team provided hands‐on technical assistance, trainings,
 capacity‐building workshops on procurement, financial management, and safeguards. Technical experts
 supplemented these training and joined supervision missions to build capacity in road asset management,
 and on activating CERC. The Bank team developed guidance documents, facilitated institutional
 coordination mechanisms, such as regular steering committee meetings to overcome delays. The Bank
 team also communicated with the government to recommended corrective measures to address delays.
 The Bank team mobilized additional trust fund resources for a road maintenance management information
 system for MIHD but this activity was canceled when CERC was activated.

 The Bank team used the Mid‐Term Review (MTR) to reinforce key timelines and deliverables, strengthen
 the results framework, and restructure the project. The three restructurings addressed implementation

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



 challenges. The first restructuring reduced the scope of the project because funds were sufficient only for
 one sub-project. Indicators were adjusted accordingly. The second restructuring, following the MTR, called
 for time bound actions as legal covenants to extend the period to complete the works. The third
 restructuring activated CERC and added corresponding indicators. Pictures, videos, phone interviews, and
 a storytelling exercise validated the results and impacts of the project.

 The quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance in ensuring quality at entry and supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
 Bank performance in supporting the response of Belize to the COVID‐19 pandemic was quick and
 CERC‐funds quickly disbursed. The shortcoming at entry and the unaddressed shortcomings in M&E
 design at supervision lead to an overall rating of Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Two M&E systems were designed. The first covered the original Theory of Change, which documented
 how the key infrastructure and capacity building activities were to generate nine outputs to achieve three
 outcomes related to disaster resilient road investments. The Bank team acknowledged that the objectives
 were over-ambitious. The PDO was not clear on which climate risk or disaster impact was to be reduced
 beyond the impact from floods, without noting that floods could result from an active hurricane season or a
 series of combined disasters in a given year. Some intermediate indicators for building institutional capacity
 were not linked to climate risk resilience. The results framework did not include all possible outcome
 indicators that would lead to resilient road investments. For example, there was no indicator to meet O&M
 needs or road service standards. The proposed limited activities (inputs) and outputs were insufficient
 to achieve an over-ambitious objective (ICR, paragraph 68). Outcome indicators were mostly at
 intermediate rather than outcome level (i.e., beneficiaries). All indicators had targets, were time-bound,
 although not all were specific, two were achieved by Yes/No measures. Two indicators had baselines (i.e.,
 number of localized hazard maps, and the return period for resilient roads).

 The other M&E system was designed under the Emergency Action Plan under CERC. This was designed
 during implementation and discussed below. Both M&E systems were project specific although it appeared
 that aspects of the CERC M&E system was to continue after the project closed.




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



  Both M&E systems were implemented by the Belize Social Investment Fund (SIF) Project Management
  Unit (PMU). M&E data was regularly analyzed and informed the reporting of progress and results.
  Outcome indicators were revised twice. First when the scope was reduced to acknowledge insufficient
  funds to finance planned investments. Second, when the PDO was revised and CERC was activated.
  These revisions were made to strengthen the links established by the theory of change. Some weak
  indicators, particularly those associated with capacity building noted above were not revised during
  implementation.

  The CERC Operations Manual, including the Emergency Action Plan, laid out the CERC M&E system,
  which defined roles and responsibilities for SIF, the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), Food Security and
  Enterprise, and the Ministry of Human Development (MHD), Social Transformation and Poverty
  Alleviation. Field visits, telephone calls, or a combination of both were undertaken. COVID19 mobility
  restrictions limited most surveys and assessments to be conducted by phone. The CERC GRM
  monitored how social protection activities were implemented. Since CERC M&E was implemented under
  emergency conditions, there is no expectation that it would remain after closing. However, some of the
  components were part of existing social protection systems and would continue after CERC. For
  example, the existing baseline data for BOOST was used to target vulnerable households. BCCT
  household beneficiaries were extracted from those who applied for COVID19 assistance and were not
  BOOST beneficiaries. The Agricultural Relief Program beneficiaries were obtained from the Belize
  Agriculture Information Management System (BAIMS), the official registry of all farms in Belize that the
  MOA updated daily. Beneficiary surveys and storytelling methodologies were added to report on the
  outcome of CERC. These included semi‐structured interviews and environmental portraits of vulnerable
  households to show how they integrated disaster resilience at the household level. The assessments
  were focused only at the beneficiary level. No macroeconomic assessments were undertaken to capture
  the overall impact of the social safety net on the country's disaster resilience. Beneficiaries were
  not involved in target setting but participated in the surveys and interviews to assess outcomes.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were reported regularly to management to address challenges and informed implementation.
  M&E data informed the MTR. The CERC M&E was used to reach beneficiaries. Surveys and storytelling
  methodologies were used to supplement the acknowledged weak indicators and justify the impact of the
  assistance under CERC. CERC M&E data was used to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes.

  Overall, the M&E design, implementation and utilization is rated Modest. The first M&E system had
  weaknesses in design, evident in the lack of indicators to adequately assess achievements related to
  resilience of road investments. The second M&E system design included indicators that assessed CERC
  outcome on beneficiaries supplemented by other surveys.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



a. Safeguards
  Environmental Safeguards: The project was a category "B" under the World Bank's environmental
  policies. The following environmental safeguards were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37); and Projects
  on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). Impacts were anticipated to be specific, short-term, and
  reversible.

  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed in the country
  and at the World Bank's websites on April 15, 2014. The PMU was staffed with an Environmental and
  Social Specialist, with knowledge and experience in environmental and social risk management following
  the completion of the preceding Bank-financed project. When CERC was activated, the PMU updated the
  ESMF to indicate that none of the previously anticipated works would be implemented to affect the safety of
  dams but site specific ESMPs may be needed for CERC-funded irrigation sub-activities. An exception to the
  notification required under OP/BP 7.50 was granted because CERC was limited to rehabilitating and
  modernizing existing small scale irrigation systems. CERC Operations Manual also prohibited the use of
  surface water for irrigation. The revised ESMF was disclosed in the country and the Bank website on
  August 14, 2020.

  Social Safeguards: The following social safeguards were triggered: Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10),
  Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Projects in
  Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60). A Resettlement Policy Framework, a Culturally Appropriate Planning
  Framework (Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework or IPPF) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were
  prepared. The proposed infrastructure works under Component 1 resettled 30 Project Affected persons
  (PAPs). The delayed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and late Social Specialist
  joining by the time of the MTR led to delays in identifying PAPs and developing the RAPs. A detailed survey
  identified households and businesses to be affected by the right of way of the project road works. A
  compensation methodology was developed. The government compensated PAPs for the replacement cost
  of their structures, loss of income, and provided a relocation allowance and/or relocation assistance. On
  average, each of the 30 PAPs received BZ$15,000 (US$7,500), for a total of BZ$450,000 (US$225,000).

  The CERC‐ESMF was prepared to assess applicable national legislation and possible additional safeguards
  policies and procedures related to eligible activities in the CERC Emergency Action Plan (EAP). The
  CERC‐ESMF included a screening process to identify and assess risks and impacts from the sites of
  sub‐projects to be financed and guided the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Plans
  to support CERC‐ESMF compliance.

  A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was in place by December 2017. A CERC-specific GRM was
  embedded in the CERC ESMF. The GRM indicated multiple channels for receiving grievances with
  guidelines to illustrate types of complaints, responsible agencies, the level of complexity of the concern or
  complaint, and timeframe for response and resolution. The GRM also included procedures to resolve
  allegations of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH). A communication
  strategy was implemented to inform beneficiaries on how to submit grievances using traditional media
  (flyers, television, and radio informational ads, and press releases), and online channels (government
  websites and Facebook pages).




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: Financial management (FM) was reported to comply with Bank policies by
   submitting satisfactory financial statements and audit reports to the Bank on time. FM capacity risks at
   appraisal were mitigated by training of the SIF and the line ministries on the World Bank’s
   fiduciary requirements. The SIF, in coordination with other partners, developed a detailed EAP and the
   CERC OM to define eligible expenditures, beneficiary eligibility criteria, and adequate controls over the use
   of funds. There were no reports of the misuse of funds.

   Procurement: Procurement and contract management challenges delayed implementation. Delayed
   feedback on technical outputs and delayed consultant outputs, led to low disbursement rates. There
   were delays in preparing bid documentation and processing of awards. Cases of unsuccessful bids and
   selection were noted. Significant differences between bid prices and initial estimates cascaded to more
   delays in completing the feasibility study and the ESIA. Once CERC was activated, procurement of
   infrastructure works was cancelled. Three of the four procurement risk mitigation measures were
   established: (i) an action plan to strengthen procurement capacity; (ii) recruiting a procurement officer for
   the PMU; and (iii) training PMU staff and line ministries staff on procurement. The fourth, establishing
   a new procurement unit in the SIF was not achieved because the SIF board had not approved the finalized
   proposal. SIF, however, developed a road market/procurement database with financial and technical data
   on road contractors active in Belize and in neighboring countries to strengthen its procurement capacity.

   The entire selection process for the PG Highway design had to be restarted because of repudiatory breach
   (ICR, paragraph 64). This delay was resolved and the final design was completed in 2020.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



According to the ICR, the project's operational experience informed the following four
lessons, slightly modified below (ICR, paragraphs 95-98):

        Investing in risk information systems strengthens the design of infrastructure works.
         In this project, activities led to the development of LiDAR surveys to generate flood models
         and led to a 1:25 year flood return period standard for road works. Data was used to design a
         climate resilient PG Highway. MIDH adopted the standards to
         decide future resilient infrastructure designs to be financed by other donors.
        Designing and implementing climate and disaster resilient infrastructure needs to be
         matched by adequate experience and capacities of the recipient institutions. In this
         project, integrating climate and disaster resilient road infrastructure was new to Belize.
         National institutions did not have experienced or the capacity to define such investment
         activities and prepare accompanying bid documents. This capacity gap was not carefully
         considered during project design. Mitigating measures may avoid delays.
        Small Island Developing States (SIDS) may benefit from establishing an umbrella PMU
         to mitigate the limited availability of expertise. In this project, Belize had a limited number
         of experts familiar with procedures and requirements of Bank financed operations. The SIF
         and PMU staff from the previous MDP proved to be an effective strategy for implementing
         this project. Measures such as a procurement unit within SIF were designed to mitigate the
         lack of procurement capacity. This and similar efforts were to ensure that institutional
         knowledge and capacities are retained. Capacity would then be ready for future
         donor‐funded projects. The SIF board had not approved the proposal but if adopted, SIF
         would have qualified staff and serve as the central management entity for future operations.
         This could be further explored in Belize and other SIDS.
        A non‐technical implementation agency, like the SIF, may facilitate implementation. In
         this project, the SIF experience in managing donor-funded projects and working with multiple
         ministries and partners helped the rapid response to manage CERC. The SIF PMU mobilized
         other ministries, government institutions, and private sector partners. SIF established
         effective working relations with the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Human
         Development, National Bank of Belize, and the private telecom operator Digicell to
         implement CERC activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and presented a comprehensive overview of the project operation. The theory
of change guided the reader on how the ratings were achieved. The report was results-oriented with sufficient
description of the strengthened government capacity, evident in the adoption of new standards for future road
investments. The CERC component constituted 70 percent of the project financing and was sufficiently
assessed. CERC-related findings were supported by evidence and supplemented by additional assessments
carried out at closing, as presented in Annexes 8 and 9 of the report. Annex 4 also added information to

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Climate Resilient Infrast. (P127338)



complete the account of how the operation proceeded with detailed benefits from the CERC components.
Lessons were based on the operation, particularly the benefit of using an umbrella PMU to mitigate limited
implementation capacity. This was particularly helpful to effectively deliver CERC-financed support to
beneficiaries. The report was candid, acknowledging the over-ambitious PDOs and the relatively weak outcome
indicators for the capacity building outcomes. The report's base of evidence supported the ratings, although the
justification for the High rating for the relevance of objectives was countered elsewhere in the report by noting
that the PDOs were over-ambitious. Some minor shortcomings in the report were reflected in some small
inconsistencies. For example, the implementation road map for the National Land Use Policy was reported to
not have been developed (ICR, paragraph 38) but was reported as prepared (ICR, paragraph 33 and Annex 1).
Changes in project cost allocation from restructuring were not presented in Annex 3 - Project Cost by
Components.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 22
