     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023044

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P156559                                     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                  Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57320,IDA-59510,IDA-D3960               30-Jun-2019                                            72,911,596.85

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Sep-2015                                 30-Nov-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              72,104,198.47                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          72,911,596.85                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Kavita Mathur               Peter Nigel Freeman           Kavita Mathur                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (para 22) were "to restore the functionality of critical infrastructure in a resilient manner in
   the disaster-affected provinces, and to improve the Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to
   an eligible crisis or emergency".




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-Jun-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   Component A. Resilient Infrastructure Rehabilitation (appraisal cost US$31.0 million; actual cost
   US$46.7 million). The activities to be financed under this component were the resilient rehabilitation or
   reconstruction of key: (a) dikes/weirs; (b) irrigation; (c) drinking water supply infrastructure in Mozambique’s
   Licungo River; and (d) education infrastructure, as recommended in the Government of Mozambique
   (GoM)-World Bank-UN-EU Joint Damage Assessment. All water-related rehabilitation works, including
   dikes, irrigated schemes, and drinking water supply, would be conducted in the Licungo Watershed. The
   rehabilitation and reconstruction of classrooms would be in the Northern and Central regions across the
   Zambezia, Niassa and Nampula provinces.

   Component B. Technical Assistance for Resilient Recovery and Vulnerability Reduction (appraisal
   cost US$6.0 million; actual cost US$1.8 million). This component would focus on enhancing the capacity to
   manage risks associated with natural hazards and was to be complemented by resources from Global
   Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) in support of Safer Schools, Disaster Risk
   Managemetn (DRM) Legal Framework, Recovery Framework, amongst others. Community engagement
   and outreach would also play a significant role under this component, with regards to the rehabilitation of
   schools and early warning systems.

   Component C. Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost US$3.0 million;
   actual cost US$4.5 million). This component would finance Project implementation, monitoring and
   evaluation costs for Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH), National
   Directorate of Water (DNA), Ministry of Education and Human Development (MINEDH), National Institute
   for Irrigation (INIR), and Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Administration (AIAS). According to the
   clarifications provided by the team, the National Directorate for Water (DNA) was replaced by the "National
   Directorate for Water Resource Management" (DNGRH) during implementation.

   Component D. Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (appraisal cost US$0.0 million;
   actual cost US$20.0 million). This component would provide immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or
   Emergency, as needed.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



   Project Cost. The actual cost was US$73.0 million, compared to the appraisal estimate of US$40.0 million.

   Financing. The original credit was US$40 million. The project received first Additional Grant of US$20
   million on January 13, 2017, and the second Additional Grant of US$13 million on October 30, 2018,
   making the total credit of US$73.0 million. The actual credit disbursed was US$72.9 million.

   Borrower Contribution. None planned.

   Dates and Restructuring. The project was approved on September 29, 2015, became effective on
   February 18, 2016, and closed on November 30, 2021, after a delay of 2 years and 5 months.

   Split Rating. No changes were made to the PDOs throughout project implementation. However, the
   restructuring of 2020 introduced significant reduction of targets of some PDO indicators. Therefore, this
   review applies split rating methodology for the determination of the overall outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Mozambique is one of the poorest countries in the world, with approximately 70 percent
of its people living and working in extreme poverty (less than US$2 a day). Poverty was highest in rural
areas, affecting 56.0 percent of rural population in 2015, compared to 32.0 percent in urban areas. Poverty
was more profound in the northern and central provinces (66.7 percent in Niassa and 61.76 percent in
Zambezia).

Mozambique has experienced some of southern Africa’s most variable hydrological and meteorological
conditions. it is particularly exposed to tropical cyclones. At appraisal, it was estimated that the floods
caused annual average losses of US$17.5 million in damage to household housing, US$0.7 million in
damage to roads and bridges, and US$42.5 million of loss in maize.

From January to March 2015, Mozambique was hard-hit by heavy rains, winds and flooding in the Central
and Northern regions of the country, more specifically in the Zambezi, Licungo and Shire River basins. In
March 2015, a joint damages assessment was conducted by the Government of Mozambique, the World
Bank, the United Nations and European Union. The assessment found that about 326,000 people were
affected and 140 died, while 30,000 houses, 2,362 classrooms and 17 health units were either partially or
totally destroyed. More than 104,430 hectares of crops were lost during the event, impacting 102,000
farmer households.

Alignment with the Government Strategy: The PDOs were well aligned with national priorities. At
appraisal, the Government was improving its legal and institutional disaster risk management (DRM)
frameworks and had approved the first DRM law in June 2014. It was implementing the Master Plan for
Natural Disasters Prevention and Mitigation (2006- 2016), which linked disaster prevention, mitigation, and
recovery to reducing vulnerability of the population, infrastructure, and the economy. Disaster risk reduction
(DRR) and climate change adaptation (CCA) were strategic objectives of the Government's Five-Year
Program (2015-2019). In 2017, the Government of Mozambique approved the new Master Plan for Disaster
Risk Reduction (2017-2030), which calls for increased investment in disaster resilience through

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



               strengthening of prospective and corrective risk-reduction activities and continued mainstreaming of DRR in
               sector policies and plans.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The project was well-aligned with the FY2017-2021 Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mozambique focus area "Enhancing Sustainability and Resilience". One
               of the priorities of the CPF was "improving disaster risk management and reinforcing social and economic
               resilience".

               The project was fully aligned with the Bank and Country strategies. The PDOs remained substantially
               relevant to Mozambique’s recurrent post-disaster recovery efforts and the need to build climate resilience at
               the sector level. Results generated by the project sub-components were gradually and informally adopted
               by new projects and several development partners to inform the design of pilot studies and projects on
               resilient housing and safer hospitals and to further scale-up resilience interventions particularly in the rural
               water supply and education sectors. The relevance of the PDOs was substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To restore the functionality of critical infrastructure in a resilient manner in the disaster-affected provinces.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: To achieve the stated objective, the project would finance investments in the
                             rehabilitation and construction of resilient infrastructure. The outputs would be: number of classrooms
                             rehabilitated or constructed; number of water systems rehabilitated or constructed; water distribution network
                             rehabilitated; dikes rehabilitated; dams and weir rehabilitated; and irrigated land. These outputs were
                             expected to result in intermediate outcomes such as the protection of agricultural land from drought or
                             flooding, access to resilient education and water supply infrastructure, thereby resulting in the achievement of
                             the PDO “restoration and functionality of critical infrastructure in a resilient manner in the disaster-affected
                             provinces”. The ICR does not discuss the critical assumptions underpinning the achievement of this objective.

                             Outputs.

                                        30 km of Dikes were rehabilitated achieving the revised target but slightly short of original target of 35
                                         km.
                                        Dam downstream apron was rehabilitated as targeted.
                                        93 community water points were constructed, exceeding the original target of 60 and revised target of
                                         68.


                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)




      372 classrooms were rehabilitated achieving the revised target but was short of original target of 433.
      217 non-conventional (mixed) classrooms were built partially achieving the revised target of 257 but
         substantial underachieving the original target of 1038. This was due to limited demand and low
         capacity of contractors in Niassa province (ICR page 35).
        150 rainwater harvesting and storage systems were built or rehabilitated, exceeding both the revised
         target of 111 and original target of 50.
        408 toilets were built or rehabilitated, exceeding both the revised target of 364 and original target of
         202.
        3161 jobs were created in construction works of non-conventional classrooms, achieving the revised
         and original target of 1,176.
        Two irrigations schemes (Munda-Munda and Intabo) were rehabilitated totaling 700 hectares.
        4,139 domestic water connections and 29 public standpipes were completed in Mocuba, Funhalouro
         and Chicualacuala.
        80.5 km of water distribution network was rehabilitated or constructed in Mocuba, Funhalouro and
         Chicualacuala.
        A feasibility study and detailed design for Phase II of the rehabilitation of Mocuba water supply and
         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was completed
        1 desalination water systems and 4 multipurpose boreholes were established.

Outcomes.

30,000 hectares of cropped land was protected by rehabilitated dykes as targeted.

700 hectares was provided with irrigation and drainage services as targeted. In addition, 700 hectares was
provided with improved irrigation and drainage services as targeted.

4,139 households benefitted from piped household water connections, exceeding the original target of 1,200
households and revised target of 2,200 households.

Achievement of PDO indicators against the original target.

PDO Indicator 1 (number of direct beneficiaries) was achieved. The project investments reached a total
of 1.44 million direct beneficiaries exceeding the original target of 1.0 million). Of these, 50 percent were
females (as targeted).

PDO Indicator 2 (number of people protected by rehabilitated dike infrastructure) was not achieved.
69,000 people were protected by rehabilitated dike infrastructure, substantially lower than the original target
of 111,700.

PDO Indicator 3 (number of people with access to improved irrigation infrastructure) was achieved.
5,600 people gained access to improved irrigation infrastructure, as originally targeted.

PDO Indicator 4 (number of people in urban areas provided with access to Improved water sources
under the project) was achieved. 33,695 people in urban areas were provided with access to improved
water sources under the project, exceeding the original target of 24,300.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



PDO Indicator 5 (number of children with access to improved education infrastructure) was not
achieved. 159,771 children gained access to improved education infrastructure, substantially below the
original target of 588,400.

PDO Indicator (number of people supported by early warning and response systems) was not
achieved. This indicator was dropped at the restructuring in 2018.

In sum, three out of five PDO indicators were achieved. The efficacy of this objective is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To restore the functionality of critical infrastructure in a resilient manner in the disaster-affected provinces.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The ToC remained unchanged. Outcome targets were revised.

Outputs

Same as those reported under original objective.

Achievement of PDO indicators against the revised target.

PDO Indicator 1 (number of direct beneficiaries) was achieved. The project investments reached a total
of 1.44 million direct beneficiaries exceeding the revised target of 1.14 million). Of these, 50 percent were
females (as targeted).

PDO Indicator 2 (number of people protected by rehabilitated dike infrastructure) was achieved.
69,000 people were protected by rehabilitated dike infrastructure, achieving the revised target.

PDO Indicator 3 (number of people with access to improved irrigation infrastructure) was achieved.
5,600 people gained access to improved irrigation infrastructure, as originally targeted. The target was not
revised.

PDO Indicator 4 (number of people in urban areas provided with access to Improved water sources
under the project) was achieved. 33,695 people in urban areas were provided with access to improved
water sources under the project, exceeding the revised target of 31,860.

PDO Indicator 5 (number of children with access to improved education infrastructure) was achieved.
159,771 children gained access to improved education infrastructure, exceeding the revised target of 78,000.




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project followed the Bank’s practice which allowed IPF projects financed by IDA,
IBRD and trust funds to include a CERC component to provide swift response in the event of an eligible crisis
or emergency. Crisis or emergency was “an event that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major
adverse economic and/or social impact associated with natural or man‐made crises or disasters. Inputs were
updating of the CERC operations manual, establishing an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) and
provision of emergency support to affected people; and training of government staff to disburse funds for an
eligible emergency or crisis. The outputs would be a CERC Operations Manual and completion of training
activities. The outcomes were (i) to activate the IRM and thereby provide access to CERC funds and (ii) to
achieve an enhanced capacity of the government to respond to an emergency.

Outputs.

      A CERC Operations Manual updated as targeted.
      The establishment and activation of the IRM in response to the drought in southern and central
       Mozambique in 2016. The IRM supported interventions in the agriculture, water and health sectors, as
       well as food assistance (discussed in detail under outcomes below).
      The project assisted in the development of institutional capacity (expertise, systems and procedures)
       within government.
      An investment Plan for the Master Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (2017-2030) was drafted.
      Mozambique DRM Law was prepared. Training was provided to 39 contractors, engineering firms,
       NGOs and to 41 local communities on resilience construction of classrooms.

Outcomes. An IRM was activated swiftly, in response to the drought in southern and central Mozambique in
2016. It was implemented within the expected timeframe and delivered all intended results. About 1,016,192
people benefited from the project’s IRM support in the following sectors (no targets were set):

Food assistance: About 519,138 people were provided with food aid as targeted through the acquisition and
distribution of 5,693 tons of maize and beans.

Health: The acquisition of medicines and medical equipment as well as 1,781.05 tons of nutritional
supplements were used for treatment of 244,394 malnourished people (exceeding the target of 146,
248) over six months across the country. The treatment rates of malnourished cases by the national health
system increased from 74 percent in 2016 to 84 percent in 2018, as result of replenishment of stocks of
nutritional supplements across the country (ICR para 42).

Water supply sector. The construction of two desalination systems and 8 multifunctional boreholes in the
districts of Chigubo and Chicualacuala, which benefited 1,800 people as well as livestock.



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



                              Agriculture:

                                    The project provided 4,200 drip irrigation kits to smallholder farmers equipped with solar panels and
                                     30 irrigation draglines equipped with diesel pumps. In total, 4,230 farmers were provided with small
                                     irrigation systems (as targeted). In addition, the distribution of agriculture irrigation kits further boosted
                                     the production and coping capacity of beneficiaries, including during localized dry spell events that
                                     affected the country during the life of the project.
                                    246,630 farmers (as targeted) were provided with 762 tons of certified seeds. Farmers provided with
                                     seeds were able to restore their food production capacity (ICR para 42).

                              In summary, the project built the country’s capacity and readiness for emergency response and recovery. The
                              efficacy of this objective is rated substantial.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was modest, three out of five PDO indicators were achieved. The
                            achievement of the second objective is substantial. Overall, efficacy is substantial, with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective under revised targets was substantial as all PDO indicators were
                            achieved. The achievement of the second objective was substantial. Overall, efficacy was substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



Economic Efficiency.

At appraisal, a full economic analysis was not conducted due to the emergency nature of the operation and
limited data available (PAD page 67). At closure, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted which covered the
rehabilitation of dikes, rural infrastructure, water supply systems, classrooms, and the Macarretane barrage. The
benefits included: rehabilitated flood protection and irrigation infrastructure; time savings associated with
improved water access; and the benefit of access to education for future earnings. The ex-ante internal rate of
return was 32 percent, and the net present value (NPV) was US$98 million at a 12 percent discount rate.

Administrative Efficiency. The ICR reports (para 48) that except for the recovery of classrooms, all
rehabilitation and construction works were contracted within or below the costs initially estimated during project
design, resulting in savings that were used for the repairs and damages caused by cyclone Idai.

The project efficiency was adversely impacted by the new cyclones, floods, COVID 19 and delays in
replenishment of IRM resources and in effectiveness of the Additional Finance (AF), which increased costs for
some works such as the rehabilitation of the Munda-Munda irrigation scheme, the construction of conventional
classrooms, and the preparation of detailed design and bidding documents and the Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for Phase II of the Mocuba water supply system. These activities were resumed two
years later after replenishment of IRM resources in 2018 through the second AF.

Despite delays due to new flood, cyclones and COVID 19, the overall efficiency rating is Substantial due to
strong economic rate of return.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      65.00
 ICR Estimate                                               32.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets. With substantial relevance of objectives, efficacy, and efficiency, the
overall rating is moderately satisfactory (4) due to moderate shortcomings.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



Under the revised outcome targets. With substantial relevance of objectives, efficacy, and efficiency, the
overall rating is satisfactory (5)

A split rating is applied based on the disbursement shares before and after the project restructuring of June
2020, when the disbursement shares were 68%, and 32% respectively (total financing was US$72.9 million).
The overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory, the weighted value is 4 (0.68*4+ 0.0.319*5=4.319).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Exposure to natural disasters. The increased frequency of disasters such as tropical storms, cyclones and
floods pose moderate risk to development outcome. The project contributed to strengthening institutional
capacity to integrate climate resilience at sector and community levels. The project enhanced the
governments capacity to promptly respond to any crisis or emergency across the country.

Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Risk. The O&M risk is moderate. The project established the
necessary legal and institutional instruments to ensure adequate O&M of infrastructure provided by the
project in all sectors:

      The operation of the water supply system was transferred from Water and Sanitation Infrastructure
       Administration (AIAS) and National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS) to the
       Water Supply Assets Investment Fund (FIPAG), using private operators under the provisions of the
       Water Supply Delegated Management Framework.

      The regular maintenance of the Macarretane dam and the dikes would be carried out by existing
       government staff with adequate capcity at the Limpopo Basin Management Division (DGBL) and
       Regional Water Administration (ARA) Centro, respectively.

      The routine maintenance of classrooms would be carried by each school administration and by
       provincial authorities, following the technical norms approved by Ministry of Education and Human
       Development (MINEDH) and Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH) in
       2021.

      For the irrigation schemes, the National Institute for Irrigation (INIR) has hired a technical service
       provider to assist local farmers with agriculture production and access to markets under the
       Smallholder Irrigated Agriculture and Market Access Project (IRRIGA project P149620), in
       coordination with farmers associations and local community authorities, and the Agriculture and
       Natural Resources Landscape Management Project (SUSTENTA project).




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared in under three months and was processed under paragraph 12 of OP10.00 –
  Projects in Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, and preparation of
  safeguards instruments was deferred until project implementation. Priority was given to rehabilitation of
  dikes and irrigation schemes to ensuring the rapid resumption of agricultural productivity. The scope of
  the original project was selected based on a strict prioritization of emergency needs. In March 2015, a
  joint damages assessment and early recovery was conducted by the Government of Mozambique, the
  World Bank, the United Nations and the European Union. It was also agreed to reflect resilience in the
  design.

  Appropriate arrangements were made to coordinate all the activities of the many stakeholders. The
  project established consultation, coordination and information exchange mechanisms with relevant
  developments partners including with: (a) Department for International Development (DFID) and World
  Food Program (WFP) and other members of the Mozambique Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) for
  food support; (b) Netherlands for phasing of rehabilitation of water supply system of Mocuba and the
  Munda-Munda irrigation system; (c) United Nations Development Program (UNDP), African Development
  Bank (AfDB) and European Union for preparation of cyclone Idai and Kenneth PDNA and recovery
  framework; (d) Germany, Finland, Canada, Ireland, Portugal, and France and United Nations Children
  Fund (UNICEF) on resilient rehabilitation of classrooms; and (e) DFID and the Netherlands on scale up of
  desalination plants and multipurpose boreholes.

  The implementation arrangements based on existing PIUs and experienced sector teams were
  appropriate to address the complexity of the project and to ensure a rapid start of project activities. A
  Project Steering Committee (PSC) was established under the leadership of the Ministry of Economy and
  Finance (MEF). The PSC was composed of directors of the four implementing agencies (DNGRH, INIR,
  AIAS and MINEDH) and chaired by a national director appointed by MEF (as permanent members), with
  permanent invitees from INGD and DNAAS. The PSC was responsible for ensuring overall coordination
  and monitoring of recovery efforts.

  The design of the M&E system was adequate given the urgency of reacting to the disaster.

  The quality at entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was supervised by experienced field-based staff. The project was implemented by two
 consecutive senior Administrative Decision Making (ADM) TTLs, two Co-TTLs and two Safeguards
 specialists (one Environmental and one Social) (ICR para 66). Regular check-in meetings and
 Implementation Support Missions (ISM) were conducted. The World Bank conducted 13 Implementation

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



 Support Missions (ISMs) over the six years and five months of project implementation. The ICR reports
 (para 83) that back-to-office reports and management letters were used to raise key implementation issues
 on the reconstruction of non-conventional classrooms by MINEDH. The Bank was proactive and
 responsive in introducing adjustments to the project design to address changing circumstances and
 implementation challenges on the ground.

 The MTR changed the direction of the project and improved the results framework. In response t-o the
 drought, the project team responded appropriately by expanding the project scope from cyclones and
 floods to include drought and approved Additional Financing. The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 caused
 delays in the import of construction materials for the rehabilitation of the Mocuba water system and the
 desalination plants in Gaza Province. To accommodate these delays, the contracts for supervision of works
 were extended between 3 to 5 months.

 There were challenges in financial management such as significant delays in the payment of invoices
 submitted by contractors and in the documentation of expenses by UN-Habitat (ICR para 78), Limited
 procurement capacity and poor contract management, and delays in meeting safeguards requirements,
 caused delays in the implementation of works and the provision of irrigation kits.

 Overall, the quality of supervision was satisfactory, with moderate shortcomings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project design included outcome indicators as well as the intermediate results indicators. The
 indicators were appropriate in measuring the achievement of objectives. Targets were set at appraisal. The
 project could have further benefited with better integration of sex-disaggregated indicators in access to
 protected irrigation land, education infrastructure and water supply. The M&E framework was fully
 integrated in the Government’s annual planning process.

 The monitoring arrangements were adequate. The PAD stated that the designated ministry or entity would
 be responsible for the monitoring and evaluation of the project. In addition, the project would also make
 extensive use of monitoring and evaluation arrangements already in place within MOPHRH through DNA,
 INIR, AIAS, and MINEDH (PAD para 66) related to other Bank projects.




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



  During project restructurings and additional financing, the M&E framework was revised to capture the
  scope and ambition of the project. The targets were revised and the PDO indicator “Number of people
  supported by Early Warning and Response System” and two intermediate indicators
  (Communities/villages covered by a new or updated emergency response plan linked to improved early
  warning capacity, and Licungo watershed management study completed) associated with activities
  cancelled at restructuring in 2018 were dropped. A new intermediate indicator was added to capture the
  activities introduced by IRM. The M&E reporting also improved after MTR.

  The PIU’s prepared regular reports, which were submitted to the Bank by DNGRH.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 74) reports that the M&E framework was used by the implementing agencies and the
  project team as a decision-making tool, particularly during the MTR and the project restructuring. In
  particular, progress towards achievement of targets of the original project was used for requesting
  the replenishment of resources for IRM.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" and following five safeguards
   were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Pest
   Management (OP 4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12). All rehabilitation of existing rural infrastructure, dikes, water supply systems, conventional
   classrooms, hydrometeorological stations, and the Macarretane dam, as well as the construction of non-
   conventional classrooms and the offices of the DGBL, were expected to generate limited impacts, as these
   works were implemented at existing sites.

   In 2017, the first AF added the rehabilitation of Macarretane dam in the Limpopo River Basin, triggered
   Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

   During implementation, following documents were prepared: an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Integrated Pest Management Plan
   (IPMP).

   For each construction activity, an environmental and social screening form was filed and a site-specific
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
   or Simplified Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (S-ESIA); Environmental and Social
   Management Best Practices Manual (ESMBPM); and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



  Resettlement Action Plan (A-RAP) were prepared, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and included in the
  respective tender documents.

  The ICR reports (page 62) that the project initially faced challenges with safeguards compliance, but
  gradually complied with the Bank’s safeguard policies, and was rated moderately satisfactory in the
  ISRs. The preparation of the safeguards instruments was a serious challenge and caused delays in the
  commencement of civil works, particularly in lot 1 of Nante dike. The ICR reports (page 62) that the project
  initially faced challenges with safeguards compliance, but gradually improved with the approval of the E&S
  Safeguards Action Plan in 2018. The Action Plan provided sequential procedures for preparation and
  implementation of relevant safeguard instrument. The compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies was
  rated moderately satisfactory in the ISRs.

  The project complied with the Bank’s Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), and Gender Based Violence
  (GBV) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) policies. All four OHS incidents and one GBV/SEA were
  effectively investigated, managed and adequately resolved by the respective PIUs.

  OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered due civil works associated with the rehabilitation of
  dikes, resilient schools, irrigation schemes and water supply system. These works were expected to
  potentially cause temporary or permanent physical and/or economic displacement and involuntary
  resettlement and would require land acquisition. For the Mocuba water system, the Government
  successfully implemented the permanent resettlement of 4 project-affected people (PAPs) and
  compensated 16 others, in accordance with World Bank safeguards policies and national regulations.

  The ICR does not report on the implementation of the following safeguards: Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04);
  Pest Management (OP 4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and
  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). No harm may have been possible from these
  safeguards but this information is not provided.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project complied with the Bank’s financial management requirements for
  audits and financial reporting. There were challenges with the timely documentation of the expenses for
  the purchase of medicines and nutritional supplements by the Ministry of Health (MISAU). There were also
  significant delays at MINEDH in the payment of invoices submitted by contractors and in the
  documentation of expenses by UN-Habitat. The ICR does not mention if audits were conducted.

  Procurement. There were weaknesses in the procurement department at MINDEH as well as
  cumbersome administrative procedures for clearance and signature of contracts. This caused delays in
  contracting and delivery of works for the education sector. The establishment of an internal procurement
  unit dedicated to the project in 2018, and the engagement of MINEDH leadership improved procurement
  performance of works.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included several lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

      To achieve acceptable levels of resilience, the recovery of infrastructure requires time,
         expertise and comprehensive technical studies. Due to the urgency of relaunching
         agricultural production in the Licungo River Basin, the initial rehabilitation of the Nante and
         Nicoadala dikes and the Intabo and Munda-Munda irrigation schemes under the project was
         done under emergency conditions, using designs and feasibility studies already prepared by
         Government, development partners and existing WB projects. These infrastructures were
         further damaged by cyclone Idai in 2019, thus reflecting insufficient resilience in design. The
         second rehabilitation of the Munda-Munda irrigation scheme, all water supply infrastructure
         and classrooms were preceded by either a comprehensive vulnerability analysis or feasibility
         and technical studies, and each infrastructure was designed to be resilient to the prevalent
         flood, cyclone, and drought risks. This required significant time and effort from Government
         technical staff and the WB team to adequately conduct the necessary due diligence. As a
         result, all infrastructure recovered or built following the recommendations of technical studies
         and designs showed adequate resilience to all cyclone and flood events that occurred
         between 2019 and early 2022.

      Appropriate coordination among all relevant stakeholders is critical to build
         synergies, alignment, and impact of recovery projects. The project established
         consultation, coordination and information exchange mechanisms with relevant
         developments partners. Through these coordination mechanisms, overlaps and duplication
         of efforts was avoided and complementarity and impact on the ground was increased,
         including gradual up taking of outcomes and lessons generated by the project.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ - Emergency Recovery Project (P156559)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and presented a comprehensive overview of the project. It was result oriented.
Its narrative was accurate and aligned to development objectives. Lessons were based on the operation.

However, there were some shortcomings: under the theory of change the ICR does not discuss the critical
assumptions underpinning the achievement of the objectives; there is no discussion as to how the government
capacity to respond to crisis or emergency was improved; it also does not report on the implementation of the
following safeguards: Natural Habitats, Pest Management; Physical Cultural Resources; Safety of Dams and
Projects on International Waterways.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial but with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
