     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023102

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P161624                                    Sindh Response to Stunting

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60470                                  31-Dec-2021                                           55,178,082.60

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2017                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            61,615,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             56,615,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         55,178,082.60                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5), the project's objective was "to contribute to the reduction of the
   stunting rate among children under five years of age by targeting the most affected districts in the Province of
   Sindh."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was to support the implementation of the government's Accelerated Action Plan (AAP) for
   Reduction of Stunting and Malnutrition in the 23 districts of the province with the highest stunting rates,
   through a results-based approach that linked disbursements to the achievement of agreed pre-designated
   indicators (disbursement-linked indicators, DLIs). It was to target pregnant and lactating women, to improve
   their nutritional status and reduce the risk of low-birthweight babies; and children aged 0 to 59 months,
   when stunting and its associated pathologies are most responsive to or preventable by specific
   interventions, and when nutrition interventions and early childhood education programs can influence
   children's future eating habits. Project financing was to expand the geographic reach of nutrition
   interventions already supported by the Bank and other donors; the project was to cover an estimated 14
   percent of total AAP costs for the 23 targeted districts.

   The project contained two components:

   1. Expanding access to a multisectoral package of services for reducing stunting (appraisal: US$45 million;
   actual: US$41.5 million) was to support expansion and increase coverage of a multisectoral package of
   services related to maternal and child nutrition, hygiene and sanitation practices, and quality and
   diversification of dietary practices: (a) expanding coverage of the planned Bank-financed Multisectoral
   Action for Nutrition (MSAN) project (2017-2020) to an additional 23 districts, and building institutional
   capacity in those districts to plan, implement, and monitor nutrition services; (b) incentivizing the training of
   licensed health workers to provide family planning counseling and to supply short- and long-term family
   planning methods to all 23 project districts; (c) improving access to early childhood education in public
   schools and better access for high school-level girls to nutrition education; (d) supporting districts to become
   open defecation free, and promoting an enhanced program on handwashing in those districts; and (e)
   supporting Agriculture Department plans to scale up nutrition-sensitive interventions contributing to
   enhanced household food diversity and increased access to and consumption of foods of high nutrition
   content. DLI-incentivized activities were to be financed under a defined Eligible Expenditure Program that
   was part of the recurrent budget for participating departments at the provincial and district levels.

   2. Strengthening key cross-cutting nutrition-related interventions and project management (appraisal:
   US$16.62 million; actual: US$15.12 million) was to finance technical assistance (TA) and selected inputs for
   effective cross-sectoral communication, coordination, and information systems, in addition to a conditional
   cash transfer (CCT) demand-side pilot to incentivize health checkups for pregnant and lactating women as
   well as growth monitoring and immunization of children under two years of age. This component was also to
   finance operations of an AAP Secretariat, to be led by a Nutrition Coordinator; nutrition expenditure tracking
   by the existing financial management information system of the province; project monitoring and evaluation
   (M&E); and citizen engagement activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$61.62 million International Development Association (IDA) credit,
   covering approximately 14 percent of the total estimated US$437 million cost to roll out the AAP to all 23

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



   project districts. Other costs were to be covered by the provincial government (US$30 million) and other
   partners, including the European Union, United States Agency for International Development (through
   UNICEF), and the World Food Program, as well as through other Bank-financed projects, with the
   government planning to seek coverage of a remaining 35 percent financing gap (US$151.4 million) through
   a donor conference planned for late 2017. US$56.62 million was actually disbursed, and US$5 million was
   cancelled. The ICR (p. 13) reported that, at the government's request, US$7 million in project funds was
   reallocated in June 2020 toward the province's COVID-19 response, but these funds remained unused. The
   ICR did not provide information on actual spending by the government or other partners, or on whether the
   financing gap for the AAP was eventually covered.

   The project was approved on May 26, 2017, became effective on October 4, 2017, and closed as planned
   on December 31, 2021. It was restructured twice:

         December 15, 2019: Adjustment of implementation arrangements to clarify responsibilities of the
          Provincial Steering Committee and Provincial Task Force under the AAP, and revisions to the
          results framework to modify and refine definitions of some intermediate indicators.
         December 23, 2021: Partial cancellation of US$5 million of project funds to reflect non-achievement
          of the DLI related to open defecation free villages in 2019-20 and 2020-21, as well as delayed
          implementation of the planned CCT pilot.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objective was highly responsive to country context. Though Pakistan had achieved considerable gains
in reducing poverty and inequality from 2001-2014, its social indicators for health, nutrition, and education
were low, lagging far behind those of other countries in the region. Malnutrition affected nearly half of the
mothers and children in Pakistan. It was estimated that malnutrition was costing Pakistan's economy 2-3
percent of gross domestic product per year by impairing health, growth and cognitive development, school
readiness and learning outcomes, and consequent loss in productivity and earnings. The situation was
particularly acute in Sindh province, the second most populous province in the country. A 2011 National
Nutrition Survey found that 72 percent of households in Sindh were food insecure, with significant variation
among districts within the province. 49.8 percent of Sindh's children under five were malnourished and/or
stunted, and 17.5 percent suffered from acute malnutrition (wasting).

The objective was also highly responsive to government strategy. Government spending on nutrition was
low, despite increased attention under the Pakistan Vision 2025 and the establishment of federal and
provincial government secretariats to coordinate and support scaling up of nutrition interventions. Only
about ten percent of the national health budget was spent on nutrition, and 90 percent of that amount was
financed by development partners. In response, in 2016, the government of Sindh approved a 2017-
2021 AAP with the goal of reducing stunting to 30 percent by 2021. The AAP included objectives and
expected outcomes across multiple sectors related to addressing the underlying causes of stunting: health,
population, sanitation and hygiene, agriculture, social protection, education, and behavior change
communication.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



               The objective was tightly aligned with Bank strategy at appraisal through completion. The Bank's Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) with Pakistan at appraisal (2015-2019) contained a results area on improving
               access to maternal and child health and nutrition services; the project's objectives were also linked with
               another CPS results area on inclusion by reducing the vulnerability of at-risk groups. A joint Bank-Pakistani
               effort to envision Pakistan's future, published in 2019 (Pakistan@100: Shaping the Future), stressed the
               importance of investing in human capital; it prioritized the implementation of integrated health and nutrition
               programs for the first 1,000 days of a child's life, and provision of CCT programs to the poor and vulnerable.
               At project closing, the CPS had been extended to 2021. The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
               informing preparation of the FY22-26 Country Partnership Framework focused on the "Five Gs": girls' and
               boys' education, growing healthy, green and clean Pakistan, growth that is inclusive, and governance. The
               project's objectives remained highly relevant to this framework.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Contribute to the reduction of the stunting rate among children under five years of age by targeting the most
                             affected districts in the Province of Sindh

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change expressed in the PAD (p. 12 and Annex 2, p. 43) noted that reduction of stunting
                             requires a multisectoral response. At a higher level than the project objectives, it envisaged that
                             improvements in child nutrition, growth, and cognition would be achieved through improved dietary intake and
                             reduced disease burden. It held that improved maternal and child nutrition would be achieved by enhancing
                             the coverage of health-related nutrition services, reducing exposure to fecal pathogens through better
                             hygiene and sanitation practices, and improved quality and diversification of dietary practices. This project's
                             specific interventions, supporting the government's AAP, were considered to be the most critical and effective
                             specifically to support reductions in childhood stunting.



                             Outputs

                             Support was provided to the implementation of the AAP through DLIs. A system to strengthen coordination,
                             collaboration, and feedback between AAP service providers and target beneficiary populations was
                             established and implemented, as planned. Two provincial nutrition steering committees were established and
                             became functional, not meeting the target of ten committees.



                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



6.164 million pregnant or lactating women, adolescent girls, and children under age five were reached by
basic nutrition services under the project, not reaching the target of 7.95 million persons. 5.912 million women
and children received basic health, nutrition, and population services under the project, not reaching the
target of 7.95 million women and children.

The cumulative number of pregnant women who received four prenatal care visits and counseling at the
community level reached 1.625 million by project closure, not achieving the target of 1.95 million. The
cumulative number of iron folic acid doses distributed to pregnant and lactating women reached 4.07 million,
far exceeding the target of 1.85 million. The cumulative number of pregnant women who received tetanus
toxoid (two or more injections) reached 2.343 million by project closure, exceeding the target of 1.725 million
women.

By project closure, there were 56,287 new users of modern contraceptive methods, not reaching the target of
229,700 users.

The number of screenings for malnutrition at the community level reached 5.97 million, not reaching the target
of 7.95 million screenings.

The cumulative number of villages certified open defecation free under the project reached 3,000, missing the
target of 8,600 villages.

2,531 kitchen gardens were established under the project, essentially meeting the target of 2,600 gardens.
20,171 households establishing backyard poultry raising and goat farming, not reaching the target of 26,000
families.

The cumulative number of children aged 36-59 months attending early childhood education under the project
reached 880,000, exceeding the target of 750,000 children.

3,900 mothers' groups were established under the project, meeting the target.



Intermediate outcomes

The percentage of children with a minimum acceptable diet increased from 8.9 percent in 2014 to 11.7
percent in 2020, not achieving the target of 20 percent.

7.475 million children between the ages of 6 and 59 months received vitamin A supplementation under the
project, almost reaching the target of 7.95 million children.

Micro-nutrient sachets were distributed to 3.25 million children, exceeding the target of 2.65 million children.



Outcomes

The prevalence of moderate to severe stunting was reduced from 48 percent in 2014 to 45.5 percent in 2021,
not achieving the target of 43 percent. Stunting data for 2014 and 2018 were taken from Multi-Indicator


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



                            Cluster Surveys (MICS) that were not repeated later. Additional data, while not strictly comparable with the
                            MICS, was derived from the National Nutrition Survey and Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief
                            and Transition conducted in selected districts. These data (ICR, p. 7) show that, since 2018, the prevalence
                            of acute malnutrition consistently declined in some districts but varied (mix of increases and decreases over
                            time) in others. The ICR (pp. 7-8) presented data from additional surveys indicating that food insecurity
                            declined in some project districts, but that progress was sharply interrupted during the COVID-19 pandemic.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's geographic support increased rapidly across its lifetime, covering four districts in the first year,
                            16 in the second year, and all 23 districts by the fourth year. Other sources of financing for nutrition
                            interventions were present in all 23 project districts throughout the entire project period. The ICR (p. 8) raised
                            questions of attribution in this context, but in an environment with multiple donors working in the same area,
                            Bank-financed projects are expected to achieve contribution rather than sole attribution.

                            However, given only partial progress toward the targeted reduction in stunting, achievement of the project's
                            sole objective is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The PAD's economic analysis (pp. 24-25), which focused on the effects of childhood stunting on per capita
   consumption expenditure in adulthood, found an internal rate of return (IRR) of 14 percent and a benefit-cost
   ratio of 28:1. It estimated that the project would reduce the effect of childhood stunting on per capita
   consumption in adulthood by 66 percent. The analysis used a five percent discount rate and assumed that 90
   percent of the consumption gain from reducing stunting is realized during the child's working age. The findings
   were robust to sensitivity analysis; under more conservative assumptions (10 percent discount rate and
   lower reduction in stunting), the project had an IRR of 13 percent and benefit-cost ratio of 13:1. The ICR (p. 9)
   argued that insufficient data (in particular, lack of MICS data) precluded a follow-up analysis of IRR and the ratio
   of costs to benefits.

   Implementation efficiency was facilitated by the elimination of duplicate mandates when the government of
   Sindh established a Shared Services Unit in the Provincial Planning and Development Department under the
   AAP Secretariat to provide cross-functional support to Bank-financed projects across Sindh and to strengthen
   capacity for project implementation. However, there were shortcomings: ongoing coordination challenges at the

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



province and district levels; recruitment, motivation, and turnover issues among key staff; and funding issues
(amounts and timeliness of budget releases) (ICR, p. 12). The position of Coordinator for Nutrition to the Chief
Minister of Sindh was vacant for three years, from 2018 through 2021, resulting in "huge underspending" of the
project during that time period (ICR, p. 42). Procurement issues produced significant delays in implementation of
activities under the second component. DLI incentives were negatively affected by slow processes for verifying
and disbursing funds, late recruitment of the third-party verifier, and lack of perception among implementing
sectors that the incentives were adequate to affect their activities. Corrective action was taken on some of these
issues following the mid-term review, which took place in January 2021, extremely late in the project
implementation period.

In terms of allocative efficiency, according to the ICR (p. 9 and Annex 4, pp. 38-39), the overall amounts
allocated to nutrition as well as the allocations by sector were insufficient to achieve the targeted outcomes. Of
the total expenditures under the first component, 99 percent were for health and food production, leaving only
one percent for education, family planning, water and sanitation, and the AAP Secretariat. An analysis of health
sector interventions conducted in 2019 concluded that a reallocation of resources would have enhanced the
project's effects (ICR, p. 9). Furthermore, the project's monitoring systems did not provide adequate data to
target inputs effectively to households and population groups, or to determine whether project-financed activities
and outputs were achieving expected results.

Given lack of updated economic analysis and low allocative, implementation, and technical efficiency, overall
project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 13.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to Sindh's context and to government and Bank strategy. However,
the objective to reduce stunting in the province was only modestly achieved, and project efficiency was modest
as well. These ratings are indicative of significant shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and
achievement, resulting in an Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 18), the final Bank supervision mission requested the preparation of sectoral
sustainability plans, but only two sectoral plans (education and water/sanitation) were submitted, and "neither
presented persuasive details for sustaining results." However, declared government commitment to the AAP
and eventual realization of the project's objective remains firm. Institutional measures introduced by the
project (strengthening of the AAP Secretariat, provincial coordination) remain in place, and establishment of
a grievance redress mechanism has provided another channel at decentralized levels for accountability for
results.

Ultimately, however, the ICR's conclusion was not promising: "Sindh's strategies to reduce stunting have
incorporated every proven intervention without markedly affecting prevalence" (pp. 18-19). The ICR
questioned whether the multi-sectoral approach has been adequately interrogated for the completeness and
effectiveness of the activities financed, and for the relevance of top-down provincial-level decisions to district
planning and targeting. The ICR also pointed to the potential negative impact of broader risks outside the
boundaries of the project: ongoing COVID-19 effects, drought and floods, and volatility due to economic,
political, and security-related instabilities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's theory of change was largely sound and evidence based, but with important gaps: there
  was no treatment for moderate under-nutrition, no building of latrines for poor households, and a lack of
  actions/arrangements to promote multisectoral work. Project design was supported by extensive
  analytical work done by the Bank, the United Kingdom Department for International Development, and
  other partners (ICR, p. 10). It acknowledged lessons learned from previous and ongoing Bank
  engagements using results-based financing approaches, highlighting their potential to contribute to policy
  and sector dialogue by focusing on political ownership, on results, and on donor coordination. The project
  also drew on international experience demonstrating the importance of combining demand- and supply-
  side interventions to reduce stunting, and the need for strong coordination mechanisms to underpin a
  multisectoral approach. Government readiness had been demonstrated through development of and
  commitment to provincial policies and sectoral strategies, developed in collaboration with international
  partners; existing multi-sectoral nutrition operations ongoing in the province; full integration of the project
  into existing government structures; and agreement on partial government financing of the project.
  Overall risk was considered to be substantial, with particular risks stemming from the complex,
  multisectoral nature of the project, the first of its kind in Sindh; the need to rapidly expand the number of
  covered districts; and the potential challenges with measurement of results. The introduction of the DLI
  mechanism was intended to mitigate these risks. Institutional arrangements for the project were well



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



  specified and based on those established by the provincial government for implementation of the AAP.
  M&E arrangements were carefully delineated, and the results framework was logical and complete.

  Project preparation and review were part of the Agile Pilots initiative, reflecting a belief that essential
  elements for success were in place. This approach envisaged financial phasing, with initial Bank support
  to the AAP to be followed by a second phase, with no reference to the financing envelope; and technical
  phasing, with sequencing of implementation over the first 2-3 years to be based on the sector's current
  readiness and ability to scale up activities, and adjustments after a mid-term review. Preparation was
  expedited and treated as an emergency in order to take advantage of IDA 17 resources.

  As the ICR (p. 11) noted, more intensive preparation of technical and financial aspects was required,
  given the project's complexity. Lessons learned from prior experience, while well cited, were not
  internalized into project design, and risk mitigation was inadequate. The ICR (p. 17) observed that "the
  congruence of Sindh and Bank expectations for the project possibly crowded out consideration of
  significant project issues." The activities to be financed by the first component were not adequately
  specified, particularly in an environment already crowded with other projects and partners. The
  Borrower's ICR (pp. 40-42) detailed some of these shortcomings: there were no planned interventions to
  treat children with Moderate Acute Malnutrition (MAM), despite the fact that the number of MAM children
  is higher than those with Severe Acute Malnutrition, and untreated MAM children are at high risk of
  becoming SAM children; and community mobilization for water and sanitation focused only on making
  villages open defecation free without additional provisions for construction of latrines for poor households.
  Furthermore, an effective mechanism was not defined or established to facilitate multi-sectoral
  convergence. As a result, the project did not have provisions in place to track whether beneficiary
  households had actually benefited from project-supported activities offered by different departments.
  Institutional relationships were not clarified between departments at the provincial and district levels, and
  there was inadequate planning for ongoing engagement with communities and households. There was
  insufficient preparation of innovative approaches -- DLIs and CCTs -- that were not well understood by
  participating sectors, and arrangements for third-party verification of DLIs were not wholly in place.
  Coordination with other development partners was not sufficient to ensure the necessary targeting and
  convergence of interventions during implementation.

  The ICR (p. 11) observed that many of these issues were raised at the Project Concept Note and
  Decision Meeting reviews, but they were inadequately addressed prior to project effectiveness. Overall,
  the PAD did not provide adequate analysis of Sindh's nutritional status, its determinants, and mapping of
  the pre-existing program response; clarification of achievements and lessons learned from ongoing and
  recently closed projects and programs; or delineation of existing and proposed new complementary and
  value-added activities (ICR, pp. 11-12).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The task team leader and project team were based in-country and remained consistent throughout the
 project period. The Bank team worked closely with the AAP Secretariat to resolve institutional, technical,
 and fiduciary matters. Supervision missions were regular, and aides-memoire were promptly shared with

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



 the government to try to remedy identified problems. Specific efforts to address issues included a
 December 2018 Implementation Support Mission, which proposed a dozen measures to strengthen
 institutional, administrative, and technical arrangements; the 2019 restructuring; and a mid-term review
 (MTR). The MTR was not conducted until January 2021, extremely late in the project period, but many
 adjustments were made at the 2019 restructuring, and three-monthly actions plans were followed up
 regularly after that point. The ICR (p. 18) noted that, despite the Bank's participation in several exercises
 led by partners, development partners reported "challenges to coordination and information sharing with
 the World Bank team." According to the ICR (p. 13), the COVID-19 pandemic limited contact in the field
 and impeded in-person supervision, but annual component outputs, intermediate results, and
 disbursements improved in 2020 and 2021 compared with prior years.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design was, in concept, coherent and aligned with the project's theory of change. Results framework
 indicators represented a subset of broader government AAP results, selected to measure those activities
 directly supported by the project. Baseline values, target values, and data sources were clearly identified.
 DLI targets, where possible, were formulated as absolute numbers rather than percentages in order to
 facilitate triggering of disbursements. M&E responsibilities were well established at the provincial and
 district levels, with sector-specific monthly district reports to be consolidated at the provincial
 level. Monitoring was to include regular reporting from the departments, especially through the Department
 of Health's District Health Information Systems; third-party monitoring for verification of DLIs; and
 specialized surveys (including at least one province-wide stunting survey) to assess the stunting rate and
 other key project indicators. Capacity to consolidate data from various government systems was to be
 strengthened gradually through TA under the project's second component.

 Lack of planning for a comparable follow-up study to the baseline 2014 MICS (and the intermediate data
 provided by the 2018 MICS) meant that there were no studies providing complete end-of-project data on
 the nutrition and health outcomes of beneficiaries.



b. M&E Implementation
  A package of M&E tools was developed, finalized, and disseminated to implementing sectors in line with
  M&E implementation. With support from UNICEF and other partners, an M&E dashboard was developed
  covering all AAP interventions. The AAP website was regularly updated and maintained.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



  However, compliance with monthly M&E reporting requirements was inadequate, at only 27 percent in
  2017-18 and around 40 percent for 2018 through project closure. The completeness of sector
  implementation reports varied widely. A planned M&E manual that would have brought together all sector
  and program responsibilities for collecting and presenting data was never formally adopted or used in
  training personnel. According to the ICR (p. 14), M&E implementation was hindered by erratic staffing
  within the AAP Secretariat and delays in procuring resources to strengthen the system. The Borrower's
  ICR (p. 41) noted that, until the project's final year, only a single AAP Secretariat staff member was
  responsible for monitoring of all involved sectors and development partners. Delays in recruiting TA for
  M&E resulted in non-use of allocated funds. Additional tools, particularly the Nutrition Expenditure
  Tracking System (NETS), were developed late in the project period, not in time to contribute to
  assessment of the project. Third-party verification of DLIs was delayed by a lengthy procurement process
  and not completed until 2020; as a result, disbursements for 2017 through 2019 were approved only in
  2020, and those for 2019 through 2021 were approved in 2021.



c. M&E Utilization
  Progress reports noted ongoing challenges and made recommendations for improvement, and the
  project's two restructurings made adjustments to implementation and indicators. The ICR (p. 15) noted
  that M&E results were presented at two Provincial Steering Committee meetings. The ICR stated that
  use of M&E data at the district level was unclear. Overall, reliance on programmed surveys and the
  absence of evaluations of implemented initiatives reduced the potential for learning from the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated environmental assessment category "B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment, OP 4.09 Pest Management, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The existing
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the planned MSAN project was reviewed
   and updated to reflect the scale-up of activities to the 23 target districts under this project. The ESMF
   included guidance on developing management plans to provide the basis for identifying and costing
   measures to mitigate potential adverse impact of subprojects, such as proper construction of soaking pits
   for effective drainage to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water; appropriate siting of latrines to avoid
   water contamination and undue pressure on aquifers; and community involvement in latrine management
   and leakage detection. The project Secretariat included safeguards specialists to monitor ESMF
   implementation progress and compliance.

   OP/BP 4.12 was triggered due to the possibility that the project would need to acquire small pieces of land
   for some interventions. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared, and it was anticipated that
   Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) would be used wherever possible, with appropriate screening, to ensure
   that land was truly donated without any pressure.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



   OP 4.09 was triggered because of project support for agriculture enhancement technologies at the farm
   level, with possible use of pesticides to enhance crop production. The government had already approved
   and disclosed an integrated Pest Management Plan for the ongoing Sindh Agricultural Growth Project
   (US76.4 million, 2014-2021); that plan was applied to this project as well.

   According to the ICR (p. 15), safeguards compliance was rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout project
   implementation. The project was non-compliant with the legal covenant for extended periods of time
   because several of the safeguards-related positions in the AAP Secretariat were vacant. The fisheries
   sector constructed fish ponds without following the procedures and mitigation measures specified in the
   ESMF for VLD. Safeguards reporting often took place with delays.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management was rated Moderately Satisfactory across the project's lifetime, despite
   disbursements that consistently lagged well behind projections. Financial management specialists were
   recruited for the AAP Secretariat, and a project Operations Manual was adopted. Financial reports were
   sometimes delayed, but there were no substantive issues reported. Internal audits found issues with the
   health, livestock, and fisheries sectors. External audits, conducted annually by the Auditor General of
   Pakistan, found "many irregularities" (ICR, p. 16), but the Bank's Implementation Status and Results
   Reports did not note any audit issues.

   Procurement ratings varied widely during project implementation. All procurement was processed through
   the Bank's Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system, and the Bank's
   procurement team provided hands-on assistance to strengthen processes for the sectors and the AAP
   Secretariat. Despite these efforts, procurement ratings fell from Satisfactory to Moderately Unsatisfactory
   for much of 2019 and 2020, largely due to delays in the procurement of consultants to provide TA under
   the project's second component (behavior change communication, NETS, DLI verification, M&E, and
   citizen engagement). The M&E and citizen engagement contracts were eventually cancelled due to lack of
   remaining time to implement activities. The procurement rating improved to Satisfactory in 2021 following
   the establishment of a Shared Services Unit in the Provincial Planning and Development Department,
   under the AAP Secretariat, to provide cross-functional support for Bank-financed projects across Sindh.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Significant shortcomings in
                                                       Moderately                  project preparation and design
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory
                                                       Unsatisfactory              that impacted achievement of
                                                                                   outcomes..
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 19-20) presented insightful lessons and recommendations, some of which are
summarized here:

Assembling the individual elements of other proven effective responses to combat stunting
may not yield expected positive results in new contexts. In this case, although the AAP, with
project support, prescribed all the "right" things -- relevant policies and strategies at the provincial
and districts levels to support a multi-sectoral approach; harnessing of technical, institutional, and
administrative capacity to implement proven interventions; sustained financial commitment; and
emphasis on results backed by financial modalities and expenditure monitoring -- progress has
remained elusive.

Addressing a complex problem like stunting is facilitated not only by defining what must be
done, but also by addressing how things should be done within a specific local context. In
this case, project design did not adequately define the tools that would be needed to achieve the
targeted objective in Sindh province, including the role of intersectoral convergence and enhanced
accountability for resource use and service delivery at all levels.

Initial enthusiasm surrounding a project can cloud estimations of project complexity and the
likely time frame for achieving outcomes. Improving nutritional status involves changing
knowledge and behaviors among a range of population groups at different levels over time. In other
countries, Bank support for nutrition projects has often lasted more than a decade and involved
multiple projects and/or additional financings. The planned time frame for this project was extremely
ambitious and optimistic.

A rigorous evaluation plan and research constitute the foundation of mid-course correction
and learning for all projects, and especially for projects involving multiple sectors and/or
innovative approaches. In this case, the project encompassed eight sectors and multiple
innovative initiatives, but there is no evidence that the project engaged funding to assess and
evaluate results, or effectively leveraged expertise from other development partners to assess the
program's overall impact.




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sindh Response to Stunting (P161624)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, concise, and evidence-driven. It followed established guidelines. The ICR candidly
assessed the factors driving the project's under-achievement of planned outcomes, citing relevant literature and
presenting high-quality analysis. However, there were shortcomings. The ICR's presentation of the project's
theory of change (Annex 6, pp. 43-44) included treatment for MAM even though there were no planned project
interventions in this area (see Section 8a), and in some instances it simply mentioned principles ("sanitation,"
"hygiene") without spelling out concrete activities that would explain the pathway to intended outcomes. Its
narrative made no mention of the activities the project actually implemented; in its effort to be concise, it
sacrificed analysis of the relationship between reported outputs and achieved outcomes. The ICR commented
on the inadequacy of the MICS as a source of project baseline data without explaining why this was the case.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
