     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023109

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P163146                                     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60740,TF-A5606                          31-Dec-2021                                           109,149,108.98

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2017                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            118,000,000.00                                       1,995,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             107,668,693.22                                       1,427,758.00

 Actual                                         109,149,108.98                                       1,427,758.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl              Fernando Manibog              Kavita Mathur                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 1) and the Financing Agreement of September 29,
   2017 (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to reconstruct and rehabilitate infrastructure assets in disaster
   affected project provinces and strengthen the capacity of the Government to effectively respond to future
   disaster events”.




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Resilient Reconstruction of Damaged Public Use and Preventive Infrastructure at the
   Provincial Level (appraisal estimate US$110.69 million, actual US$106.77 million): This component
   included five provincial subcomponents that were all intended to fund resilient reconstruction of damaged
   roads, bridges, irrigation systems and natural disaster prevention/control structures in each of five
   participating Provinces: Binh Dinh, Phu Yen, Quang Ngai, Ninh Thuan and Ha Tinh.

   Component 2: Disaster Recovery Capacity Enhancement (appraisal estimate US$2.0 million, actual
   US$1.43 million): This component was to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Government at the
   central and provincial levels to respond to future disasters. It was to be implemented by the Ministry of
   Agriculture and Development (MARD). This component was to finance the following activities: i) evaluation
   of the effectiveness of the existing flood risk reduction efforts in the Central Region, using the 2016 floods
   as a case study; ii) building capacity of Disaster Risk Management (DRM) agencies on the damage and
   loss assessment methodology; and iii) the development of emergency reconstruction and recovery
   procedures.

   Component 3: Project Management Support (appraisal estimate US$7.31 million, actual US$1.26
   million): This component was to support project management, safeguards, audits, and monitoring and
   evaluation (M&E). It was to be implemented by the Binh Dinh Provincial People’s Committee (PPC). The
   actual amount under this component was much smaller than planned since the majority of the Provincial
   Project Management Units (PPMUs) and MARD’s PMU staff were civil servants and only few consultants,
   keeping the project management cost low.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$135.8 million. Actual cost was US$122.4 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$118 million (of which US$107.7
   million was disbursed) and a Trust Fund in the amount of US$1.9 million (of which US$1.4 million was
   disbursed).

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$15.8 million of which US$13.2 million
   materialized.

   Dates: The project was not restructured and closed on its original closing date (December 31, 2021).




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 10) at the time of appraisal, Vietnam had been experiencing three decades of
steady economic growth accompanied by a notable decline in poverty. However, despite this development,
a third of the population (about 30 million people) still lived close to the poverty line.

Vietnam is highly vulnerable to natural hazards such as floods, typhoons, droughts, and landslides that
pose a significant threat to development gains already made. Every monsoon season, the country is highly
exposed to a combination of river plain flooding, flash floods, and associated landslides. Almost 60 percent
of the country’s total land area and over 70 percent of its population are at risk to hydrometeorological
hazards. By the time of appraisal, extreme weather events had caused more than 13,000 deaths and
property damage in excess of US$6.4 billion during the previous two decades.

The Central Region of Vietnam, due to its high poverty and climate vulnerability, is a priority area for
strengthening disaster and climate resilience and improving well-being for vulnerable communities. The
PAD (p. 11) stated that between October and December 2016, 18 provinces in the Central, South Central,
and the Central Highlands regions of Vietnam were affected by prolonged flooding due to five consecutive
rainfall events resulting from a combination of tropical depressions and the north‐eastern monsoon,
resulting in substantial human loss and widespread damage to infrastructure, agriculture, and aquaculture
and especially affecting the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable communities. According to the ICR (p. 6) in
order to address these challenges, the government approved in 2014 the first law of Natural Disaster
Prevention and Control, which emphasized an integrated approach to Disaster Risk Management (DRM)
under the direction of the newly designated Central Committee for Natural Disaster Prevention and Control
(CCNDPC).

In 2016, the government’s 10-year Socio-Economic Development Strategy (2021-2030) emphasized the
importance of a sustainable, inclusive, and resilient growth path.

However, despite these efforts, challenges persisted due to limited intuitional coordination restricting the
governments’ capacity to manage disaster risks in a more holistic and systematic approach, lengthy budget
allocation procedures for emergency operations, and outdated damage and loss assessments.

The objective of the project supported the government’s National Strategy for Natural Disasters Prevention,
Response, and Mitigation (2017-2020) which shifted the focus of Disaster Risk Management (DRM) from
ex-post response to ex-ante preparedness.

The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY18-
22) which aimed to support Vietnam’s transition to a more resilient green growth model by ensuring that key
public infrastructure in the five most vulnerable provinces in Central Vietnam become more resilient to
natural disasters and climate change impacts and their governments have sufficient capacity to manage
any future disasters.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To reconstruct and rehabilitate infrastructure assets in disaster affected project provinces.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as
               reconstructing/rehabilitating damaged public infrastructure assets and preventive infrastructure in Binh Dinh,
               Ninh Thuan, Ha Tinh Phu Yen, and Quang Ngai provinces, and adopting, budgeting, and implementing O&M
               plans for infrastructure assets were to result in income and welfare benefits for the beneficiaries in the five
               selected, disaster-affected project provinces.

               The project made the following assumptions: i) adequate coordination mechanisms being in place among the
               implementing agency, technical agencies, provinces, and local communities; ii) procurement processes
               advancing smoothly and having adequate market response; iii) no other emergencies causing significant
               damages or disruptions during implementation; and iv) DRM interventions taking place in other vulnerable
               sectors.

               Outputs:

                     33 bridges were constructed, surpassing the target of 28 bridges being constructed.
                     99.39 kilometers of canals were constructed, not achieving the target of 126.80 kilometers.
                     79.97 kilometers of dykes and revetment were reconstructed, achieving the target of 78.80 kilometers.
                     24,279.4 hectares of area were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services, surpassing
                      the target of 20,601 hectares.
                     35,890 hectares of land were protected with reconstructed flood prevention/control infrastructure,
                      surpassing the target of 31,605 hectares.
                     107 operations and maintenance plans of built infrastructure were adopted, budgeted, and
                      implemented surpassing the target of 47 plans.

               Intermediate Outcome:

                     The project benefitted 1,282,013 beneficiaries, achieving the target of 1,257,245 beneficiaries. Of
                      these beneficiaries, 8.3 percent were poor, almost achieving the target of 9.4 percent. Since the
                      project emergency paper and the ICR did not define “poor”, it is not clear how the achievement was
                      measured. Also, 50.5 percent of beneficiaries were female, almost achieving the target of 52 percent.
                     751,318 beneficiaries were provided with improved/restored transport connectivity, surpassing the
                      target of 460,152 beneficiaries.




                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)




      93 percent of beneficiaries with reconstructed/rehabilitated flood-damaged infrastructure that reflected
       their needs was satisfied, surpassing the target of 60 percent. 93.7 percent of female beneficiaries
       were satisfied and 93.3 percent of poor beneficiaries. Both surpassing the target of 60 percent.

Final outcomes:

      The project’s improvements allowed for increases in household income ranging from 11 to 35 percent,
       depending on the area and the type of works implemented. The average was 25 percent equivalent to
       US$18 million for the five provinces over 30 years.
      The ICR stated (p. 14) that the reconstructed and rehabilitated infrastructure functioned well during
       flooding events in 2019 and 2020. Communities did not face interruptions to infrastructure services,
       including the reconstructed irrigation, water supply, and transport infrastructure.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of the Government to effectively respond to future disaster events.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as developing
national damage and loss assessment and procedures, training province officials on damage and loss
assessment, conducting an analysis on institutional options for National Disaster Prevention and Control
(NDPC) as well as developing a program for natural disaster mitigation for the central region were to result in
the following intermediate outcomes: i) tools for effective mobilization of resources for recovery by the Ministry
of Finance and Provincial People’s Committee (PPCs) being available; ii) damage and loss assessment
capability of PPC improved; and iii) framework for improved NDPC coordination available. These intermediate
outcomes were to result in the outcome of strengthening the capacity of the government to effectively
respond to future disaster events.

Outputs:

      An integrated flood risk management plan (IFRMP) for three river basins in the Central Region,
       including Phu Yen province were prepared, achieving the target of preparing such plan.
      Streamlined procedures for resource mobilization and allocation for recovery were developed,
       achieving the target of streamlining these procedures. Subsequently, a set of recommendations for
       specific clauses and articles of laws related to the mobilization and use of public resources for disaster
       preparedness and response were submitted to different ministries including the Ministry of Planning
       and Investment (MOPI), Ministry of Finance (MOF), and the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
       Development (MARD), for consideration.
      124 provincial government officials were trained in improved damage and loss assessment
       methodology, surpassing the target of 50 officials. In addition, 375 central government staff working on
       NDPC activities was also trained. Training topics included disaster risk management, development

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



                                    and implementation of emergency preparedness plans, update and maintenance of the IFRMPs of the
                                    three river basins, conducting rapid risk assessments, and development of rapid disaster damage
                                    reports.

                            Intermediate Outcome:

                                  17 provinces started to use improved damage and loss assessment methodology to prioritize post-
                                    disaster recovery and/or reconstruction, surpassing the target of five provinces.

                            The final outcome was as stated under objective 1, increases in household income in the targeted by the
                            government responding effectively to future disaster events.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            This project achieved the immediate goal of short-term physical rehabilitation and reconstruction. It was able
                            to achieve all of the PDO indicators with the exception of female and poor beneficiaries. Given the emergency
                            nature of this project, the achievement of the PDO was measured through the achievement of intermediate
                            outcome indicators rather than outcome indicators. However, the ICR was able to provide data on increases
                            in household income through the construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure that performed well during
                            new flooding as well as strengthened government capacity to respond to future disaster events. Taking
                            everything together, the achievement of both objectives was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: The PAD (p. 23) included a cost‐benefit analysis to calculate the Economic Rate of
   Return (ERR) and Net Present Value (NPV) of the project. Benefits of the project were the direct and indirect
   income and impact from the project’s activities. Shadow pricing conversion factors (CFs) of 0.9 for investments
   and 0.8 for labor were used. The aggregate economic impact considered the expected ERR from the subproject
   investments and the aggregate costs and benefits of the project areas. The analysis calculated an ERR of about
   18.9 percent and NPV of about VND 1,671.9 billion, indicating that the project was a worthwhile investment.

   The ICR (p. 51) included in its economic analysis each type of subprojects in a province financed under
   component 1. The aggregate economic impact considered the expected ERR from the subproject investments,

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



given the aggregate costs and benefits, increases of income of beneficiaries in targeted areas. The analysis
calculated an ERR of 19.2 percent, and NPV of VND1,722 billion, and a benefit cost ratio greater than 1
indicating that the project was a worthwhile investment. According to the Bank team (October 4, 2022) while the
calculation methods used for the ERR at appraisal and ICR were identical, the ICR economic analysis
considered costs and benefits from the country’s perspective valued according to current market prices, which
were higher than the market prices at the appraisal stage.

Operational Efficiency: Even though the project experienced procurement related delays (see section 10b for
more details), it closed on its original closing date while utilizing 90 percent of its budget. 83.5 percent of the
government funds were disbursed. The project was able to save US$9.97 million as a result from a successful
bidding process as well as tax exemption on IDA funds. Project implementation was more efficient in the Bin
Dinh and Phu Yen provinces than in the other three provinces since the latter ones did not use the counterpart
contributions when IDA resources were not yet available avoiding procurement delays.

The project’s administrative costs were only 2 percent of actual total project costs (which is lower than the
administrative costs of similar projects in Vietnam) since the management of the project was mainly done by civil
servants and only a few consultants were hired.

Taking everything together, the project’s efficiency was Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  18.90
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               19.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the country’s National Strategy for Natural
Disasters Prevention, Response, and Mitigation (2017-2020) and the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (FY18-22). Efficacy was Substantial since the project’s indicator targets were fully or nearly
achieved. Finally, efficiency was Substantial. Taking everything together, the project’s outcome rating is
Satisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risk to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories.

Political: The government is further cooperating with the Bank in this area with several operations aiming to
strengthen the capacity at all levels to manage future shocks and strengthen the resilience of infrastructure
assets. Projects include the Vietnam Dam Rehabilitation and Safety Improvement Project (P152309), the
Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P15344) and the
forthcoming Resilient Infrastructure Development Project (P174156). Continuous government commitment
will be critical to ensure the sustainability of outcomes. However, the ICR did not state whether the
government continues to remain committed, making the assessment of a political risk challenging.

Financial: Provincial line departments included O&M budgets for reconstructed infrastructure in their annual
budget plans, supporting the sustainability of project outcomes achieved. However, according to the ICR (p.
26) the sustainability of the flood protection infrastructure will require that various line agencies conduct
integrated river basin management as per the Integrated Flood Risk Management Plans. Also, these
agencies need to implement sustainable land use management practices upstream to reduce erosion and
silting of the infrastructure downstream. The ICR did not state whether the O&M budget will be sufficient and
if the timing of the actual transfers of these budgets are adequate.

Technical: In order to ensure the advancement of the country’s DRM legal, regulatory, institutional, early
warning system, and policy framework at the national, provincial and community level, it will be critical to
provide continuous capacity building. Training materials developed under the project can be used to
strengthen technical capacity and could include new and updated modules in the future. The ICR did not
state whether the government is ensuring that continuous capacity building will occur.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared as an emergency project following the 2015-16 drought and the 2016 floods.
  The preparation time was relatively quick taking only three months from concept to approval. According
  to the ICR (p. 20) the project built on lessons learned from previous Bank projects in Vietnam. One of the
  lessons included the value in applying the Build Back Better (BBB) principle in infrastructure
  reconstruction, stressing the importance of a risk-based design and high-quality construction using
  resilient materials and techniques. Also, the importance of allocating adequate funding for Operation &
  Maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure at the provincial level to mitigate macroeconomic risks was
  emphasized. This lesson was addressed by giving provinces the responsibility for allocating budget to
  implement the O&M plans and oversee the implementation of such plans through their designated
  agencies or departments.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



  The ICR (p. 25) stated that the Bank team had the right mix of expertise and conducted close
  consultations with the government, Provincial People’s Committee (PPC) and beneficiaries throughout
  the preparation process.

  According to the PAD (p. 22) the Bank team identified relevant risks such as: i) political and governance
  risk due to Vietnam’s graduation from IDA with lower access to concessional official development
  assistance (ODA) and increasingly less concessional loans making it more difficult to meet debt
  obligations; ii) institutional capacity for implementation due to the already high workload of the existing
  PMUs; and iii) fiduciary capacity at the PMUs. Mitigation measures included using trust fund resources
  (for Component 2) that were to focus on institutional capacity strengthening and training activities to
  complement IDA‐funded activities as well as providing technical assistance and support to PMU staff in
  key areas, which were adequate. The Bank team did not identify the risk of lengthy internal approval
  processes of budgets and investments, which resulted in IDA funds only starting to be disbursed one and
  a half year into project implementation. The ICR (p. 21) stated that due to the allocation of counterpart
  funds and advancement of the provincial budget by Binh Dinh Province and Phu Yen Province for the
  preparation of feasibility studies, engineering designs, bidding documents and reconstruction of priority
  investments, the project did not require any extension of its closing date.

  The project’s Results Framework lacked a final outcome indicator and only measured intermediate
  outcomes (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 25) the Bank provided timely and appropriate fiduciary support to the counterparts
 at the national, provincial, and community levels. In addition, the Bank team conducted bi-annual
 supervision missions (a total of nine supervision missions) and included a variety of experts in Disaster
 Risk Management (DRM), climate change, transport, water resource management, and agriculture.

 In December 2019, the Bank team conducted a Mid-Term Review (MTR) addressing the implementation
 delays in Ha Tinh, and Quang Ngai provinces resulting from the delayed IDA disbursement. The Bank
 addressed these delays through training (especially in financial management, procurement and
 safeguards) designed for each specific Provincial Project Management Unit (PPMU) and PMU challenges.

 The ICR (p. 26) stated that the Bank candidly reported on the project’s implementation status in Aide-
 Memoires and Implementation Status Reports.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended intermediate
 outcomes were adequate. Also, the objective was clearly specified. All indicators had a target and were
 sufficiently specific and measurable.

 The project’s M&E included a wide range of features such as i) Management Information System (MIS)
 structured around the Results Framework; ii) infrastructure asset baselines which were informed by the
 2017 Rapid Flood Damage and Needs Assessment (RFDNA); iii) semi-annual technical audits; iv) semi-
 annual M&E evaluations; v) mid-term evaluation; and vi) final project evaluation.

 The Binh Dinh PPMU was to hire a project M&E and Coordination Consultant to help coordinate project
 activities.

 The Results Framework had several shortcomings: i) the Results Framework did not include a final
 outcome indicator measuring an increase in beneficiaries’ incomes as defined as benefit in the PAD’s
 economic analysis; ii) intermediate outcome indicator “operations and maintenance plans of built
 infrastructures are adopted, budgeted and implemented” measured several different aspects; iii) targets
 seemed to have been too conservative given that several targets were substantially surpassed; iv) while six
 PDO level indicator measured the first aspect of the PDO (“reconstruct and rehabilitate infrastructure
 assets in disaster affected project provinces”) only one PDO indicator measured the second aspect
 (“strengthen the capacity of the government to effectively respond to future disaster events”); and v)
 several expected results were not measured including increase in income, reconstructed roads, fresh water
 supply systems and institutional assessments.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Results Framework was not revised during implementation and the Bank team found the data to be
  reliable and of good quality.

  According to the Bank team (October 4, 2022) key M&E functions are highly likely to be sustained. The
  Management Information System (MIS) that was established at the beginning of project implementation
  as the main data collection and processing tool has been integrated into provinces’ M&E systems
  and used by them since to monitor and evaluate government-financed projects. The provinces’ officials
  and M&E experts who were trained and assigned to the project continue to be involved in M&E of this
  project’s investments as well as others, and beneficiary surveys and periodical technical audits continue
  to be carried out by the clients for the province-financed projects.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



  According to the ICR (p, 23) the project’s M&E was used to identify implementation bottlenecks and
  identify opportunities to address them. Also, the project’s M&E was used to track implementation
  progress towards the objective.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered six of the Bank’s safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.11
   (Physical and Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement).

   According to the ICR (p. 23) the project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   and Environmental and Social Management Plan. The PMUs in the provinces of Binh Dinh and Phu Yen
   were more effective in ensuring that contractors complied with the Environmental and Social Management
   Plans during the construction phase of the infrastructure activities than the PMUs in the provinces of Ha
   Tinh, Ninh Thuan, and Quang Ngai.

   The ICR (p. 24) stated that the project prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework and Ethnic Minority
   Development Plans, which were implemented adequately. Furthermore, external reports were submitted in
   a timely basis and were of adequate quality. However, in Ha Tinh province, the PMU did not conduct
   replacement cost studies systematically and beneficiaries were not compensated in a timely manner. Also,
   there were delays in the following activities: i) updating of the resettlement databases of the PMUs; ii)
   carrying out the Resettlement Action Plans/Ethnic Minority Development Plans as well as the Free, Prior,
   and Informed Consent with ethnic minority communities.

   The Bank team (October 4, 2022) stated that the Bank addressed safeguard related issues by providing
   technical support and regular safeguards training to the PPMUs and contractors to ensure they have the
   necessary knowledge and skills to take safeguards actions. Also, mitigation measures included frequent
   watering of of roads and washing of trucks before leaving a construction site to minimize dust generation
   during construction and air pollution emerging from dust; installation of septic tanks at the construction sites
   to minimize water pollution; installation of trash cans, development of a site clean-up schedule, and
   identification of dumping sites to manage waste generated during the construction processes; and safe
   storage of fuels and chemicals in areas with impermeable soil with roofs and surrounding banks, equipped
   with safety warning signs and at a minimum of 20 meters away from camps and prevailing winds to safely
   remove and dispose chemical and hazardous waste generated during construction.

   According to the Bank team (October 4, 2022) the project complied with social safeguards. One
   shortcoming in regard to compliance was that the PPMU in Ha Tinh Province had not provided
   compensation to beneficiaries and implemented actions with ethnic minority communities for two out of 12
   investments in a timely manner. However, these issues were addressed in April 2021.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



   Overall, according to the ICR (p. 23) the project complied with the Bank’s environmental safeguard policies.

   The project developed a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). According to the ICR (p. 24) the project
   incorporated several measures to ensure transparency in the implementation of project activities before
   implementation start. The GRM included a redress mechanism in the five provinces for potential grievances.
   However, no complaints for compensation and resettlement or other issues were submitted.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 24) the project complied with the Bank’s financial management procedures.
   Financial reports including interim unaudited financial reports, audit reports, and audited financial
   statements were submitted in a timely manner and were adequate. Also, the accounting system was well
   maintained and payments to contractors were made in a timely manner. The ICR (p. 24) stated that once
   the IDA funds were released, the PMUs found the increased work volume challenging but maintained the
   Financial Management arrangements in acceptable manner. After July 2021, the project experienced
   delays in regard to its financial audits and contract management weaknesses in Ha Tinh, Ninh Thuan, and
   Quang Ngai provinces that were resolved by the time the project closed.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 25) the project complied with the Bank’s legal covenants. However, the project
   only partially complied with the Bank’s procurement procedures. During the first one and a half years of
   project implementation project procurement was significantly delayed. With the exception of three small
   contracts, most procurement processes complied with Bank procedures. To enhance transparency and
   improve integrity, the PMUs used e-bidding for procurement and most civil works contracts. Finally, the
   Bank provided intense training and support to improve the PMU’s capacity.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)



Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27) provided a few lessons that were adapted by IEG:

        Engaging with communities in the identification, implementation, and monitoring of
         investment assets allows for prioritizing investments and securing support. During
         project preparation and implementation of this project, the project team engaged with
         different population segments including women, the poor, ethnic minorities and other
         vulnerable communities. This resulted in mutual trust between all community segments and
         government tiers as well as increased ownership of beneficiary communities of the
         reconstructed infrastructure assets.

        Streamlining government procedures for emergency projects is critical for improving
         the DRM emergency financial response by the government. Due to the delay of IDA
         financing during the first one and a half year of project implementation, the project
         experienced implementation delays. This could have been prevented if the government had
         streamlined procedures for emergency projects. Also, putting in place a national emergency
         fund would allow line ministries at the provincial level to apply for initial and fast-disbursing
         funding for emergency situations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and included an appropriate
economic analysis. Furthermore, the ICR was internally consistent and results oriented. The ICR would have
benefitted from providing more final outcome data given the lack of PDO indicators measuring final outcomes.
Also, the ICR could have benefitted from providing more details on the probability of risks to development
outcomes materializing and including more lessons learned to provide a learning opportunity for similar projects
in this area. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
VN-Disaster Reconstruction Project (P163146)




                                                                            Page 14 of 14
