     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023081

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133017                                    Guilin Integrated Environment Management

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84580                                 31-Dec-2020                                       76,817,282.23

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Feb-2015                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              76,817,282.23                                            0.00

 Actual                                          76,817,282.23                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Kishore Laxmikant          Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to improve water and sanitation services in Guilin (Loan
   Agreement, Schedule 1 dated April 1, 2015 and Project Appraisal Document, para. 12).

   The PDO remained unchanged during project implementation.

   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed as follows:


                                                                                                Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



   Objective 1: To improve water services in Guilin.

   Objective 2: To improve sanitation services in Guilin.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 15 to 20 and ICR para. 12).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Any changes to these components during project
   implementation are discussed later in Section 2 under the Restructurings.

   Component 1: Water Supply (estimated cost at appraisal US$36.93 million; actual cost at completion
   US$42.97 million).

   This component was to consist of: (i) installation of a 35.26 km long trunk water main and associated
   distribution and reticulation pipelines to serve mainly the Lingui District and Balijie Area; (ii) construction of a
   booster pumping station in Xiefeng District to supply water to the residents in Lingui District and the vicinity
   of Guilin Liangjiang Airport; (iii) provision of monitoring and inspection equipment in the network to improve
   compliance with the new drinking water quality standard; (iv) installation of three tiers of District Metered
   Areas (DMAs); and (v) development and installation of a cloud-based decision support system (water
   operation platform) for improved operational efficiency in providing water supply services.

   Component 2: Wastewater Management (estimated cost at appraisal US$79.43 million; actual cost at
   completion US$58.24 million).

   This component was to consist of: (i) replacing aged equipment at selected pumping stations and
   installation of additional odor control facilities including ventilation systems; (ii) expanding, replacing or
   rehabilitation sewer networks and provision of necessary equipment to control leakages or blockage, and
   replacement and/or rehabilitation of associated manholes; (iii) upgrading of four wastewater treatment
   plants (WWTPs) in Shangyao, Qilidan, Beichong and Yanshan to improve the quality of effluent discharges,
   and associated odor control and disinfection equipment to improve operations and the water quality of
   Lijiang River; (iv) upgrading sludge dewatering equipment at three WWTPs (Shangyao, Qilidan and
   Beichong) and installing associated ventilation and odor control facilities at five WWTPs (including the
   Lingui WWTP); and (v) providing monitoring and sewer maintenance equipment.

   Component 3: Sludge Management (estimated cost at appraisal US$18.48 million; actual cost at
   completion US$4.0 million).


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



  This component was to consist of: (i) construction of a sludge management center at Shangyao WWTP
  with associated ventilation and odor control facilities; and (ii) procuring sludge hauling trucks and sewer
  maintenance trucks.

  Component 4: Water Quality Monitoring and Pollution Management (estimated cost at appraisal
  US$1.13 million; actual cost at completion US$1.09 million).

  This component was to consist of: (i) strengthening of the water quality monitoring system associated with
  the Lijiang River to enable real-time data collection and processing; (ii) developing a pollution management
  system for effective monitoring and management of the Lijiang River water quality; and (iii) piloting of a
  pollution source analysis for urban stretches of the Lijiang River.

  Component 5: Project Management and Supervision (estimated cost at appraisal US$2.0 million; actual
  cost at completion US$0.77 million).

  This component was to consist of: (i) project management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E); (ii)
  consultancy services for engineering design reviews and supervision of implementation of environmental
  assessments and resettlement actions plans; (iii) support to the Project Management Office (PMO) during
  implementation; and (iv) training and study tours to help in capacity building in monitoring and operations
  and maintenance (O&M) of facilities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$155.46 million. At project completion,
  the total cost was estimated to be US$110.78 million. The lower cost at project completion was primarily
  due to cost savings realized during project implementation.

  Financing: At appraisal, the Project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$100 million. During the
  restructuring in December 2020, reflecting cost savings realized during implementation, an amount of
  US$15 million was cancelled, thereby leaving a loan balance of US$85 million. At project completion, as a
  result of further cost savings, the actual amount disbursed was US$76.82 million, and the remaining
  unutilized balance of US$8.18 million was cancelled.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution from the Borrower was US$55.46 million. At
  project completion, the actual contribution from the Borrower was US$33.96 million.

  Dates: The Project was approved on February 2,2015 and became effective on June 29, 2015. The original
  closing date was December 31, 2020. It was extended once by 12 months and the actual closing date was
  December 31, 2021.

  Mid-Term Review (MTR): An MTR was carried out in December 2018.

  Restructurings: The Project underwent one Level 2 restructuring in December 2020 (disbursed amount
  US$69.79 million). (ICR paras. 13 to 26).

  The original PDOs were not changed. There were some changes in PDO indicators and Intermediate
  Results Indicators (IRIs) as discussed below. However, they were made to provide greater clarity and did


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



   not reduce the ambition of the Project. Consequently, the ICRR does not include a split evaluation in
   assessing the Project's outcome. Overall, the changes during the restructuring did not significantly impact
   the Project's Theory of Change (TOC).

   Changes in PDO Indicators: The target for PDO Indicator 2 (volume/mass of BOD pollution load removed
   from the treatment plants under the Project) was revised from 1,113 tons per year to 8,602.9 tons per year
   to reflect the absolute reduction rather than the incremental reduction under the earlier target. A new PDO
   Indicator 3 "number of beneficiaries of the improved wastewater collection and treatment services under the
   Project" was added with a target of 870,000 beneficiaries. (ICR para. 25).

   Changes in IRIs: Two new IRIs were added: (i) to assess the outcome associated with improved water
   service management systems and (ii) to monitor performance under the grievance redress mechanism
   (GRM). Changes were made in some other IRIs to provide greater clarity and adjust dates to reflect
   changes in the Project's closing date. (ICR paras. 21 and 25).

   Changes in components: Under Component 1, the following new activities were added: (i) upgrading of the
   SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) system at one water treatment plant (WTP); (ii)
   upgrading of the cloud-based monitoring system to improve operation efficiency and quality of service; and
   (ii) renewal of equipment at one WTP. Under Component 2, some of the original activities were dropped: (i)
   some sewer construction activities as they were financed from counterpart funding and (ii) installation of one
   sludge drying facility as it did not pass public consultation. Under Component 5, acquisition of office
   hardware was dropped. (ICR paras. 16 and 17).

   Some reallocations were made between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 7 and ICR paras. 1 to 7).

Country Context: At the time of appraisal in 2014, with China's continuing rapid transition to an urban
economy, more than 60 percent of its gross domestic product (GDP) was being generated in urban areas
and more than half of its population lived in urban and peri-urban areas. However, the environmental
performance of its cities and towns needed improvement to remedy the serious environmental pollution and
degradation arising from rapid economic growth, urbanization and industrialization. Guilin is located in the
Guanxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (Guanxi), where, despite some economic advances, average income
levels were only about one-third of the national average. To reduce the economic disparities, the
Government of China (GoC) had been investing heavily in promoting economic development and alleviating
poverty. Guilin, with a population of about 940,000 people, was one of the most famous tourist destinations
in China, attracting about 13.6 million tourists and visitors in 2012. Tourism contributed to about 20 percent
of Guilin's GDP in 2012. The iconic Lijang River and surrounding karst formations were (and continue to be)

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



primary attractions for both national and international tourists. Consequently, environmental protection of
these resources was of prime importance for Guilin.

Sector and Institutional Context: Under the decentralized governance system in the sector, water supply,
sanitation and environmental management in Guilin were the responsibilities of the Guilin Municipal
Government (GMG). The Guilin Water Supply Company (GWSC) was responsible for water supply services
and the Guilin Sewerage Company (GSC) for sanitation services.

Alignment with the Country Partnership Strategy/Framework: The project development objectives
(PDO) were consistent with the priorities in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Fiscal Years 2013 to
2016 in effect at the time of appraisal and continue to remain consistent with the priorities under the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Fiscal Years 2020 to 2025 that is currently in effect. Under the
CPS, the Project was in line with Strategic Theme One (Supporting Greener Growth). The PDO remain
consistent with the CPF that is currently in effect. Of the CPF's three engagement areas (EA), the PDO are
consistent with EA 2 (Promoting Greener Growth), and EA 3 (Sharing the Benefits of Growth). Under EA 2,
the PDO are consistent with Objective 2.2 (reducing air/soil/water/marine plastic pollution) where the CPF
acknowledges (CPF para. 68) that "water pollution is a serious problem compounded by acute water
scarcity" and under Objective 2.4 (strengthening sustainable natural resource management), where the
CPF (para. 70) recognizes that China is one of the most water-scarce nations in the world, and water
scarcity is worsening due to increasing demand, water pollution, and the effects of climate change". The
CPF confirms (para. 70) that the Bank will continue to provide policy advice on water governance issues
and states that the pipeline of Bank-supported projects will support integrated water resource
management.

Alignment with National/Autonomous Region Priorities: The PDO continue to remain consistent with
national and regional priorities in China. As an autonomous region, one of the highest priorities of the
Guanxi Region and the GMG has been to maintain and improve the quality of the Lijang River. Under
Guanxi's Lijang River Catchment Ecological Environmental Protection Resolution of 2011, the GMG was
required to protect the Lijang River by integrating ecological protection with the City's Development Master
Plan, including upgrading of municipal wastewater services, expanding and rehabilitating water supply
services, and raising awareness of the importance of water conservation. The Region's 12th Five-Year Plan
(2011-2015) included strengthening of water quality monitoring and water environment management
capacity. In December 2012, the Guanxi State Council issued an Outline Plan for Constructing Guilin as an
International Tourism Destination and assigned responsibilities to the GMG.

Prior Bank Experience: The Guilin Integrated Environment Management Project (GIEMP - the Project)
built on the experience and successful achievements under earlier projects, including the
predecessor Bank-financed Guanxi Urban Environment Project (GUEP) which closed in December 2007.
The GUEP focused on improving the environmental conditions in Guilin's core urban area by improving
facilities for wastewater collection and treatment, effluent regulations, and solid waste management, and
providing technical assistance and capacity building for improving water environmental monitoring and
enforcement. As Guilin's population and tourism continued to grow, further investments were assessed to
be essential for expanding services, protecting the environment, ensuring sustainable use, and improving
the water quality in Lijang River. Towards this end, the GIEM Project adopted an integrated approach to
urban water supply and wastewater management, supported by enhancing related environment
management capacity in the GMG.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDO were
               consistent, and remain consistent, with the priorities in the national/regional programs and the Country
               Partnership Strategy/Frameworks. However, as formulated, the PDO were pitched at a relatively low level
               "to improve water services in Guilin" and "to improve sanitation services in Guilin", particularly given the
               required degree of improvement in water productivity and pollution reduction, as recognized in the PDO
               indicators employed in the Results Framework. The relevance of PDO is rated Substantial.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve water services in Guilin.

                             Rationale
                             With regard to Objective 1, the ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the Theory of Change (TOC) and
                             the causal Results Chain. To meet the growing water supply needs in Guilin, the water supply capacity
                             needed to be increased and the transmission/distribution systems strengthened. An increase in water supply
                             capacity was planned to be provided through the Chengbei Phase II water supply project that was being
                             financed by the French Development Agency (AFD). The Project would provide for financing investment and
                             technical assistance. The inputs for investment financing would result in relevant physical outputs including:
                             (i) installation of a 35.25 km long trunk water main and associated pipelines; and (ii) construction of a new
                             booster pumping station. The inputs for technical assistance to the Guilin Water Supply Company (GWSC)
                             would provide capacity building outputs including: (i) provision of water quality monitoring and inspection
                             equipment; (ii) installation of District Metered Areas (DMA); and (iii) installation of a cloud-based water
                             operations system. The World Bank-financed and AFD-financed investments would be inter-linked in ensuring
                             achievement of the PDO. The outcomes would be improved quality of water services in Guilin. The longer-
                             term outcomes would be enhanced health and welfare benefits to the population of Guilin.

                             The causal links and the full results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 1 were clear. The PDO indicators
                             and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) adopted were generally relevant, measurable, and appropriate for
                             assessing the achievement of the objective. Achievement of Objective 1 was to be measured by a single
                             PDO indicator "number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources under the
                             Project". Under the World Health Organization definitions, improved water sources include household
                             connections, public standpipes, and protected water sources.

                             Key assumptions underlying the results chain were that: (i) the increase in water supply capacity under the
                             AFD-financed Chengbei Phase II Water Supply Project would be implemented in time; and (ii) GWSC would

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



be able to internalize and implement in a timely manner the capacity-building benefits provided under the
Project.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and
ICR paras. 31 to 37).

Principal outputs under the water supply component included: (i) installation of a 35.26 km long trunk water
main and associated distribution pipelines; (ii) construction of a new booster pumping station; (iii) provision of
monitoring and inspection equipment; (iv) installation of three tiers of District Metered Areas (DMA); and (v)
development and installation of a cloud-based decision support system (DCS) to serve as a water operations
platform.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): Targets for all the associated IRIs were achieved or substantially
achieved as follows:

        Number of newly added water connections (baseline 0; target 80,000; actual 84,000; target achieved).
        Length of distribution pipe constructed to enable new connections (baseline 0; original target 37 km;
         revised target 35.36 km; target substantially achieved).
        Increase in water treatment capacity; (baseline 0 m3/day; target 200,000 m3/day; actual 200,000
         m3/day; target achieved).
        Installation and operationalization of a cloud-based drinking water operations platform for improved
         water service management (baseline no; target yes; actual yes; target achieved).

Outcomes: For Objective 1, the Project achieved or substantially achieved the planned targets for all the
Intermediate Results Indicators (as discussed above) relating to (i) increase in water treatment capacity; (ii)
extension of the water distribution network; (iii) increase in the number of water connections; and (iv)
strengthening of the capacity for water operations management. These achievements collectively contributed
to achievement of the targeted outcome under Objective 1. The outcome was to be measured by a single
PDO indicator "number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources under the
Project" (baseline 0; target 248,000; actual 260,400; target exceeded). Thus, the Project achieved the
targeted outcome in regard to the number of people provided with improved treated water from the Project-
supported water treatment plant (WTP).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve sanitation services in Guilin.

Rationale
With regard to Objective 2, the ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the Theory of Change (TOC) and
the causal Results Chain. To enable the GMG to significantly improve its capacity for wastewater
management, substantial investments were required in improving the wastewater infrastructure and


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



strengthening the environmental management capacity. The Project would provide for financing investment
and technical assistance. The inputs for investment financing would result in relevant physical outputs
including: (i) upgrading of pumping stations; (ii) rehabilitation of sewerage networks and equipment; (iii)
upgrading of wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs); (iv) installation of ventilation and odor control equipment;
and (v) provision of monitoring and sewer maintenance facilities; (vi) construction of a sludge management
center with associated facilities; and (vii) provision of sludge hauling trucks and sewer maintenance trucks.
The inputs for technical assistance to the Guilin Sewerage Company (GSC) would provide capacity building
outputs including: (i) strengthening real-time data collection and processing of environmental data for the
Lijang River; (ii) development of an integrated pollution management plan for the Lijang River; (iii) piloting of a
pollution source analysis for stretches of the Lijang River. The outcomes would be improved wastewater
services and improved environment management capacity in Guilin. The longer-term outcomes would be
enhanced health and welfare benefits to the population of Guilin, and economic benefits from a growth in
tourism in the Region.

The causal links and the full results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 2 were clear. The PDO indicators
and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) adopted were generally relevant and measurable for assessing the
achievement of the objective. However, as discussed earlier in Section 2, the original formulation of one of
the PDO indicators "volume (mass) of BOD pollution load removed by treatment plants under the Project"
lacked clarity and had to be re-formulated under the project restructuring. It did not result in a reduction in
ambition.

Key assumptions underlying the results chain were that: (i) the procurement arrangements and obtaining of
necessary environmental clearances would be accomplished in a timely manner; and (ii) GSC would be able
to internalize and implement in a timely manner the capacity-building benefits provided under the Project.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and
ICR paras. 31 to 37).

Principal outputs under the wastewater and environment management component included: (i) upgrading of
equipment at selected pumping stations; (ii) expansion/replacement/rehabilitation of networks to control
leakages and blockages; (iii) upgrading of four WWTPs; (iv) upgrading of sludge dewatering units at three
WWTPs; (v) provision of monitoring and sewer maintenance equipment; (vi) construction of a sludge
management center with associated facilities; and (vii) procurement of sludge hauling trucks and sewer
maintenance trucks.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): Achievement of the targets for the associated IRIs were as follows:

      Length of sewer network rehabilitated or constructed (baseline 0; target 40 km; actual 40 km; target
       achieved).
      Number of WWTPs upgraded to meet the improved effluent discharge standard (Class IA of
       GB18918-2002) (baseline 0; target 4; actual 4; target achieved).
      Amount of sludge treated and disposed safely per day (water content 72%) (baseline 0; original target
       150 metric tons; revised target 107 metric tons; actual 107 metric tons; target not achieved against
       original target and achieved under revised target).
      Number of sludge treatment facilities upgraded at WWTPs (baseline 0; target 3; actual 3; target
       achieved),



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



                            Thus, three of the original four IRIs were achieved. The original target for the volume of sludge treated (tons
                            per day or tpd) was revised to 107 tpd at the restructuring. The revised target was achieved.

                            Outcomes: For Objective 2, the Project achieved the planned targets for three of the four
                            associated Intermediate Results Indicators (as discussed above) relating to (i) length of sewer network
                            rehabilitated/constructed; (ii) number of WWTPs upgraded; and (iii) number of sludge treatment facilities
                            upgraded in the WWTPs. Regarding the IRI related to sludge removal, the original target (150 tpd) was
                            significantly scaled down to 107 tpd at the project restructuring. These achievements collectively contributed
                            to achievement of the targeted outcome under Objective 2. The outcome was to be measured by two PDO
                            indicators: PDO 1 "volume (mass) of BOD pollution load removed by treatment plants under the
                            Project" (baseline 0; original 1,113 tons per year (tpy); revised target 8,603.9 tpy; actual 12,800 tpy; target
                            exceeded). PDO 2 "number of beneficiaries of improved wastewater collection and treatment services under
                            the Project" (baseline 0; target 870,000; actual 920,000; target exceeded). Thus, the Project exceeded the
                            targeted outcomes in regard to reduction in the volume of BOD pollution load and the number of beneficiaries
                            of improved wastewater services under the Project.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The rating of overall efficacy is based on the underlying efficacy ratings for Objectives 1 and 2 as discussed
                            earlier above.

                            Efficacy of Objective 1 was rated High as the targeted outcome of providing people in urban areas with
                            access to improved water sources under the Project was exceeded. Against the target of providing access to
                            248,000 persons, the actual achievement at completion was providing access to 260,400 persons. The
                            achievement of the targeted outcome was supported by the achievement of all the associated supporting
                            Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs).

                             Efficacy of Objective 2 was rated High as the targeted outcomes of providing people in urban areas with
                            improved wastewater collection and treatment services and reducing the volume of BOD pollution load by the
                            WWTPs under the Project were both exceeded. Against the target of providing improved services to 870,000
                            persons, the actual achievement at completion was 920,000 persons. Against the target of reduction in BOD
                            load by 8,603 tpy, the actual achievement was 12,800 tpy. The achievement of the targeted outcomes was
                            supported by the achievement of three of the four associated supporting Intermediate Results Indicators
                            (IRIs).

                            Based on the foregoing, the Project's overall efficacy is rated High.

                            Additional Achievements (ICR paras. 36 and 37): In addition to the achievement of the intended outcomes of
                            improving water and sanitation services in Guilin, the Project also generated additional environmental and


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



  social co-benefits, including enhancing the environmental management capacity of Guilin. The water quality
  monitoring capacity of GMG was strengthened through developing and improving a pollution management
  system that enables on-line real-time monitoring of both river water quality and pollution discharges. A study
  on pollution source inventory analysis for the Lijang River funded by counterpart financing contributed to
  advanced practice in China for informing integrated river water environmental management. The ICR reports
  (para. 37) that the Project has contributed to protecting the water environment. Monitoring data have shown
  that the Lijang River's water quality showed an improving trend from 2015 to 2020 thereby increasing the
  potential for improved living conditions, increased tourism, and stimulation of the local economy.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
(Reference ICR paras. 38 to 46 and Annex 4).

Economic Efficiency

At Appraisal: The economic analysis approaches used at appraisal were the following: (i) For the water supply
component, a cost-benefit analysis; (ii) for the wastewater component, a qualitative assessment and cost-
effectiveness analysis; and (iii) for the sludge management component, a cost-effectiveness analysis.

Water Supply Component: For the cost-benefit analysis, economic costs included investment costs and
operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. Quantified economic benefits included valuation of (i) supply of clean
water to meet growing demands in existing served areas; (ii) increased access to clean water in previously
unserved areas; and (iii) savings in O&M costs. Valuation of benefits was based on an assessment of
consumers' willingness-to-pay. Based on this, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 11.2
percent in real terms, higher than the utilized threshold of 10 percent, (ICR para. 39).

Wastewater Management Component: The ICR reports (para. 40) that a qualitative assessment and cost-
effectiveness analysis was carried out at appraisal. Reactive oxygen ionization (ROI) and sludge treatment with
composting were chosen as the least-cost options. Lifecycle costs (Net Present Value or NPV at a 10% discount
rate) were estimated for both investments. Results at appraisal and the post-completion estimates are provided
in the Table below.

At Completion: The ICR confirms (Annex 4, para. 6) that the same analytical approach was followed for
assessing the post-completion economic viability of the Project. Results comparing the appraisal estimates with
the post-completion estimates are provided in the Table below.

                         Economic Viability Estimates - Appraisal vs. Completion
                                                                            Post-
                  Component and Economic Viability Indicator      Appraisal
                                                                            Completion
                  Water Supply (EIRR)                             11.2%     10.3%


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



                  Wastewater (Reactive Oxygen Ionization) (Lifecycle   US$5.92     US$5.18
                  Cost NPV at discount rate of 10%)                    million     million
                  Sludge Management with Composting (Lifecycle         US$12.13    US$7,23
                  Cost NPV at discount rate of 10%)                    million     million




Rating of Economic Efficiency: For the water supply component, the post-completion EIRR is slightly less than
the appraisal estimate but still higher than the reference discount rate of 10% used at appraisal. For the
wastewater and sludge management components, the post-completion re-estimated lifecycle costs are lower
than the corresponding estimates at appraisal, indicating higher economic efficiency.

Based on the foregoing, the Project's economic efficiency is rated Substantial.

Implementation Efficiency

Project Cost: As compared to the estimated project cost of US$155.46 million at appraisal, the actual cost
estimated at completion was US$110.78 million, lower by about US$44.68 million (29 percent) as compared to
the appraisal estimates. The reduction in project cost was largely the result of cost savings realized during
implementation through competitive bidding and the cancellation of parts of some components as their costs
were covered by the government. All project investment activities were completed substantially as planned.

Project Duration: The planned implementation period was about six years (71 months). Due to the delaying
effects of the COVID pandemic, the Project's closing date was extended once by 12 months to allow for
completion of Project activities.

Based on the foregoing, the Project's implementation efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)              *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



6. Outcome

The Project's outcome is rated on the basis of underlying ratings for Relevance, Efficacy, and Efficiency.

As discussed in Section 3, the Project's Relevance is rated Substantial.

As discussed in Section 4, the Project's Efficacy is rated High.

As discussed in Section 5, the Project's Efficiency is rated Substantial.

Based on the above, the Project's Outcome is rated Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and Operational Risks: These are rated Moderate. While GWSC and GSC have substantial
technical and operational experience, their ability to maintain efficient operations will depend upon timely and
adequate availability of funds to cover their operating and other costs. This will depend upon continued
support from the GMG.

Financial Risks: These are rated Moderate. As providers of basic services, GWSC and GSC would require
financial support from time to time. The GMG's ability to provide this will depend upon the availability of
sufficient funds to cover these needs while simultaneously meeting its other obligations.

Institutional Capacity Risks: These are rated Moderate. The Project contributed to significant capacity
building in GWSC, GSC and the Environment Management Bureau, including the introduction of
sophisticated monitoring systems. The successful use of these systems will require timely internalization and
continued attention on the part of the institutional beneficiaries.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  (Reference ICR paras. 76 and 77).

  Preparation of the Project benefited from the Bank's experience gained from earlier projects, including
  the GUEP, and analytical work in the sector, including the World Bank-China Country Water

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



  Resources Partnership Strategy (2012). The strategic relevance was high. The PDO were clear and
  achievable and were well-aligned with the national/regional development agenda and the World Bank's
  Country Partnership Strategy/Framework. Policy and institutional aspects were well covered including a
  requirement for the GMG to ensure that GWSC and GSC would generate sufficient revenues, including
  from subsidies as appropriate, to cover their operating expenses. Assignment of responsibilities for
  implementation arrangements were generally satisfactory with a Project Leading Group (PLG) set up at
  the GMG level and establishment of a Project Management Office (PMO). Adequate assistance and
  capacity building were planned to be provided to these agencies. Environmental aspects were addressed
  and required assessments carried out in time. Fiduciary assessments and arrangements were
  adequately designed. Gender considerations were incorporated in project preparation and
  implementation. M&E design, including the theory of change and the Results Framework, were generally
  adequate to assess the achievement of the objectives and test the links in the results chain. The risks
  assessment and proposed mitigation measures were adequate. An important risk was in relation to the
  timely completion of the AFD-financed expansion of the Chengbei WTP. This was covered through
  including and monitoring achievement of a relevant output indicator under the Results Framework One
  area where greater attention could have been given was ensuring adequacy of staffing in the PMO.
  Weaknesses in PMO staffing led to delays in procurement activities (ICR para. 77).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Overall, the Bank's supervision team worked proactively with the counterparts to anticipate and resolve
 issues affecting implementation progress. This included interacting with the counterparts during the lengthy
 restructuring process (the MTR was conducted in December 2018 and the restructuring took place in
 December 2020). The delays were caused by cancellation of some activities and multiple reviews required
 by different GoC agencies and the impact of the COVID pandemic (ICR para. 61). To overcome the serious
 delay in the hiring of a project management consultant by the PMO, the supervision team proactively
 enabled funding the services of an experienced consultant to expedite preparation of bidding documents
 which considerably helped expedite implementation thereafter. The supervision team helped organize
 several training workshops and provided hands-on training to the counterparts where appropriate. The
 supervision team also worked closely with AFD, the development partner under the Project, to ensure
 timely completion of the Chengbei WTP, an important component under the Project.

 During the implementation period of nearly seven years, the Project team carried out a total of
 14 supervision missions, averaging two per year. The team had two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the
 implementation period. The missions were adequately staffed with technical, safeguards and fiduciary
 specialists. Back-to-Office reporting was candid and the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs)
 were filed in a timely manner.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR paras. 63 to 66).

 Although not articulated in the PAD, the theory of change (TOC) and results chain (as inferred in the ICR)
 were generally sound and well-covered in the Project's M&E system. The M&E system included an
 adequately developed Results Framework (RF) with some shortcomings. As discussed earlier in Section 3
 (Relevance of Project Development Objectives), the PDO ("to improve water services in Guilin" and "to
 improve sanitation services in Gulin") were pitched at a relatively low level given the required degree of
 improvement (as recognized in the PDO indicators employed in the Results Framework). While the PDO
 indicators were directly related to the planned outcomes, there was a lack of clarity in one PDO indicator
 "volume (mass) of BOD pollution load removed under the Project" which was addressed during the project
 restructuring. While the Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were generally adequate to capture the
 contribution of the Project components and outputs towards achieving the Project outcomes, there was a
 lack of clarity in definitions and targets for some IRIs which had to be addressed during the restructuring.
 Also, IRIs were missing for monitoring the progress of Component 4 (Water Quality Monitoring and
 Pollution Management) and had to be added during restructuring. (ICR para. 63).



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, some adjustments were made to the M&E system to better collect and monitor
  relevant data, including addressing the shortcomings referred to in the section above. The changes
  helped improve the clarity of the indicators and relevance of the data, and did not lead to a reduction in
  the ambition of the Project. The M&E data were collected and verified by the PMO with the support of
  consultants. Reports were submitted semi-annually to the World Bank and the government agencies
  concerned.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data and reports were used to monitor progress, identify bottlenecks, facilitate decision-
  making and recommend proactive actions where needed, including in seeking resolution of land
  acquisition issues. (ICR para. 65).

  Overall Rating of M&E Quality: Based on the foregoing, the Project's M&E quality is rated Substantial
  with some shortcomings.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   (Reference ICR paras. 67 to 75).

   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   At appraisal, the Project was classified as Category A (full assessment). The environmental and social
   safeguards triggered were: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (IR OP 4.12).

   Environmental: The ICR reports (paras. 67 and 68) that the Project complied with all environmental
   safeguards including Environmental Assessment and Natural Habitats. An Environmental and
   Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Environmental Impact Plans (EIAs) were prepared and satisfactorily
   implemented by the client. Major negative environmental impacts during construction were site-specific and
   were mitigated by measures included in the relevant Environment Management Plans (EMPs). Potential
   adverse impacts during implementation from the sludge treatment and disposal process and discharge from
   the WWTPs were avoided by sound project design and construction management. There were no pending
   environmental issues after project closing. The overall environmental safeguards performance of the Project
   was rated Satisfactory (ICR para. 68).

   Social: The ICR reports (para. 70) that the Project complied with all social safeguards. Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP 4.12) was triggered due to land acquisition and population relocation for the Chengbei
   WTP. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared as
   required and publicly disclosed. The Project involved 19.6 hectares (ha) of land acquisition of which 0.4 ha
   were nationally owned and 19.2 ha collectively owned. In total, 247 households and 1,147 people were
   affected. Two private restaurant owners with 15 staff members were also affected. The resettlement
   activities were carried out in consistency with the World Bank requirements and applicable national policies.
   Nearly all (99.9 percent) of the surveyed households reported that the resettlement work was satisfactory.
   (ICR para. 72).

   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): The Project established a GRM to receive, respond to, and resolve
   grievances. A municipal department was assigned to manage the GRM and resolve any issues that could
   not be resolved at the working level. Displaced families were able to come into or call the municipal
   department to raise their grievances. The GRM channels were disclosed to all displaced persons. At project
   closing, there were no outstanding grievances associated with project implementation. The Intermediate
   Results Indicator "percentage of grievances redressed satisfactorily" included a target of 100 percent which
   was successfully met at project closing (ICR para. 75).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



  (Reference ICR paras. 73 and 74).

  Financial Management: The ICR reports (para. 73) that the Project had an adequate financial
  management (FM) system. The project accounting and financial reporting were in line with the regulations
  issued by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the requirements specified in the Loan Agreement. Interim
  and other financial reports were submitted in a timely manner. No significant FM issues were noted
  throughout the implementation period. Any issues or weaknesses identified during implementation were
  resolved in a timely manner. The Project audit reports were all with unqualified opinions and submitted on
  time. The funds flow arrangements were appropriate. No cases of ineligible expenditures were reported.
  (ICR para. 73).

  Procurement: The ICR reports (para. 74) that procurement activity under the Project was satisfactory and
  in compliance with the World Bank procurement policies and procedures. The Project team carried out
  post-reviews regularly on a sampling basis. At the inception stage, a lack of sufficient knowledge and
  familiarity in the PMO with World Bank operations led to slow progress, which was mitigated by training,
  guidance and the assistance of external consultancy services. Procurement related issues included
  complaints and contractual disputes which were resolved in joint discussion with the relevant parties.
  There were some instances of fraudulent practices on the part of some contractors which were addressed
  as a part of procurement oversight by the counterparts and the Bank team. All contracts were procured
  and signed following the World Bank's Procurement and Consultant Guidelines. (ICR para. 74).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
  (Reference ICR paras. 48 to 55).

  Gender: The Project was not gender-tagged. The ICR reports that some gender considerations were
  incorporated in project preparation and implementation. Gender-sensitive approaches were used during
  resettlement planning. Both males and females were consulted during RAP preparation and the social
  assessment process. Men's and women's groups were separately interviewed. Gender-disaggregated
  indicators were reported in the M&E reports. According to an evaluation by a third-party independent
  consultant commissioned under the Project, both men and women benefited equally from improved water
  supply and wastewater services under the Project. (ICR paras. 48 to 50).

  Institutional Strengthening: While the ICR does not provide specific quantitative or qualitative information
  to help assess the degree of institutional strengthening, it reports that the Project had substantial impacts
  on institutional strengthening within a wide range of agencies. Capacity building support provided to the
  Guilin Municipal Development and Reform Commission (GDRC), particularly through setting up the PMO in
  GDRC, enhanced its capacity to coordinate relevant agencies, including those responsible for environment,
  water, and public utilities, as well as the GWSC and GSC. This support has contributed to improving the
  integrated management of water supply and wastewater services in Guilin. The technical training,



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



   workshops, and study tours conducted under the Project have contributed to strengthening the institutional
   capacity of all participating agencies. (ICR para. 51).

   Resilience to Climate Change: By helping Guilin improve its water environment management, the Project
   contributed to increase its resilience to adverse impacts due to climate change. The Project also enabled an
   improvement in energy efficiency in Guilin's WTP (by about 6 percent) and WWTPs (by about 25 percent).
   Given that electric power is the leading contributor to China's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, energy
   savings enabled by the Project would contribute to reducing GHG emissions from the water sector and
   thereby contributing to climate change mitigation. (ICR para. 54).

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: Poverty reduction was not specifically targeted under the
   Project. However, improved access to cleaner water benefits all sections of the population, including the
   poor. Environmental improvements enabled by the Project could potentially lead to increased economic
   benefits to the local population through stimulation of tourism. (ICR para. 55).




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               While the ICR rates Relevance
                                                                               of Project Development
                                                                               Objectives as High, IEG rates it
                                                                               as Substantial given that the
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              PDO were pitched at a relatively
                                                                               low level considering the degree
                                                                               of required improvements in
                                                                               water and sanitation services in
                                                                               Guilin.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 82 to 86) lists a number of lessons derived from the Project's experience. Based
thereon, IEG derives the following lessons relevant for similar projects carried out in comparable
environments.

Integrated plant and network management for urban water and wastewater utilities can
improve operational effectiveness and efficiency. The separation of plant and network
management has been identified as a main issue affecting performance of urban water utilities in
many countries. While water and wastewater plants are typically managed by utilities, networks are

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)



often managed by other municipal government departments (as in China). The Project financed not
only the upgrading of WWTPs but also the wastewater networks, which enabled improved efficiency
and helped reduce the pollutants discharged to the natural environment.

Appropriate innovative technologies can contribute to significant improvement in urban
water and wastewater services. The Project design included an innovative water supply
management system that builds on a cloud-based information platform and enables the smart
operation of water utilities to improve operational efficiency, reduce non-revenue water, improve
energy efficiency, and increase service quality. In addition, pilot activities for improved sludge
dewatering and composting and preparing a pilot pollution inventory study would provide valuable
information for future environment related interventions in China.

Institutional, technological, and financial measures taken in a complementary manner can
improve the sustainability of improved water and sanitation services. The Project design
included: (i) establishing and building capacities of the involved institutions; (ii) adopting reliable,
easy to operate, and affordable technologies; and (iii) ensuring the financial sustainability of the
utilities through appropriate tariff adjustments and reducing operating costs through the Project
interventions. This enabled GWSC and GSC to have sufficient revenues to cover their operating
expenses as required under the agreed financial covenants in the Loan Agreement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and generally follows the OPCS guidelines (except in regard to length - 31
pages compared to the recommended 15 pages or less). The ICR provides an adequate theory of change in
regard to the causal links and the full results chain, and the reporting is outcome focused. The analysis is
generally evidence-based. The ICR provides lessons from the Project's experience that also have relevance for
similar projects carried out in comparable environments. Given that the Project aimed at Integrated
Environment Management, one area which could have been developed further in the ICR is how the results of
the Project's various interventions (water supply, wastewater, and environment management) contributed
together in improving environment management.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                           Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)




                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
