     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023103

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P143751                                 IN: TN Roads II

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84990                              30-Jun-2021                                        300,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Apr-2015                             30-Jun-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     300,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Fernando Manibog           Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6) is:

   " To increase road capacity, enhance quality of maintenance, improve safety and support institutional
   development of Tamil Nadu's (TN) Core Road Network".



                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



   The PDO is parsed as follows for this review:

   1. To increase road capacity; 2. To enhance quality of maintenance; 3. To improve road safety; and 4. To
   support institutional development.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, 7-8).

   1. Network Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$746.45 million. The actual cost
   US$439.26 million. This component planned to finance the upgrading and maintenance of selected roads in
   TN state's core road network (CRN). There were three sub-components:

   (i) upgrading and maintenance through Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contracts for
   widening approximately 430 kilometers (km) of the Core Road Network (CRN) to two-lane standards with
   paved shoulders and road maintenance for a five-year period; (ii) upgrading and maintenance through a
   Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) concession for about 145 km of roads to four-lane standards with road
   maintenance during the concession period; and (iii) maintenance of roads through multi-year Performance-
   Based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC) for approximately 600 km of roads for a five- year period.

   2. Institutional Capacity Enhancement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$11.00 million. The actual
   cost was US$6.12 million. This component planned to finance implementation of the institutional capacity
   enhancement plan (ICEP) developed by the Highways Department (HD) and approved by the state
   government. Activities in this component included: (i) supporting policy-level actions and commitments for
   improving mobilization and allocation of resources; (ii) supporting operational level initiatives for enterprise-
   level efficiency through: (a) process improvements; (b) organizational restructuring; (c) maintaining the
   integrated the key Information Technology (IT) systems (such as, the Road Management System (RMS),
   Project Financial Management System (PFMS) and the Road Accident Database Management System
   (RADMS)); and (iii) training and knowledge management.

   3. Road Safety. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$20.00 million. The actual cost was US$2.87
   million. This component included the following activities; (i) at the state level, awareness, promotion,
   advisory assistance for monitoring and evaluation, research, training and knowledge transfer; enforcement
   and compliance by the Police and HD and integrating the RADMS of the road management and the health
   system, and mainstreaming it through complementary investments; and (ii) at the field level, supporting two
   districts and a corridor to implement multi sectoral road safety improvement initiatives involving stakeholder
   departments by assisting in designing a program of interventions and investments for road safety issues,
   speed management, risk-targeted patrol plans, promoting helmet wearing, trauma care training and
   services.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$778.20 million. The actual cost was US$448.25
   million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$300.00 million. The loan was fully
   disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was planned at US$478.20 million. Their actual
   contribution was significantly less than planned at US$148.25 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on April 28, 2015, became effective on July 10, 2015, and closed as
   scheduled on June 30, 2021.

   Other changes. The project was restructured on March 16, 2021, about three months before the closing
   date, to retroactively increase the disbursement percentage for civil works.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. The project roads connected the coastal state of TN with Karnataka state in the southern
part of India. TN's Gross State Domestic Product growth at an average of 8.6% over the 2008 - 2014 period
was higher than the national average of 6% during this time period. Road transport was important in TN, in
view of the significant economic activity occurring at some distance from the Chennai port in TN.

Sector context. At appraisal, the HD was managing 62,000 km of the network, comprising 4,974 km of
National Highways (NH), 11,594 km of State Highways (SH), 11,289 km of Major District Roads (MDR) and
34,160 km of Other District Roads (ODR). At appraisal, the highway sector faced three distinct challenges:
inadequate financing for increasing capacity and managing the road assets; insufficient implementation
capacity for efficient contracting modes; and poor road safety. These challenges were due to the state's
rapid economic growth and consequent increase in the number of motor vehicles and increasing demand
for road transport.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the Government of TN's program " Tamil Nadu State Highway
Development Program", articulated the need for strengthening and widening 4,000 - 5,000 km of high-traffic
segments of the CRN. The PDO was consistent with the State's Vision 2023. The vision envisaged
infrastructure investments of approximately US$192 billion, with infrastructure spending as a percentage of
Gross State Gross Domestic Product rising to 11.5% by 2023, and 42% of financing coming from the
private sector.

The PDO is relevant to the Government of India's 2018 "Strategy for New India @75". The strategy
underscored the need for widening single/intermediate lanes in the national and state highways and
improving the regulatory framework for the sector. The PDO is aligned with the State Government's "Policy
Notes 2021". This note highlighted the long-term state vision to develop the road network to all parts of the
state to improve living standards. This note specifically mentioned the need for upgrading high-traffic state

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



               highways to four-lane standards and all major district roads, national and state highways to two-lane
               standards depending on the traffic intensity.

               Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy at appraisal. The Country Partnership
               Strategy (CPS) for 2013 - 2017, articulated the need for integration through improving connectivity,
               improving road safety and ensuring asset sustainability. The PDO was well-aligned with Bank's Finance-
               Plus vision that underpinned the Bank's engagement in India with better contracting approaches, capacity
               enhancement via enterprise-wide mainstreaming of decision support systems based on Information
               Communication (IT), and multi-sectoral interventions for improving road safety.

               The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018-2022. The
               CPF reiterated the need for improving connectivity and logistics, and the Focus Area Two of the CPF
               highlighted the need for enhancing competitiveness and enabling job creation.

               Previous Bank experience. This was the second Bank financed road project in TN. The first Tamil Nadu
               road sector project completed in 2012, contributed to the state's ability to better manage highways, improve
               road maintenance and road safety. This follow-on project was based on those accomplishments and aimed
               to address the current challenges the state was facing. As in the previous project, this project aimed to
               increase the highway capacity and improve institutional strengthening. Unlike the previous project, this
               project specifically aimed to support the state government in implementing a sustainable road strategy
               through: (i) innovative contracting structures such as ECP contract, PPP concession and multi-year PBMC;
               (ii) gradual shift towards allocating more for capacity expansion and maintenance; and (iii) a coordinated
               approach to road safety at the state and district levels. This review concludes that the level of ambition was
               appropriate for TN's development needs and strategic framework. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is
               High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase road capacity.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as upgrading roads to two-lanes through the EPC contract,
                             widening roads to four-lane standards through PPP concessions, and maintaining the road network through
                             PBMC, were expected to increase the road capacity of the state. The causal links between project activities,
                             outputs and outcomes were logical and straightforward, given the established practices and the Bank's long
                             experience with these types of road transport projects; moreover, the intended outcomes were monitorable.


                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



Outputs (ICR, pages 13 -14).

      1,175 km of the core road network were upgraded when the project closed, exceeding the target of
       575 km. Of the 1,175 km of the road network, 91% were upgraded through a combination of EPC
       contracts, PPP concessions and PBMCs. The remaining 74 km were transferred from the PPP mode
       to the EPC mode due to the challenging conditions in the contracting industry in the state. The HD
       department was completing the remaining 74 km under the EPC mode when the project closed.
      The size of the classified road network increased from 11,594 km to 22,898 Km. There were no
       targets for this indicator.
      As of June 2021, the project had provided 0.70 million-person days of unskilled employment (including
       66% to people from local areas).

Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to: (i) increase the percentage of roads that were in good/fair condition (with an
International Roughness Index (IRI) of less than four) and (ii) reduce the average travel time on the project-
intervened areas.

      The roads that were reported to be in good/fair condition increased from 35.6% at the baseline to 70%
       when the project closed. This exceeded the target of 45%.
      The average travel time per km on the project roads decreased from 1.25 minutes at the baseline to
       0.98 minutes when the project closed, achieving the target of one minute.

Given that the outcomes were realized or exceeded, efficacy of this PDO is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance quality of maintenance.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs discussed above (upgrading roads to two-lanes through the EPC contract,
widening/ roads to four-lane standards through PPP concessions, and maintaining the road network through
PBMC), were expected to enhance quality of maintenance and improve road quality and reduce the vehicle
operating costs of cars and trucks. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were
logical and direct. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs ( ICR, paragraph 19).

The outputs discussed above were relevant to this objective.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to contribute to the outcome of reducing the vehicle operating costs (VOC) of cars
and trucks.

      With 70% of roads in the project-intervened areas in good/fair condition when the project closed, the
       average VOCs for cars were reduced from 5.8 Indian Rupee (INR)/km at the baseline to 5.0 INR/km
       as targeted.
      The average VOCs for trucks were reduced from 24 INR/km at the baseline to 19.3 INR/Km,
       exceeding the target of 22 INR/km.

Although it is difficult to determine the extent to which the project contributed to the outcome, since average
VOCs are dependent on fuel costs which is beyond the project control, it is reasonable to assume that the
project activities significantly contributed to realizing the outcome.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve road safety.

Rationale
Theory of change. Establishing state-level entities (a road safety leadership group, road safety management
cell and road safety reference group), together with road safety demonstration corridors in two districts,
rectifying black spots, road safety campaigns and training on enforcement and trauma care, were expected to
reduce the number of fatalities due to road accidents. The direct causal links between project activities,
outputs and final outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 10 -11).

      The state level entities were established as targeted.
      Road safety improvements were carried out in 3,206 km of road, exceeding the target of 1,700 km.
       The improvements included multi-sectoral interventions such as in infrastructure interventions
       (signage, pedestrian markings and junction improvements) and other non-infrastructure interventions
       (such as enforcing speed limits and wearing helmets).
      TN updated the Road Safety Policy and the Road Safety Act. These were being reviewed by the state
       government when the project closed. Eight senior officials from relevant departments were trained
       overseas on road safety management leadership.
      Road safety audits were completed on 1,500 km of roads. The project used International Road
       Assessment Program (IRAP) on 528 km of roads in two pilot districts to identify a 100 km
       demonstration corridor for multi-sectoral road safety interventions such as: (i) road safety awareness
       program; (ii) preparing road safety awareness materials by the School Education Department; (iii)
       implementation of automated speed control through speed cameras, an Advance Traffic Management

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



       System and an enforcement system; (iv) highway patrol vehicles for the police, medical equipment
       and ambulances; (v) establishing centers of excellence in trauma care; and (vi) training first
       responders for emergency medical response. With the exception of awareness programs in schools
       which were affected by the COVID -19 crisis, all other activities were completed by the time the project
       closed.
      Of the 775 blackspots identified by the HD in 2017, 478 were rectified, and the rest were under
       rectification by the time the project closed.

Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to contribute to the intended outcome of no increase in fatalities due to road
accidents in the project-intervened areas when the project closed, as compared to in the baseline.

      The number of road fatalities in the project areas decreased from 452 at the baseline to 147 fatalities
       when the project closed in December 2021.

In the absence of information on the number of road fatalities in TN when this project was completed, it is not
clear whether the outcomes could be fully attributed to project activities in the intervened areas. This is
especially so given that actual disbursement for this component was only 10% of the appraisal estimate. This
review concludes that given the lack of evidence and unclear attribution, efficacy of this objective is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To support institutional development.

Rationale
Theory of change. Activities supported implementation of the institutional capacity enhancement plan which
was developed by the HD and endorsed by the state government for the road sector through process
improvements, and organizational restructuring for sustaining investments in infrastructure. Activities such as
new methods of financing (Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC), the Public-Private Partnership
(PPP) and the Performance-Based Maintenance Contract (PBMC) were expected to support institutional
development. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the
intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 24 - 25).

      The Institutional Capacity Enhancement and Road Safety (ICERS) Cell established within the HD
       aided in defining the CRN for the state, which formed the critical intermediate link bridging the state's
       primary network and the national highways.
      A toll policy was prepared as targeted.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: TN Roads II (P143751)




                                   The time taken to prepare, award and implement large-size projects decreased from 48 months at the
                                    baseline to 36 months as targeted.
                                   3,800 staff engineers were trained on institutional capacity enhancement and road safety.
                                   The activity associated with road condition data was not completed when the project closed.

                            Outcomes.

                            The project activities were expected to improve the efficiency of the HD to manage its road assets through
                            new modes of financing.

                                   3,381 km of the state highways were upgraded using new methods of financing (such as the EPC,
                                    PPP and PBMC), as compared to none at the baseline and far exceeding the target of 2,000 km.
                                   Twenty two field divisions implemented at least a large civil works contract through new methods of
                                    financing. This exceeded the target of five.

                            Given that the targets were realized, efficacy of this PDO is substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is substantial, with three of the four objectives rated as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic evaluation was conducted both at appraisal and at closure for activities
   associated with upgrading roads using the Highway Development and Management Model (HDM - 4). These
   activities accounted for 96% of the appraisal estimate and 98% of the actual cost. The methodology for the
   analysis entailed comparison of costs and benefits under two scenarios: " without upgrading " and "with
   upgrading". The benefits were assumed to come from reduction in road user costs of motorized and non-
   motorized traffic due to the improved roads as a result of: (i) savings in vehicle operation costs (VOC); (ii) travel
   time savings for passengers and commercial vehicles; (iii) savings in accident costs; and (iv) savings in carbon
   emissions.


                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate was US$420 million at appraisal and the NPV when the
project closed was US$300 million for EPC roads and US$169.8 million for roads with PPP concessions. The
average ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 24% as compared to the average ex-ante EIRR
of 30.9%. The results under a sensitivity analysis with a 20% reduction in benefits confirmed that the EIRRs
remained above the minimum required social discount rate or the opportunity cost of capital.

Administrative and operational issues. The project did not have a regular full-time project Director for over
three years and some key staff positions (such as the Chief Engineer and the forester) remained vacant for a
considerable time, leading to delays in decision-making. Delays in land acquisition for two contracts due to a
court case, resulted in delays in compensating the project-affected people. The failure to award two PPP
packages resulted in low disbursement (with disbursement at the time of the Mid-Term Review (MTR) being only
36.4%). However, through restructuring and retroactively increasing the disbursement package, the loan was
fully disbursed and most of the activities were completed with no extension of the closing date (despite the
restrictions due to the COVID -19 pandemic).

In sum, efficiency is assessed as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      96.00
 Appraisal                                                  30.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      98.00
 ICR Estimate                                               24.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the Government and the Bank strategy. Overall efficacy is substantial, with
three of the four objectives rated as substantial. Efficiency is substantial. Taking these ratings into account,
overall outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)




Government commitment. The ICR (paragraph 62) notes that the road assets created under the project are
likely to be sustained in the medium term, as the contracts include maintenance periods of five years. The
TN Government has showed strong commitment to road safety by establishing Center of Excellence in
trauma care and using a multi-sectoral approach to addressing road safety issues. There is however a
moderate risk that funding for maintenance might be undermined after five years, given the fiscal constraints
facing the state in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed - the Tamil
  Nadu Road Sector Project - and similar lending operations in India (including on EPC contracts, PBMS,
  modified-annuity type PPP concessions, and road safety demonstration corridors). The lessons
  incorporated at design included; (i) a time-bound plan for completing major preparatory actions (including
  procurement actions), as the previous major highway contracts financed by the Bank routinely faced time
  and cost overruns due to the inadequate attention to preparation activities; (ii) progressively shifting the
  Government's allocations to the road sector through larger contracts for exploiting scale economies; and
  (iii) upgrading works through EPC plus maintenance contracts or PPP concessions for better
  maintenance of roads (PAD, paragraphs 27 - 30).

  The implementation arrangements at appraisal were appropriate. This included: a project implementation
  unit (PIU) in the HD responsible for day- to- day implementation; and an Institutional Capacity
  Enhancement and Road Safety Cell in the HD responsible for implementing institutional strengthening
  and road safety activities.

  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal, including substantial risks due to the low
  implementation capacity and environmental risks. With mitigation measures, the overall project risk was
  rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 45). The arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary
  compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. The Bank underestimated the HD's ability to
  implement innovative contract packages. There were also shortcomings with some of the key outcome
  indicators for monitoring project performance, such as the vehicle operating cost and the indicator for
  monitoring road safety (discussed in section 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



 Supervision missions were held twice a year (with thirteen supervision missions during the project lifetime
 of six years). In the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, missions were virtual. The Bank was pro-active in
 identifying operational problems (such as poor or non-performing contracts and delays in procurement) and
 challenges and recommending solutions. Given the low disbursements until the Mid-Term Review due to
 the issues with the PPP concessions in two contracts, the Bank helped to restructure the project to: (i)
 increase the percentage of Bank financing for eligible expenditures under the project to be applied
 retroactively; and (ii) change the respective length of roads to be upgraded using the EPC and PPP
 contract modes. The ICR does not provide details on the continuity of leadership during the project
 lifetime. One shortcoming during supervision was that the issues with the results framework were not
 addressed.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is moderately satisfactory, given the shortcomings at the Quality-at-
 Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was logical. Of the four key outcome indicators, two indicators - roads that were
 reported to be in good and fair condition and average travel time on project roads were appropriate for
 monitoring project performance.

 The key outcome indicator " reduction in vehicle operating cost on project roads" is dependent on fuel
 costs, which is beyond the control of the project. A comparison of the number of fatalities in the project-
 intervened areas with the number of fatalities in TN, would have helped to better attribute the results to the
 project's road safety activities in the intervened areas. The project could have provided a better key
 outcome indicator to monitor the institutional strengthening component of the project.

 The M&E arrangements at appraisal were appropriate. This included: the use of supervision consultants
 and the Government of TN/PIU field units for monitoring the road upgrading works; a Management
 Information System (MIS) to track implementation progress; and the PIU to evaluate the socio-economic
 impact of the project through road user satisfaction surveys using a comparative study of project roads and
 a controlled sample of similar non-project roads (PAD, paragraphs 36 - 39).



b. M&E Implementation
  The shortcomings in M&E design were not corrected during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 43)
  notes that in initial years, data was not collected diligently for all indicators and there were delays in

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



  updating the data. Moreover, some data on project roads on speed and traffic volumes were unavailable,
  due to a combination of frequent staff transfers and the impact of the pandemic. However, many of these
  issues were rectified in the latter years of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 44) notes that M&E utilization improved significantly in the final years of the project.
  The M&E data was used for decision-making and the project was restructured based on the M&E data.
  A user satisfaction survey was undertaken when the project closed (discussed in section 10).

  In sum, overall M&E is modest, in view of the shortcomings at design which were not rectified during
  implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (Full Assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Five safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 19).

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural Resources and Forests. An
   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
   and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were prepared at appraisal and publicly disclosed.

   Compliance with environmental safeguards was rated as moderately satisfactory during project execution
   (ICR, paragraph 46). The EMP was adhered to in all contract packages, including the provisions on work
   safety and labor camp management. At project closure, the compensatory afforestation under one PPP
   contract was not completed. The ICR noted that Bank team will continue to monitor the completion of this
   activity. The team clarified that there were no issues with the safeguards on Natural Hazards and Physical
   Cultural Resources.

   Involuntary Resettlement. Land acquisition and resettlement impacts were anticipated at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 57). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal.

   The project activities involved land acquisition of 169 hectares of private land (an increase from the
   appraisal estimates of 149 hectares because of changes in alignment) and affected 7,560 landowners and
   3,745 informal settlers occupying public lands. Between 87% and 99% of the project-affected people were
   compensated when the project closed (ICR paragraph 48). The remainder was held up due to ongoing
   contracts, court cases and non-availability of some of the affected people. Land acquisition and
   resettlement represented about 8% of the project cost. The project had a Grievance Redress Mechanism.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



  As of December 2021, 87% of the 596 grievances were addressed. The remaining cases were open when
  the project closed either because the complainants did not come to the hearing or could not provide the
  required documentation.

  A post-resettlement impact evaluation was conducted in 2021 to assess the outcome of land compensation
  and resettlement assistance provided to the project-affected people through household surveys, field
  investigations and focus group. The main conclusions of the survey were: (i) the proportion of people living
  in permanent houses increased from 33% at the baseline to 90% post resettlement; (ii) 85% of the surveyed
  families reported that their overall living standards improved or remained unchanged; (iii) 80% reported that
  their incomes had either increased or remained the same; and (iv) 88% were satisfied with the timely
  payment of compensation and with the compensation rates.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment of the PIU at
  appraisal. The assessment concluded that the financial arrangements of the PIU were adequate (PAD,
  paragraph 54).

  The project's financial management was rated as satisfactory throughout implementation, and there were
  no major issues during the project lifetime (ICR, paragraph 53). The internal and external audit reports
  were submitted in a timely fashion. The team confirmed that the audits were unqualified.

  Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the PIU at appraisal. The PAD (page
  36) noted that many of the PIU staff were involved in the previous Bank-financed project and were familiar
  with Bank procedures. However, unlike the previous project, this project had newer forms of contracts
  (EPC, PPP and PBMC. Procurement risk was assessed as substantial at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 55).
  The mitigation measures incorporated at design included: using skilled staff, using e-procurement, and
  training staff.

  The procurement management was rated as moderately satisfactory during implementation (ICR,
  paragraph 54). There were some delays against the procurement timelines for some packages and market
  failure in several procurements (especially the PPP and Road Safety contract) that necessitated
  retendering. The ICR also notes that there were multiple allegations of fraud and collusion. The ICR noted
  that an investigation by the Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) substantiated fraud by a local firm, which was
  subsequently sanctioned.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (paragraph 38) noted that the project integrated road safety features and standards through
  design stage audits of all packages (for a total of 575 km) financed under the project, and also prepared
  designs for an additional 2,500 km of roads.




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



d. Other
    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory        Satisfactory
                                   Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                     Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Longer term engagement can help in driving reforms and building stronger institutions.
This project built on the sector dialogue developed under the previous Bank-financed transport
project on innovating contracting formats, road safety and road sector policy. This longer-term
engagement helped in implementing an institutional reform program.

2. Data driven multi sectoral approach can help in addressing road safety issues. This project
adopted decision-making based on crash data to identify road safety infrastructure investments to
manage post-crash response and trauma care. The road safety infrastructure investments and
enforcing mandatory wearing of a helmet, monitoring speeding and awareness campaigns helped in
reducing fatalities in the project-intervened areas.

3. Establishing dedicated decentralized land acquisition unit with required staff and
resources can help in facilitating land acquisition. The impact evaluation conducted at project
closure confirmed that in eight of the 13 contracts land was handed over on time and hence delays
in construction were avoided.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, well-written and concise. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly articulates the links
between project activities, outputs and outcomes. The ICR provides adequate evidence to assess project

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: TN Roads II (P143751)



performance. It candidly discusses the issues with the new contracting approaches and draws good lessons
from the experience of implementing the project.

There were minor shortcomings. The ICR provides little details on the continuity of leadership. The ICR could
have incorporated photographs of roads that were upgraded. This would have enabled the reader to better
visualize the changes made under the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
