     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023106

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P155842                                     Modernization and restructuring of roads

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Croatia                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87490                                  31-Dec-2021                                         19,033,810.31

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Apr-2017                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             23,327,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              23,327,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                          19,033,810.31                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Peter Nigel Freeman           Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loan Agreement (p.10)
   dated May 8, 2017, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.5) dated November 7, 2013, the project objective
   is “to strengthen institutional effectiveness, enhance operational efficiency and increase debt service capacity
   of the Borrower's road sector.” The Borrower is defined as the Republic of Croatia, and the version in the PAD
   reads as “Croatia” only.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:

   A. Institutional Strengthening and Sector Reforms. (Appraisal cost: EUR 6.08 million excluding
   contingencies; actual cost: EUR 7.47 million). This component was to finance activities to establish an
   institutional framework for the road sector. It consisted of three sub-components:

         A.1. Hiring of a Financial Transaction Advisor. The financial transaction advisor hired under the
          project was to prepare a debt optimization strategy for the road sector companies (RSCs), analyze
          debt facilities for rescheduling and refinancing, propose the type and sequencing of the refinancing
          instrument, and develop and implement the engagement strategy for communication, negotiation
          and conclusion of the arrangements with the capital market. RSCs consist of Croatian Roads
          Company (HC – Hrvatska Ceste), Croatian Motorways (HAC - Croatian Autoceste), and Zagreb-
          Rijeka Motorway Company (ARZ – Autocesta Rijeka-Zagreb).
         A.2. Transport Sector Planning and Road Sector Governance and Monitoring. Six activities
          were defined under this sub-component: (a) Development of a directorate in the Ministry of Sea,
          Transport, and Infrastructure (MSTI) to coordinate strategic planning and public investment
          management; (b) development of a sector governance framework including definition of key
          performance indicators and monitoring arrangements; (c) establishment of an application for data
          exchange and reporting between MSTI and the RSCs; (d) improvement and standardization of
          accounting practices across the RSCs; (e) improvement of the business environment for the freight
          transport industry through review of administrative processes applied to the road transport sector;
          and (f) introduction and improvement of citizen engagement through consultation processes.
         A.3. Implementation Support. This component was to provide technical advisory and training, and
          finance project audits to support the MSTI in project management including procurement,
          safeguards management, and monitoring and evaluation, and implementation of the road sector
          strategy.

   B. Operational Restructuring of Road Sector Companies. (Appraisal cost: EUR 13.92 million excluding
   contingencies; actual cost: EUR 8.77 million). This component was to finance six activities for the
   implementation of management tools and carrying out revenue enhancement and cost rationalization
   measures to improve operational and financial sustainability of the RSCs:

         B.1. Road classification and standards. Implementation of a technical classification of the public
          road network and development of regulations and specifications for the maintenance of all classes of
          roads.
         B.2. Road Asset Management System. Design and implementation of a road asset management
          system (RAMS) for all RSCs including a computerized database with inventory, condition and traffic
          data, and development of a multi-year costed road maintenance program by each RSC.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



        B.3. Rationalization of Operations and Business Functions – Motorways. Development of
         action plans and their implementation to improve technical and business efficiency and effectiveness
         through optimization of management and roads' operations and maintenance costs, outsourcing
         enhancement and rationalization of technical units, administrative activities and revenue
         improvements, and provision of staff retrenchment packages to include support for retraining,
         counselling, advisory services and employment intermediation.
        B.4. Tolling. Carrying out of studies to identify the preferred automated tolling system and new tariff
         structure, including plans to transition from the current system and pricing regime.
        B.5. Operational and business rationalization of HC (Croatian Roads Company). An action plan
         was to be developed to support the following activities: (a) Restructuring and transition of HC to a
         regional management system based on six regions; (b) carrying out of joint procurement at regional
         level among HC and the County Roads Authority (ZUC - Zupanijske Uprave za Ceste); (c)
         development of improved maintenance contracting practices; and (d) assessment and programming
         of periodic maintenance based on the RAMS.
        B.6. Road Safety. Carrying out of technical studies to increase road safety on the motorway system
         including tunnels and traffic information.

  C. Debt Optimization. (Guaranteed Refinancing Facility up to EUR 350 million; It was not used.). This
  component was to provide a Guaranteed Refinancing Facility to mobilize commercial financing for the RSCs
  to refinance their short term and expensive loans. The guarantee was not used by project closing.

  Revised Components

  Project components were not formally revised under a restructuring (see the Restructurings entry in the
  following section), but two project activities under the first component were dropped: (a) establishment of an
  application for data exchange and reporting between MSTI and road companies as the Ministry of Finance
  has developed a different application for this purpose; and (b) freight transport sector study as MSTI has
  taken other measures—not financed under the project—to support this sector (ICR, p.14). Additionally,
  because of delays in procurement, the original planned activities related to safety barrier design were
  dropped and replaced by an analysis of social cost of traffic accidents that was required to comply with the
  relevant European Union road safety directives.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at EUR 22.0 million (consisting of the costs of
  components A and B and EUR 2.0 million for contingencies). The amount for the debt optimization of the
  RSCs to be supported by the IBRD guarantee was estimated at EUR 750.0 million. On December 31, 2021,
  the project closed with a total cost of EUR 16.23 million. The IBRD guarantee was not used for debt
  optimization.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan was estimated at EUR 22.0 million fully covering the costs of
  components A and B, and EUR 350.0 million guarantee for debt optimization. By project closing in
  December 2021, the project had disbursed EUR 16.23 million for components A and B. The guarantee for
  debt optimization was not used. As parallel financing, the EBRD provided EUR 250.0 million to support debt
  optimization.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



   Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
   project closing.

   Restructurings: The project was not restructured. However, by early 2020, talks between the Croatian
   Government and the World Bank had already started to restructure the project because of delays in
   implementing two key project activities, i.e., the establishment of an automated tolling system and RAMS.
   The restructuring would include revision of the project activities related to road safety priorities and some
   indicators, reallocation of EUR 2.0 million between components, and extension of the project closing date.
   Because of the onset of COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, two earthquakes in and around Zagreb in
   March and December 2020, and the ensuing economic recession heavily impacted by the drop in tourism
   revenues resulted in a shift in government priorities to manage a severe crisis situation. Eventually, the
   Croatian Government submitted a letter to the World Bank in July 2021, less than six months before project
   closing date, to restructure the project and extend the project closing date by 12 months, but considering
   low actual project achievements and risks to the achievement of project outcomes, and the lack of
   consensus on how to address the project implementation issues, the World Bank “considered that an
   extension of the project could not provide any certainty on successful completion” (ICR, pp.21-22). Hence,
   the project was not restructured and closed on December 31, 2021, the original project closing date.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 28, 2017. The Loan Agreement was signed on May 8, 2017, and
   the loan became effective on November 4, 2017. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in October 2019.
   The project closed on its original closing date of December 31, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives are highly aligned with the World Bank’s current strategy as defined in the Croatia
Country Partnership Framework FY2019-24 (CPF). Based on the findings of the Strategic Country
Diagnostics dated May 4, 2018, the CPF identified three key priority development areas where “Croatia’s
institutional weaknesses constrain productivity and limit the ability to achieve better societal outcomes”
(CPF, p.22). These are institutional gaps that limit government effectiveness, a lack of capacity to deliver
quality services, and weaker market institutions. The project sought to address the first two development
problems through its support for the establishment of an institutional framework for the road sector and
restructuring of the RSCs that would be expected to improve their financial viability and their planning,
governance and monitoring capacities, and debt optimization. The project objectives correspond to the
CPF’s “Objective 1. Improve efficiency of public administration to implement strategy and deliver
services” and “Objective 2: Support policies that reduce fiscal vulnerabilities, with a focus on State-
Owned Enterprises” under Focus Are 1, Enhancing Public Sector Performance and Institutions (CPF,
pp.53-55).

The project objectives are substantially relevant to the country context. Croatia has an extensive road
network that supports its industrial development and tourism and transportation sectors. It also connects
the European Union with other Balkan countries that are either member or accession countries of the
European Union. The project was designed to support the MSIT and the RSCs to address the
weaknesses in road sector governance and lower road sector related high debt burden. The achievement
of these objectives would have been expected to lead to the better maintenance of the advanced

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



               highway and national road networks and relieve the burden on the government finances caused by the
               high debt of the RSCs. The project objectives “to strengthen institutional effectiveness, enhance
               operational efficiency and increase debt service capacity of the Croatia’s road sector” are outcome-
               oriented since the achievement of the objectives would be expected to result in improvements in the road
               sector governance and financial viability of the RSCs—modified conditions in organizations because of
               project outputs, i.e., improvement in the governance and financial capacity of the government institutions
               in charge of the road sector.

               The objectives are also relevant to the Transport Development Strategy of the Republic of Croatia 2017-
               2030 that focuses on “transport planning and increased multimodality, safe and sustainable transport
               services, as well as improving regional connections and sections of the Trans-European network of
               corridors” (ICR, p.6). The project was designed to support the government’s road strategy included in the
               Letter of Sector Policy dated March 16, 2017 that “reinforces sector-planning functions, supports
               improvements in operational efficiency and enables financial optimization” (PAD, p.9). The project
               objectives are appropriately pitched for the development status and objectives of the country. However,
               the project aimed at reforming the road sector that would require full and sustained commitment on the
               government side. As the CPF states (p.13) “the political environment in Croatia has been relatively stable
               in recent years however there has been limited scope to implement ambitious reforms.” Therefore, the
               expectation that the project objectives could be achieved was overly optimistic.

               The World Bank has been an important development partner in Croatia since the country’s independence
               in 1993. Transport projects, mostly in railways and ports, had a 24 percent share in the country’s portfolio
               between 1993 and 2018. During appraisal, World Bank-financed Rijeka Gateway Project 2 (P102365)
               and Sustainable Croatian Railway in Europe Project (P147499) were being implemented. For the debt
               restructuring objective, the project benefited from the World Bank’s experience in two guaranteed
               refinancing projects in Kenya and Ghana, but in different sectors. Given the World Bank’s experience in
               the country and the road and the guaranteed refinancing sectors, the project objectives were adequately
               challenging, but expectation that a major sector reform could be achieved through a technical assistance
               project without any investment lending was overly optimistic.

               Overall, while the project objectives were highly aligned with the World Bank strategy, and the objectives
               were adequately challenging given the prior country and sector experience of the World Bank, they were
               only substantially relevant to the country context because of “limited scope to implement ambitious
               reforms” in the country through a technical assistance project without any investment lending; therefore,
               the relevance of project objectives is rated Substantial.
               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen institutional effectiveness of Croatia’s road sector.

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1. The objective was to strengthen the institutional effectiveness of the road
sector that is defined as the “extent to which road sector companies have the legal and regulatory framework,
organizational structure, incentives and technical capabilities needed to design, build, operate, maintain and
finance the infrastructure under their management in an effective manner” (PAD, p.12 and ICR p.10). The
project’s inputs - loan - was to be used for procuring consultancy services for technical assistance and
procurement of systems to implement project activities related to the achievement of the first objective
defined under the first and second components (see section 2.d. Components).

The expected outputs were a financial strategy, a new directorate within the MSTI for the coordination of
strategic planning and public investment management, a sector governance framework including key
performance indicators and M&E design, an application for data exchange and reporting between the MSTI
and RSCs, harmonized accounting standards, an improved business environment for the freight sector,
technical classification of the public road network, regulations and specifications for road maintenance, a road
asset management system (RAMS), and restructured RSCs.

These outputs would be expected to lead to the project outcomes of improved capacities of the MSTI and
RSCs to design, build, operate, maintain and finance the infrastructure under their management in an
effective manner because of the existence of a legal and regulatory framework, organizational structure,
incentives and improved technical capabilities that were achieved under the project. The causal pathways
from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the achievement of the outcomes and project objectives
could be attributed to the project’s intervention. Continued government support to the reform process was the
critical assumption for the achievement of this objective.

Outputs

Six indicators measured the achievement of project outputs that would be expected to lead to the
achievement of the project outcomes.

      Status of implementation of new financing strategy for HAC, ARZ and HC under government
       coordination. At the start of the project, a contract with a financial advisor was already signed for the
       development of a new financing strategy. The target was to execute debt restructuring transactions
       that were contemplated in the financing strategy. At project closing, the financing strategy had already
       been approved and the execution of debt optimization transactions had started in three stages since
       2019. The project, through the financial advisor, provided transaction services as defined under sub-
       component A.1. However, the World Bank guarantee was not used for debt optimization.
      Operational status of Planning Department established within MSTI. At appraisal, MSTI did not
       have a planning and coordination department. The target was to establish a fully functional planning
       department within the MSTI. By project closing, the department had been established and fully
       functional.
      Status of implementation of improved and harmonized accounting standards. Before project
       start, accounting standards were not harmonized. The target was to improve and harmonize these
       standards. Amendments to the Roads Act were approved in December 2021, and harmonized
       accounting standards were being implemented as of January 2022.
      Status of implementation of end-performance road maintenance standards. At project start-up,
       the standards did not include any end-performance requirements. The target was to incorporate


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



       service standards in rolling investment plans. At project closing, maintenance standards were
       incorporated into the new rulebooks, and HAC had been applying them since January 2021. HC is
       expected to apply them with the start of the new four-year framework agreement in January 2023.
      Status of implementation of Road Asset Management System (RAMS). At project start-up, the
       road sector agencies and companies did not have an integrated RAMS. The target was to incorporate
       RAMS in rolling investment plans. At project closing, RAMS technical specifications and bidding
       documents were complete, but the procurement could not be launched during the project's
       implementation. Hence, RAMS could not be implemented. This was a major shortcoming in the
       project’s achievements that adversely affected outcomes related to all three objectives. The main
       reason for incompletion of the RAMS was unsatisfactory work delivered by the consultant hired under
       the project. This led to significant implementation delays.

Outcomes

Two indicators measured the achievement of the project outcomes.

      Ability of MSTI to plan road sector investments. At project start-up, a sector-wide planning
       coordination did not exist. The project aimed at establishing a rolling investments plan structure for the
       effective management of motorway and roads network. While there was some progress such as the
       establishment of a directorate within the MSTI, establishment of standardized accounting practices,
       development of a road transportation strategy, and establishment of a single database of public roads
       as a basis for a new platform for spatial monitoring of all road activities, the achievement of this
       outcome depended on the implementation of RAMS that would have informed the rolling investment
       plans. However, RAMS was not finalized by project closing; therefore, the project’s contribution to
       strengthen the ability of the MSTI to plan road sector investments that would have led to the
       strengthening of institutional effectiveness of road sector in Croatia was limited.
      Ability of MSTI to monitor and enforce performance on motorway and RSCs using Key
       Performance Indicators and standardized accounting measures under service agreements
       between the government and reorganized companies. At appraisal, the monitoring system was
       inadequately performing. The target was to establish an integrated monitoring system. As of January
       2022, standardized accounting measures were being applied, and service-level agreements were
       expected to be signed in 2022. According to the update received from the project team on October 13,
       2022, service-level agreements were signed in the second quarter of 2022.

The project contributed to the strengthening of the institutions and the development of a regulatory framework
in the road sector. Project outputs laid the groundwork for further improvement of financial viability of the
sector and its governance. However, the non-completion of RAMS was a major setback for the achievement
of this objective. Implementation of rolling investment plans depended on the data to be provided by RAMS.
Therefore, rolling investments plans that would significantly improve the operational effectiveness of road
sector institutions could not be implemented in the absence of such data. The project outcomes and this
objective were partially achieved. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to
strengthen the institutional effectiveness of the road sector is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance operational efficiency of Croatia’s road sector.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2. The objective was to enhance operational efficiency of the road sector
that is defined as the “ability to provide quality services in a cost-efficient manner” (PAD, p.12 and ICR p.10).
The project’s input - loan - was to be used to procure consultancy services for technical assistance and
systems, such as RAMS and a new automated tolling system, to implement activities defined under the first
and second components (see section 2.d. Components).

The expected outputs of these activities related to the achievement of the second objective were
standardized accounting practices, maintained citizen engagement, technical classification of the public road
network, regulations and specifications for road maintenance, a road asset management system (RAMS),
restructured RSCs, a new automated tolling system, and technical studies for improved road safety.

These outputs would be expected to lead to the project outcomes of improved financial viability of the RSCs
measured in financial ratios such as lower operating expense ratio and lower operating expenditures per
kilometer of road network, and provision of quality services as a result adequate maintenance of roads,
implementation of a new automated tolling system, and improved safety measures. The causal pathways
from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the achievement of the outcomes and project objectives
could be attributed to the project’s intervention. Like in the theory of change for Objective 1, continued
government support to the reform process was the critical assumption for the achievement of this objective,
too.

Outputs

The following indicators in the results framework measured the achievement of project outputs.

      Status of implementation of new tolling revenue enhancement measures. At project start, the toll
       system was a mixed one. The target was to establish and implement a new automated tolling system.
       By project closing, MSTI had approved a new tolling strategy and completed its advanced preliminary
       design, but the system was not established; hence it could not be implemented. The tender is
       expected to be launched under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan within 2022 and a new
       automated tolling system is planned to be implemented in 2025.
      Percent of HC network where county agencies (ZUC) participate in a joint procurement
       committee. It was targeted that county agencies would participate in joint procurement of all HC
       network—100 percent—that would result in cost reduction. Such participation did not exist before
       project start-up and did not materialize at project closing. The target could not be achieved because
       the political will did not exist to implement this reform.
      Percentage of TEN-T (Trans-European Transport Network) road network for which road safety
       audit or inspection as per European Union (EU) Directive 2008/96 has been carried out. Before
       project start, road safety audits or inspections as per the EU directive were not carried out. At project
       closing, 100 percent of the roads of TEN-T network were safety audited or inspected according to the
       EU directive requirements.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




      Citizen engagement: Maintain full responsiveness rate to comments and grievances from
         citizens. Before the project, the rate was 100 percent-full responsiveness. This was maintained
         through to project closing as targeted and achieved through communication consultancy. The MSTI,
         HAC and HC have contact links and details for citizen and user communication clearly included on
         their websites.

For the following four indicators, please see Outputs under Objective 1:

        Status of implementation of Road Asset Management System (RAMS).
        Status of implementation of end-performance road maintenance standards.
        Status of implementation of improved and harmonized accounting standards.
        Percent of HC network where county agencies (ZUC) participate in joint procurement committee.

Additionally, the project facilitated the merger of Croatian Motorways – Maintenance and Toll Collection
(HAC-ONC) with HAC in 2017, and later ARZ to HAC in 2020 through carrying out efficiency gains analysis
and supporting the voluntary retrenchment of 211 people as a result of these mergers. These activities and
outputs were not captured by the results framework.

Outcomes

      Percent Reduction in Operating Cost of Motorways relative to baseline: HAC and ARZ. Before
         the start of the project, the annual operating cost of the two companies was 823 million Croatian
         kunas. The target was a 30 percent reduction to 576 million kunas. At project closing, annual
         operating cost dropped to 765 million kunas—a 7.05 percent reduction. A new automated tolling
         system to be established under the project would result in a significant reduction in operating costs,
         but as the tolling system could not be established, the target could not be achieved.
        Weighted Average toll revenue per vehicle-km travelled in Croatian kuna. The baselines for the
         two motorway state companies were 0.59 kuna for HAC and 0.64 kuna for ARZ. The target was to
         increase toll revenue per vehicle-km travelled above 0.67 kuna for both companies. The achievement
         was 0.66 for HAC, which was marginally below the target value. This was to be achieved through the
         implementation of a new automated tolling system. Since the tolling system was not implemented, this
         achievement could not be fully attributed to the project’s intervention.
        Reduction in Operating Cost for State Roads relative to baseline. Before project start, HC’s
         annual roads operating cost was 546 million kunas. The target was to reduce it to 515 million kunas.
         At project closing, operating cost increased to 624 million kunas. The target was not achieved. The
         main reason for this increase is the increase in the length of the roads HC was responsible for.
        Staff per kilometer of road under operation (motorways). The baseline values for HAC and ARZ
         were 2.7 and 3.2, respectively. The target was to decrease this ratio to less than 2.2 for each
         company. The achievement was 2.4 for HAC, which was better than the baseline but short of
         achieving the target value. The main reason for not achieving the target value was the incompletion of
         the new automated tolling system that would have resulted in a reduction of staff, although 211
         members of staff voluntarily quit their jobs following the merger of ARZ with HAC.
        Operating Expense Ratio (Total Operating Expenses / Total Operating Revenue). The baseline
         values for operating expense ratios of three RSCs were 0.38 for HAC, 0.31 for ARZ, and 0.29 for HC.
         Target was to lower this ratio below 0.27 for each company. The achievements were 0.32 for HAC
         and 0.31 for HC. The project did not achieve the operating expense ratio targets for the RSCs. Since
         HC did not have full control over revenues received from fuel levies and was required to accept more

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



       county roads to its network—which were under the purview of the government—HC’s operating and
       maintenance costs increased. During project implementation, it was already clear that HC would not
       be able to meet the target.
      Operating Expenditures per kilometer of road network. The baseline values at appraisal were as
       follows: 0.68 kuna for HAC, 1.05 kuna for ARZ, and 0.08 kuna for HC. The target was to lower these
       below 0.60 kuna for HAC and ARZ, and 0.07 kuna for HC. The achievements were 0.69 for HAC and
       0.09 for HC. The project could not achieve the targets because of the incompletion of RAMS and a
       new automated tolling system that would lower the operating costs, i.e., maintenance costs, while
       increasing revenues, i.e., tolling revenues.

The progress was limited in improving the financial ratios of the RSCs. The project activities were expected to
increase revenues and lower operating costs. Two key activities were the establishment of RAMS and a new
automated tolling system that would both increase revenues and lower costs. Both activities could not be
completed during project implementation because of reasons given in relevant entries above. Furthermore,
the onset of COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, and two major earthquakes in the same year adversely
affected road sector revenues. Although the implementation of maintenance standards and successful
completion of EU road safety audits should be expected to result in improved service delivery quality, these
improvements were not captured by the results framework. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the
second objective to enhance operational efficiency of road sector is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase debt service capacity of Croatia’s road sector.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 3. The objective was to increase the debt service capacity of the road
sector that is defined as the “ability of road sector companies to cover principal and interest payment on new
and existing debt from their own operating surpluses” (PAD, p.12 and ICR p.10). The project’s input - IBRD
guarantee was to be used, as needed, to mobilize commercial financing to restructure RSCs’ short-term
debt. The expected outputs were longer tenor and lower interest rates on RSCs’ debt. These outputs would
be expected to improve the ability of the RSCs to match their liabilities, i.e., principal and interest payment on
new and existing debt, with their operating surpluses. The project was to support the achievement these
objectives with the successful implementation of the road sector improvement activities under the first two
components, such as establishment of financial strategy, restructuring of the RSCs, implementation of RAMS
and a new automated tolling system. These were expected to improve the operational efficiency of the RSCs
resulting in an improved financial situation that would help them improve their service capacities. Overall, the
causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the achievement of the outcomes and
project objectives could be attributed to the project’s intervention assuming that the IBRD guarantee was
utilized.

Outputs


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



Please refer to the outputs listed under the first two objectives.

The project did not use the IBRD guarantees to restructure the RSCs’ debt. The three road companies
refinanced EUR 1.275 billion of debt through a sovereign bond issuance in November 2017 and rescheduled
an additional EUR 1.8 billion through jumbo loans issued at the company level in March 2018. As a result, the
borrower exceeded the targeted total amount of EUR 2.9 billion for the sum of refinancing and rescheduling.
Given the improvement in market conditions in Europe and Croatia specifically between the project approval
and the financial transactions, the government and the road companies were able to achieve the targeted
tenor and pricing for both without additional credit enhancement.

Outcomes

      Annual Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR). The baselines for the DSCRs of the road sector
         companies were 0.15 for HAC, 0.63 for ARZ, and 0.55 for HC. The target values were 1.0 for each of
         the three RSCs. The achievements were lower than the targets: 0.77 for HAC and 0.30 for HC. Since
         the achievements are less than 1.0, the companies are not able to pay their debt using their cash
         flows. The lower achievement was mostly because of the revenue loss caused by the COVID-19
         pandemic. In October 2020, DSCRs for HAC and HC were calculated at 1.15 and 1.34, respectively.
        Loan Life Coverage Ratio (LLCR). The baselines for the LLCRs of the road sector companies were
         0.51 for HAC, 0.66 for ARZ, and 0.97 for HC. The target values were 1.0 for each of the three RSCs.
         The achievement at 1.07 for HAC was higher than the target, but lower for HC at 0.66. The
         achievement indicates HAC’s improved solvency and ability to service its debt over long-term. The
         underachievement for HC can be attributed to the additions to its road network and the cash out-flow
         related to the Peljesac Bridge construction—the largest infrastructure project in the country.
        Debt to Cash Flow Available for Debt Service (CFADS) Ratio. The baselines for this ratio were
         36.0 for HAC, 15.2 for ARZ, and 9.9 for HC, which were significantly higher than the ratios of other
         European toll road operators that ranged between 3.7 and 7.3. The target values were 10.0 for HAC,
         10.0 for ARZ, and 7.3 for HC. The achievements were 15.03 for HAC and 35.23 for HC. The targets
         could not be achieved because of the worsening of the cash flows following the onset of COVID-19
         pandemic and incompletion of a new automated tolling system.
        Private Direct Mobilization (Debt refinancing and rescheduling with support of the IBRD
         guarantee). The target was to refinance over EUR 900 million debt and reschedule over euro
         2.0 billion debt for all three companies. At project closing, more than EUR 900 million debt was
         refinanced, and more than EUR 2.9 billion was rescheduled. However, the IBRD guarantee was not
         used. Therefore, the achievement could not be attributed to the project.
        Weighted average maturity of road sector companies’ debt. The baseline value was 3.5 years.
         The achievement was 6.9 years lower than the target value of 7.8 years. While the achievement was
         lower than the target, but it was significant improvement in the maturity of debt. However, the IBRD
         guarantee was not used. Therefore, the achievement could not be attributed to the project.

The targets were partially achieved but these achievements cannot be attributed to the project as the
guarantee facility was not used. The achievements in operational efficiency might have contributed to the
improvement of the RSCs’ debt capacity, but those achievements were limited, and the evidence is
insufficient to establish attribution.

The Ministry of Finance and the RSCs had successfully completed the refinancing of the RSCs’ debt by the
end of 2018. Improved financial market conditions both in Europe and Croatia were an important factor for the

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



                            government and RSCs to restructure the debt with more favorable conditions and longer tenor without any
                            additional credit enhancement through the IBRD guarantee.

                            Since the main activity related to the achievement of this objective, i.e., utilization of the IBRD guarantee, was
                            not implemented, it was not possible to assess the efficacy of the project in achieving the third objective to
                            increase debt service capacity of the road sector.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the project completed important activities in establishing a road sector governance structure and
                            helping the RSCs to establish a strong financial foundation to improve their operational efficiency, the
                            incompletion of the key project activities—RAMS and a new automated tolling system—onset of COVID-19
                            pandemic, and two major earthquakes in 2020 adversely affected the achievement of the first two objectives.
                            Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first and second objectives to strengthen institutional
                            effectiveness and enhance operational efficiency of the road sector in Croatia is rated Modest. The project’s
                            efficacy in achieving the third objective to increase debt service capacity of the road sector is not rated
                            because the main project activity, i.e., the IBRD guarantee, was not implemented. Overall, the efficacy of the
                            project in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis

   At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was not conducted. Instead, a partial financial analysis was included in the
   PAD about the impact of debt restructuring on various financial ratios of the RSCs related to revenue risk and
   debt sustainability. However, details of the financial analysis were not disclosed in the PAD (p.85) for
   confidentiality purposes as these could have impacted the debt optimization process.

   Outcomes of the proposed restructuring measures were listed as an increase in toll revenues, a reduction in
   maintenance and administrative costs, and an overall increase in Cash Flow Available for Debt Service
   (CFADS). However, as the ICR (p.18) states “the analysis mainly served to propose the results indicators for
   debt sustainability measures and operational effectiveness” rather than assessing the costs and benefits of the




                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



project’s intervention. An economic analysis was not conducted at project closing, because the project results
were not achieved (ICR, p.85).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

A project implementation period of three years was unrealistic given the complexity of the procurement of the
consultancy services for a new automated tolling systems and RAMS, and the track-record of the country’s
portfolio. The project could not be restructured because of lack of consensus as to how to proceed with the
project implementation, and it was considered that a 12-month project closing date extension would be
insufficient to complete pending project activities. The project closed without the completion of key project
activities and EUR 5.75 million had to be cancelled. The risks that were identified at appraisal materialized
during project implementation, but the mitigation measures proved to be insufficient, such as the procurement
risk of and implementation of a new automated tolling system and RAMS.

The departure of the project implementation unit head, who played a critical role in managing a complex
coordination among many project participants, slowed down project implementation in early 2020. The position
was only filled several months later and this directly impacted the overall dialogue in implementing the project.
Because of macro-fiscal constraints, the government’s commitment to the implementation of the Letter of Sector
Policy weakened and government took actions that adversely impacted project’s implementation and the
achievement of project objectives, such as the decision to transfer additional roads to HAC that increased the
financial burden of the company in operating and maintaining a larger road network. The onset of COVID-19 and
the two major earthquakes in 2020 resulted in a shift in government priorities, which prevented a timely
restructuring and extension of the closing date of the project.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Negligible because of non-
materialization of project’s benefits and significant shortcomings in administrative and operational efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




While the scope within the country was limited to implement ambitious reforms such as the road sector reform
planned under this project and, therefore, the expectation that the project objectives could be achieved was
overly optimistic, the project objectives were substantially aligned with the World Bank strategy and country
context. The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The project’s overall efficacy in achieving the project
objectives is rated Modest, because of the incompletion of critical project activities, i.e., establishment of RAMS
and a new automated tolling system, and the under achievement of project outcomes. The project’s efficiency in
achieving the project objectives is rated negligible, because of the non-existent of a full economic analysis,
under achievement of project outcomes, and significant administrative and operational inefficiencies. The
project’s outcome is rated Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership/commitment: While the project did not achieve the expected outcomes, it
triggered policy and institutional changes and road sector restructuring. In the absence of renewed
government commitment to road sector reform defined in the Letter of Sector Policy dated 2017, further
progress would be unlikely. During project implementation, government’s commitment to the project showed
a fluctuating pattern affected by political concerns, such as the political decision to transfer some roads to
HC that increased its operating costs, and external factors, such as COVID-19 and earthquakes. Completion
of the new automated tolling system and RAMS after project closing will also require a high level of
commitment from the government. The automated tolling system is one of the top priorities of the
government and funding has already been secured from the European Union for its system-wide
implementation planned to start in 2025. However, the future of RAMS remains uncertain (ICR, p.25).

Financial: A deterioration of the financial viability of the road sector companies poses a risk for the
sustainability of the partially achieved project outcomes especially in operational efficiency. The project could
only partially achieve its objective to improve operational efficiency of the RSCs but laid some foundations for
a sustained financial viability, such as harmonized accounting standards, and the merger and restructuring of
RSCs—the number of RSCs decreased from four to two—as well as maintenance standards. However,
since HC is not in full control of its revenues received from fuel levies and is subject to political decisions to
integrate more county roads into its network, the company faces a higher risk in improving or even
maintaining its operational efficiency. HAC might face a similar risk if the new automated tolling system,
which will increase its revenues while decreasing its operating costs, is not implemented.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The road sector reform through the establishment of a sector governance framework and organizational
  restructuring and debt optimization of the RSCs were of high strategic importance to ensure the

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



  sustainability of the service delivery while easing the fiscal pressure caused by the RSCs’ high debt on
  government finances. The project implementing agency was assessed to have the capacity to achieve
  the project objectives. The fiduciary and safeguard aspects and implementation arrangements of the
  project were adequate. However, the project implementation period of three years was insufficient to
  achieve the project objectives that were expected to lead to a major sector reform. The project activities
  should have been expected to result in the achievement of the project outcomes, but the assumption that
  new systems, i.e., RAMS and an automated tolling system, could be designed and implemented in that
  timeframe was unrealistic (ICR, p.20). Similarly, the expectation that conditioning the World Bank
  guarantee on the implementation of revenue and cost measures and significant governance and
  transparency commitments would serve as incentives for sector reform was overly optimistic. (The
  government restructured the RSCs’ debt without using the World Bank guarantee; hence, those
  conditions did not lead to expected sector reforms). There were some moderate shortcomings in the M&E
  design that resulted in not capturing some project outcomes. The risks were adequately identified but the
  mitigation measures for the procurement risk were inadequate and resulted in the incompletion of key
  project activities. A financial impact of the project’s intervention was assessed but not disclosed because
  it was stated in the PAD (p.85) that its disclosure could have impacted the debt optimization process. An
  economic analysis identifying the costs and benefits of the project was not conducted.

  Overall, the quality-at-entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were held every six months until the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020. One of the
 two task team leaders and operations staff including a transport specialist, a procurement specialist and an
 environmental specialist were stationed in Zagreb, which facilitated frequent interactions with the Croatian
 counterparts. The ICR (p.24) reports that mission aide memoirs, implementation status and results reports,
 and letters to the client included recommendations to address key pending issues related to project
 implementation and were prepared on time. The project team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguard
 aspects of the project were adequate.

 Following the mid-term review in October 2019 when it was noted that the project objectives could not be
 achieved because of delays caused by a slow-down in the road sector reform process and the worsening
 of the central government finances, the project team initiated a discussion with the Croatian counterparts to
 restructure the project including a project closing date extension. The project team acted proactively and
 had numerous talks and correspondence with the counterparts to restructure the project, but the on-set of
 COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 and two earthquakes in the same year adversely affected these
 efforts.

 The government sent a letter to the World Bank in July 2021 requesting a 12-month extension of the
 project closing date, but the project team considered that this extension would be insufficient to achieve the
 objectives in the absence of a consensus how to address the projects implementation issues (ICR, p.21).
 Hence, a project restructuring could not be processed. The project team’s focus on the development of the


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



 project impact was not sufficient; key project activities, i.e., establishment of RAMS and a new automated
 tolling system, could not be completed before project closing.

 Overall, the quality of supervision, which was adversely affected by the external factors, is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change documenting how the key activities and outputs would lead to the outcomes was
 clearly explained in the project appraisal document. The formulation of the project objectives was also
 clear, and the key terms in the formulation, i.e., institutional effectiveness, operational efficiency, and debt
 service capacity, were sufficiently defined in the PAD. The indicators were overall sufficient to capture the
 project outcomes, except the outcome related to institutional effectiveness. Two indicators related to this
 objective partially captured institutional effectiveness outcome according to its definition in the PAD. The
 results framework did not include any indicator to capture the service quality aspect of the project objective
 to enhance operational efficiency. The intermediate indicators were adequate to capture the contribution of
 project activities and outputs toward achieving outcomes, but some indicators were related to outputs
 rather than outcomes. The indicators were specific, measurable, relevant, time-bound, and mostly
 achievable. Targets of some indicators were not realistic; hence, not achievable, such as operating cost
 reduction of 30 percent (ICR, p.22). The design ensured baselines for every indicator. where relevant. The
 M&E design and arrangements were well-embedded institutionally, and the institutions had sufficient
 capacity to implement M&E.



b. M&E Implementation
  Planned data collection was carried out adequately. The project implementation unit measured and
  reported progress in achieving the indicator targets regularly. The presence of a financial and technical
  coordinator and a procurement specialist facilitated the collection of M&E data (ICR, p.28). Overall, the
  project implementation unit’s dedication to M&E was noted during project implementation through to
  project closing. Some weaknesses in the M&E design were not addressed during project implementation,
  such as the absence of indicators capturing some aspects of institutional effectiveness and road service
  quality. The M&E methodology was straightforward and standard both for road sector related indicators
  and financial ratios; hence, M&E functions and processes are likely to be sustained in the future.




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were adequately communicated to the project stakeholders, especially to the government
  officials for measures to be taken to accelerate project implementation related to key activities, such as
  the establishment of a new automated tolling system and RAMS. M&E findings initiated a discussion for
  a project restructuring when it was decided that some project activities could not be completed before
  project closing date, and the project objectives would not be achieved. A project restructuring did not
  materialize because of the changing priorities of the government after the onset of COVID-19 pandemic,
  two earthquakes in 2020, and lack of consensus among the parties on how to proceed with the project
  after restructuring. The M&E data were adequately used to provide evidence of achievement of
  outcomes and outputs. There is no evidence that M&E findings of this project could lead to a subsequent
  intervention in the road sector in the near term.

  Overall, the M&E design, implementation, and utilization had moderate shortcomings. but the M&E
  system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and
  test the links in the results chain. The M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
   and did not trigger any other safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Although the project did not finance any physical investments
   or civil works, it was classified as category B because the RSCs, which were project beneficiaries,
   performed various road maintenance operations outside of the project scope that could have adverse
   impact on environment. Additionally, the project was to support severance payments that broadly fall under
   this safeguard policy (PAD, p.41). At appraisal, a preliminary environmental and social analysis of the RSCs
   was conducted, and the companies were found to be in general compliance with the national environmental
   regulation. As planned, the RSCs prepared an Environmental and Social Compliance Report (ESCR) to
   further assess the companies’ environmental and social management systems. The ESCR reviewed the
   compliance of the companies with the national environmental and social regulation and the application of
   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) in investments. The ESCR was disclosed on the RSCs’ websites
   and publicly consulted in October 2018. These resulted in the preparation of an Environment and Social
   Action Plan for each RSC. The action plans were disclosed in January 2019.

   Following some delays in 2019, the RSCs reported the implementation of the action plans regularly. There
   was no significant non-compliance in the implementation of the action plans except some occasional delays
   in recording during the COVID-19 pandemic. The project’s compliance with this safeguard policy was rated
   satisfactory through to project closing (ICR, p.23).




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. At appraisal, the financial management assessment concluded that the existing
   country and RSCs’ systems in place were mostly sufficient to support the project, and the financial
   management risk was moderate (PAD, p.36). One weakness identified was the lack of experience of the
   project implementing entities in managing World Bank-financed projects. A member of staff was assigned
   to perform financial management of the project to address this weakness. The MSTI submitted quarterly
   unaudited interim financial statements, and the project financial statements were audited annually by
   independent auditors whose opinions were unqualified. The ICR does not report the project’s fiduciary
   aspects—that section is missing in the ICR. The project team reported that there were no known issues of
   corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project, all project funds were accounted for at the time
   of project closing, and the project’s financial management was compliant with the World Bank’s
   requirements.

   Procurement. The project benefited from a procurement specialist. However, there were significant delays
   in the procurement of a technical consultant for a new automated tolling system because of the time
   required to negotiate the contract. Because of this delay, a new automated tolling system could not be
   established during project implementation. Project activities related to road safety barrier design were
   dropped because of procurement delays. The procurement of RAMS could not be completed because the
   unsatisfactory work delivered by the first consultant required the procurement of a second consultant.
   There was not sufficient time left to tender the procurement of RAMS after the hiring of the second
   consultant. Because of procurement delays, key project activities could not be completed resulting in under
   achievement of project outcomes. The ICR is missing the section on procurement. The project team
   reported that procurement was implemented in accordance with the World Bank procurement policies and
   procedures, and there were no cases of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   Gender. The project targeted to increase the ratio of the women employed in the motorway sector. This
   was to be achieved through the retrenchment of employees, the majority of whom were expected to be
   male, after the installation of the new automated tolling system. Since the new automated tolling system
   was not established, the ratio did not improve. The baseline value was 0.19 and the target was 0.25. The
   achievement at project closing was 0.21, slightly above the baseline because of the retrenchment of male
   personnel following the merger of the motorway companies.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



Outcome                          Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                      The quality at entry is rated
                                                                                      moderately unsatisfactory
                                                                                      because of the shortcomings in
                                                                                      project's design to achieve a
                                                                                      major sector reform such as
                                                                                      provision of only technical
                                                                                      assistance support, short project
                                 Moderately               Moderately                  implementation period,
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory              insufficient identification of risk
                                                                                      mitigation measures, the
                                                                                      unrealistic expectation that
                                                                                      guarantee mechanism can be
                                                                                      used to incentivize the borrower
                                                                                      to implement reform measures,
                                                                                      and the absence of an adequate
                                                                                      cost-benefit analysis.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn two lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Stand-alone technical assistance, without an investment lending component, can be
insufficient to trigger major sector reforms. The project financed only technical assistance
activities to modernize and restructure the road sector in Croatia. The project was to deliver studies,
reports, and bidding documents for the implementation of a road asset management system (RAMS)
and a new automated tolling system. These two activities were key activities for the achievement of
the sector reform through RAMS’ data feeding into the rolling plans to increase the efficiency of the
sector and new automated tolling system increasing the road sector companies’ revenues. The
project did not finance the actual procurement of both systems, which was a shortcoming that may
have ensured government’s sustained commitment to the reform process. Nevertheless, the project
was partially successful in facilitating the mergers of the road sector companies, financial
restructuring of the system, and harmonization of a set of rules, such as accounting principles.

Conditioning the use of guarantees on strict requirements can be counterproductive in
achieving sector reforms. The World Bank guarantee to be used for the optimization of the road
sector companies’ debts was conditional on the implementation of revenue and cost measures, and
governance and transparency commitments. It was expected that the need to use the guarantee
would lead to the implementation of these measures resulting in a sector reform. However, when the
government was able to restructure the debt of the road sector companies benefiting from the
improvements in the European and local capital markets, the necessity to implement the reform
measures to benefit from the IBRD guarantee subsided, and the government commitment to the



                                                                                                         Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)



sector reform weakened. The conditions tied to the use of the guarantee did not lead to the expected
sector reforms.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  A detailed assessment of the project can provide more evidence for the unsatisfactory performance of the
  project in a country where implementation capacity is high and be an opportunity to learn more about the
  effectiveness of stand-alone technical assistance projects in facilitating a major reform in the road sector.
  Related to the second point, a cluster of such assessments can possibly be considered across different
  sectors, not restricted to the road sector.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and concise. It is a well written and a complete critique of the project. The ICR, including
annexes, presents a complete and robust evidence base to support its assessment of the project’s
performance. The quality of analysis is high, and the narrative is highly evaluative; it clearly links evidence to
the findings that support the ratings. The report adequately emphasizes and highlights how activities informed
outcomes that led to the achievement or underachievement of the project objectives. It is internally consistent;
there is a high level of logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report and the results are
mutually reinforcing. The lessons respond to the specific experiences of the project, but they are mostly in the
form of findings. The report follows the Bank guidance, but the sections on financial management and
procurement are missing. An economic analysis was not attempted; the ICR states (p.50) that “as the project
results were not achieved an efficiency/economic analysis per se could not be run at ICR stage.”

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Modernization and restructuring of roads (P155842)




                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
