     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023112

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P121842                                    ID-Research and Innovation in S&T

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82450                                 31-Dec-2020                                          69,584,160.44

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Mar-2013                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            95,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             69,584,160.44                                                0.00

 Actual                                         69,584,160.44                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6), the project's original objectives were "to create an enabling policy
   environment for research and development in science and technology, to improve the public research and
   development institutes' performance, and to improve science, technology and innovation (STI) human
   resource capacity."

   At a 2017 restructuring, the objectives were modified: "support the government in: (1) improving STI human
   resource capacity; and (2) strengthening technology transfer, institutional functioning, and data management

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



   of public research agencies (LPNKs)." At that restructuring, some output targets were also revised to be less
   ambitious.

   This Review will perform a split rating, acknowledging that some of the objectives remained consistent across
   the original and restructured project. The assessed objectives are:

   1. Create an enabling policy environment for research and development in science and technology (original
   objective)

   2. Improve the public research and development institutes' performance/strengthen technology transfer,
   institutional functioning, and data management of LPNKs (original/revised objectives essentially the same)

   3. Improve STI human resource capacity (original/revised objectives identical)

   At the time of restructuring, US$29.6 million, or 42.5 percent of total Bank financing, had been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project contained four components:

   1. Improving innovation policy framework and performance of Public Research Centers (appraisal:
   US$4 million; 2017 restructuring: US$2.5 million; actual: US$2.4 million). This component was to improve
   the innovation policy framework through support for coordination and consensus-building by the State
   Ministry of Research and Technology (RISTEK) on a national innovation strategy and action plan; a
   technical and policy study by RISTEK of relevant issues for development of that strategy; capacity building
   for RISTEK; development of a national science and technology information system; and review by RISTEK
   of the legal framework for STI. The component was to improve the performance of LPNKs through support
   for RISTEK to undertake LPNK institutional assessments; creation of institutional development plans for
   select LPNKs; and pilot implementation of those plans.

   2. Strengthening public research funding (appraisal: US$4 million; 2017 restructuring: US$2.5 million;
   actual: US$1.9 million) was to support RISTEK to undertake a feasibility study and design of a competitive
   national research funding system, strengthen its existing institutional research funding program, establish
   industrial and global research linkages for science and technology researchers, improve monitoring and


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



  evaluation (M&E) of publicly funded research, and improve the effectiveness of the science and technology
  planning and budgeting system.

  3. Developing science and technology human resources capacity (appraisal: US$80 million; 2017
  restructuring, US$68 million; actual: US$60.3 million) was to support implementation by RISTEK of a
  competitive fellowship program and a non-degree professional (NDP) course and training program,
  including provisions in both programs for competitive selection of candidates, orientation/pre-departure
  program, and scholarships.

  4. Project management (appraisal: US$7 million; 2017 restructuring: US$7 million; actual: US$5.0 million)
  was to support the operation of a Steering Committee, Technical Committee, and Project Management
  Office to carry out project coordination, M&E, procurement, financial management, and advisory activities.

  After two years of project implementation, it became clear that the systemic change envisioned as a result
  of activities under the first component, intended to achieve the first original objective "to create an enabling
  policy environment for R&D in science and technology," was a longer-term proposition than initially realized
  and was beyond the scope of a single project. The project's 2017 restructuring revised the objectives and
  components accordingly. The revised objectives focused on the project's main thrust, to improve human
  resource capacity at LPNKs and at MoRTHE (Ministry of Research, Technology, and Higher Education,
  formed with the 2014 merger of RISTEK and the Directorate General of Higher Education of the Ministry of
  Education and Culture). (MoRTHE was separated back to the Ministry of Research and Technology, MoRT,
  in 2019.)

  Component 1 was renamed Support the government in strengthening technology transfer, with
  activities on development of technology transfer organizations (which would serve as the "front offices"
  of LPNKs, while research agencies would be the "back offices"), design of Science and Technology Parks
  (STPs), and development of a management information system (MIS) and database for STI.

  Component 2 was renamed Institutional functioning and data management of LPNKs, with activities on
  support for the implementation of an improved government output-based unit cost methodology, and
  support for increased coordination among research funding agencies and improvement in international
  networking.

  Components 3 and 4 were not modified.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was approved in March 2013, became effective on June 12, 2013, and closed on December 31,
  2021, one year after its original closing date of December 31, 2020. It was to be financed by a specific
  investment loan of US$95 million. The ICR provides contradictory figures -- US$69.6 million or US$71.7
  million -- for the amount that was disbursed. US$15 million of the loan was cancelled at a 2017
  restructuring, and US$5.2 million at a 2020 restructuring.

  There were two restructurings:

        January 30, 2017: Revised the objectives, components, and results framework, and cancelled
         US$15 million of the loan to reflect modifications to project activities.

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



         November 19, 2020: Extended the closing date by one year, from December 31, 2020 to December
          31, 2021, to allow extension of support for NDP study to additional participants because of the
          COVID-19 pandemic, and cancelled US$5.2 million of unused funds.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, despite strong economic growth and increasing regional and global standing, Indonesia had
fallen behind other emerging economies on export sophistication and the knowledge economy. The share
of raw commodities in Indonesia's exports had increased significantly in the preceding decade. In 2010,
only 11 percent of manufacturing exports were high-technology exports. On the Bank's Knowledge
Economy Index, Indonesia ranked 108 out of 146 countries, surpassing only Laos and Cambodia in the
region. It needed to move up the value chain to sustain and increase economic growth, with investments in
the human resources, infrastructure, and policy framework necessary for increasing innovation capacity.
However, the STI system was underdeveloped, suffering from low availability of resources (especially
advanced human capital), low productivity, and low quality and relevance of research outputs. The main
reasons for poor system performance were institutional: lack of a coherent policy framework; fragmented
institutional arrangements and funding; and poor performance of the main implementers of research and
development (R&D) policy, the public research institutes (LPNKs). Indonesia's seven LPNKs, under
coordination of the Ministry of Research and Technology (RISTEK), accounted for 35 percent of the
government's R&D expenditures and employed 20 percent of the country's researchers, but they were
inward-oriented institutions, lacking the capacity and incentives to respond to the needs of customers in the
broader economy. In addition, after the discontinuation of large-scale scholarships for graduate study a
decade earlier, there was a shortage of high-quality researchers: fewer than 5 percent of LPNK staff held
PhD degrees, and only 15 percent held master's degrees.

At appraisal, the government had recently made innovation a priority area. In 2011, it created a National
Innovation Commission to oversee implementation of a "Master Plan for Acceleration and Expansion of
Indonesia's Economic Development 2011-2025." Technological and science capacity was one of the three
main strategies in that master plan. The government recognized the need to address short-term constraints,
especially on human resources, while providing support for an overall policy framework that would
facilitate effective innovation and medium- and longer-term institutional reforms. Government strategy has
continued to focus on science and technology skills development through its most recent medium-term
Development Plan 2020-2024, which includes a strategy area for nurturing of human capital.

The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (CPS, FY2013-2015) contained an objective on
enhancing skills and technology, in support of a longer-term objective to enhance R&D, science, and
technology. The project was relevant to that CPS. However, the FY2016-2020 Country Partnership
Framework focused primarily on infrastructure development; this project was included under that CPF's
objective to simplify business licensing processes to support the private sector, without a direct and
coherent logical chain tying the project's outcomes to the CPF objective. The project was better aligned with
the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic Update in 2020, which noted that nurturing world-class human
capital was one of four key pathways toward poverty reduction and shared prosperity in the country. The



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



               project is cited under the current CPF's (FY2021-2025) objective to strengthen the quality and equity of
               education and skills.

               As the project's objectives have been aligned with country conditions and with government strategy across
               its lifetime, and with Bank strategy for most of its lifetime, relevance is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Create an enabling policy environment for research and development in science and technology (original
                             objective)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that development of a National Innovation Strategy and Action
                             Plan, technical and policy studies, the creation of a National Science and Technology Information System,
                             and review and revision of the legal framework governing research and development would lead to an
                             improved policy environment for research and development in science and technology. The ICR (p. 7) also
                             hypothesized that an institutional assessment of LPNK research centers, as well as the creation of
                             institutional development plans by the LPNKs and piloting of reforms under those plans, would contribute to
                             an improved policy environment, but it is unclear how that would have been the case.



                             Outputs and outcomes

                             A National Innovation System (SINAS) concept was discussed by MoRTHE, LPNKs, and other relevant
                             ministries, local government agencies, and universities. It was agreed in 2014 that the SINAS would cover
                             three areas: STPs, consortia, and local innovation system development. The ICR provided no further
                             information on the SINAS concept.

                             The original project contained an outcome indicator on the percentage of LPNK reform milestones reached.
                             Project documents were not clear on how these reform milestones were defined and how their achievement
                             was to have measured the creation of an enabling policy environment for science and technology R&D. In
                             any event, the ICR (p. 17) reported no progress on this indicator.

                             The ICR (p. 19) noted that policy papers on the STI legal framework, innovation funding system, and
                             commercialization were written, and that these papers "informed a number of regulations and
                             implementation," including Law No. 11/2019 on a National System of Science, Technology, and Innovation. It

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



also noted that "strategy action plans were submitted for consideration to the new national research and
innovation master plan." No further information or detail about the Law or master plan was provided.

Due to lack of information on outputs and outcomes, achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the public research and development institutes' performance/strengthen technology transfer,
institutional functioning, and data management of LPNKs (original/revised objectives essentially the same)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that institutional assessment of LPNK research centers, as well
as the creation of institutional development plans by the LPNKs and piloting of reforms under those plans,
would improve LPNK performance. Carrying out a feasibility study for a competitive funding system and
establishment of research networks would lead to strengthened institutional performance and technology
transfer. Improvements in M&E and the R&D budget system would lead to better data management of
LPNKs.



Outputs and outcomes

Strengthening institutional functioning of LPNKs: The ICR (p. 19) stated that MoRTHA issued a regulation in
2019 (No. 25/2019) on STP governance, resulting in institutionalization of reforms in five STPs in three
LPNKs. The ICR did not state exactly what those reforms were or how they were institutionalized. The ICR (p.
47) stated that the five STPs were developed through a "programs of excellence" selection process, and that
the STPs created road maps and action plans, identified industrial needs, engaged in management capacity
building, and prepared for networking and training. The ICR did not state the extent to which road maps and
action plans were implemented, networking and training took place, and/or identified industrial needs were
incorporated into STP activities.

The ICR (p. 20) stated that project activities "brought the improvement of a regulation on the output-based
cost standard" for the STI research funding system, indicating that new regulations replaced older ones, but
no information on the content of the regulations was provided. Later in the ICR (p. 47), it was implied that new
regulations in this area were issued on an annual basis.

Strengthening technology transfer: Technology Transfer Office (TTO) Management Guidelines and guidelines
for technology valuation and incentive systems were revised and aligned with the 2019 National System of
STI Law. Four TTOs were created, and 30 TTO staff were certified as Registered Technology Transfer
Professionals by the Alliance of Technology Transfer Professionals.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



Strengthening data management: The ICR (p. 20) stated that a National Information System for STI database
was expanded to include national, local government, and university STI data, and that STI was "continuously
being collected," but it did not define or provide context about the database. It noted that "the process was
continued through the establishment of Monevrisbang," but it did not define that term. It cited "key results" as
an increased number of research programs in LPNKs and MoRTHE with focus on higher ranks of the
"Technology Readiness Level," strengthened R&D M&E capacity, and twelve independent evaluations of
multi-year research activities, but no details or information were provided on the number or characteristics of
these research programs, what constitutes a higher "Technology Readiness Level," by what measure or in
what ways R&D M&E capacity was strengthened, and what multi-year research activities were evaluated and
by whom. Annex 1 of the ICR (p. 38) reported an output indicator on "strengthened R&D M&E capacity" with
a baseline of zero, target of 12, and actual achievement of 6, but no units of measurement were specified,
and it is not clear what this indicator measured.

The ICR (p. 19) stated that "the number and quality of inventions increased," but no evidence was provided to
support this claim.

The original project included an outcome indicator on the share of total LPNK R&D revenue that would be
generated from external partners. That share declined from about five percent in 2013 to four percent in 2016.
However, external funding -- from industry, the local community, and foreign grants -- was beyond the scope
of the project, making this indicator invalid as a measure of achievement of the objective.

Due to lack of information on outputs and outcomes, achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve STI human resource capacity (original/revised objective)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that support for scientists, in the form of scholarships to graduate
degree programs overseas and non-degree professional courses, would improve the human resource
capacity for science, technology, and innovation.



Outputs and outcomes

The project provided scholarships for degree and non-degree programs covering tuition and fees, travel,
living and book allowances, and research and journal publication allowances. The ICR provided inconsistent
information on the number of students who received scholarships: 3,026 (p. 24), 2,756 (p. 26), or 457 (p. 20)
scholars were supported by the project. According to Annex 1 of the ICR (p. 38), 457 LPNK, MoRTHE, or
research agency staff were supported by the project for study overseas, meeting the target of 457 staff. 378
of those 457 scholars (83 percent) had completed their studies as of November 2021, and 17 (4 percent) had

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



                              dropped out. 62 scholars (14 percent) remained active and aimed to complete their programs after project
                              closure, using university scholarships or their own funding. The ICR provided contradictory information on the
                              number of students -- 1,670 or 2,289 -- who participated in non-degree professional courses and training,
                              meeting the target of 1,670; the ICR did not provide detail on the specific subject matter that was studied or
                              where the courses/training were offered or completed.

                              236 of 253 scholars (93 percent) who received master's degrees with project-financed scholarships took
                              research posts aligned with their fields of study within their respective LPNKs, exceeding the target of 90
                              percent. 131 out of 137 PhD graduates (96 percent) who were supported by the project went on to lead
                              research projects in their fields of study within their respective LPNKs, exceeding the target of 90 percent.
                              The other six PhD degree recipients were, as of the writing of the ICR, waiting for positions aligned with their
                              fields of study.

                              The ICR (p. 23) noted that an undefined number of project-supported alumni now teach and have become
                              academic supervisors for post-graduate students in universities across Indonesia, as well as resource
                              persons for institutions such as the Indonesian Statistics Agency, UNESCO, and the G-20.

                              Scholars supported by the project published 699 scientific articles, including 382 indexed publications, 318
                              unindexed publications, and 27 patents. 62 of these publications were approved for a Publication Allowance
                              (undefined in the ICR), including 45 indexed in Scopus, seven in international journals that are not globally
                              indexed, and ten in international proceedings.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            With modest achievement of the objectives to improve the enabling policy environment for STI R&D and to
                            improve LPNK performance, and substantial achievement of the objective to improve STI human resource
                            capacity, efficacy under the original objectives is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Insufficient evidence
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            With modest achievement of the objective to improve LPNK performance, and substantial achievement of
                            the objective to improve STI human resource capacity, efficacy under the revised objectives is rated



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



  Substantial, but with important shortcomings related to lack of evidence on improved technology transfer,
  institutional functioning, and data management of LPNKs.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD's economic analysis (pp. 12-13 and Annex 6) presented qualitative arguments justifying overall
investment in the STI sector through high returns to R&D spending, acknowledging that increased public
resources must be accompanied by institutional reforms and must be used to leverage private resources (not
crowd out private investment).

The ICR (pp. 21-25 and Annex 4) performed a cost-benefit analysis. Benefits included the social return from a
strengthened national innovation strategy, strengthened public research funding, and increased human
resources capacity in science and technology. Drawing from international literature, the rate of return to R&D
spending was estimated at 200 percent, at the low end of typical findings. It was also assumed that 30 to 40
percent of financing for scholarships would generate social return after four years. Costs included the direct
costs of the project as well as indirect costs (human capital depreciation, assumed to be six percent; costs
associated with students who dropped out; and opportunity costs associated with cancelled/undisbursed project
funds). The analysis found, in a base case scenario, a net present value (NPV) of about US$18.5 million and an
internal rate of return (IRR) of 12 percent. This estimate was considered to be a lower bound, with positive
externalities such as increased future salaries of scholars who benefited from the project not reflected in the
analysis. Slightly higher NPV and IRR results were found under scenarios that assumed higher social rates of
return.

The efficiency analysis (p. 24) noted that the project's scholarship amounts were comparable with those under
other Indonesian government scholarship schemes, as well as several international scholarship programs. The
ICR argued that the project was efficient because it reached more beneficiaries while spending less than
planned, but it did not provide sufficient information on the types of scholarships and fellowships provided to
support that argument fully. The ICR (p. 32) also noted that scholarship recipients found it difficult to identify
foreign universities offering their desired field of study or specialization, suggesting inefficiency in the absence of
an education agent or agency who could liaison between international universities and selected students.

The ICR (p. 23) referred to implementation inefficiencies such as frequent staff turnover, structural changes in
the executing agency (presumably referring to the merger of RISTEK into MoRTHE in 2014 and then back into
MoRT in 2019), and slow procurement and disbursement. The ICR (p. 27) also stated that the project went
forward despite "uncertainties around government commitment to the project at the time of project preparation,"
and that "specific administrative and technical linkages" between RISTEK and the LPNKs were "not assessed
comprehensively then," leading to the need for later project restructuring and scaling down. It noted that
"institutional strengthening during project implementation was disrupted frequently" (p. 26). There was
inadequate oversight from MoRTHE on project implementation in 2014-2015, contributing to slow
implementation of activities and low disbursements. Payment processes for scholarship recipients under the
third component were slow, exacerbated by "long and cumbersome" project fund withdrawal processes from

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



MoRTHE's internal finance unit (ICR, p. 28). Inaccuracy in the project's annual budget document, coupled with
government cuts, "frequently required revisions to the budget document (again requiring lengthy processes.)"
The ICR (p. 28) stated that project design was simplified at the first restructuring, but it did not describe how
implementation efficiency improved.

Due to implementation inefficiencies, project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               12.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original objectives: The project was relevant to country conditions and government strategy, and it
was well aligned with Bank strategy over most of its lifetime. Relevance is therefore rated Substantial. The
project modestly achieved its two objectives to improve the enabling policy environment for STI R&D and to
improve LPNK performance, and substantially achieved its third objective to improve STI human resource
capacity, consistent with a Modest overall efficacy rating. Efficiency is rated Modest due to significant
implementation inefficiencies. Outcome under the original objectives is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Under the revised objectives: The project was relevant to country conditions and government strategy, and it
was well aligned with Bank strategy over most of its lifetime. Relevance is therefore rated Substantial. The
project modestly achieved its objective to improve LPNK performance, and substantially achieved its objective
to improve STI human resource capacity, consistent with a Substantial overall efficacy rating. Efficiency is rated
Modest due to significant implementation inefficiencies. Outcome under the revised objectives is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.

Following IEG/OPCS guidelines, overall outcome is determined by weighting performance under the original
and revised objectives according to the amount of Bank financing disbursed under each set of objectives. In this
case, 42.5 percent of the loan had been disbursed at the 2017 restructuring that revised the objectives.

       Original objectives. Outcome = MU (3) * 0.425 = 1.275


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



      Revised objective: Outcome = MS (4) * 0.575 = 2.3

1.275 + 2.3 = 3.575, which rounds to 4 (MS).

Overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of moderate shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 31) noted that sustaining STI capacity developed under the project will require the development
of multi-stakeholder research funding and strengthening of the research and innovation ecosystem in the
country through increased synergy of funding from various institutions that are members of the Indonesia
Research Funder Forum. It also recommended (p. 32) that the government support scholarship programs
with a focus on graduate-level training and public-private partnerships. The ICR did not assess the extent to
which these things are happening or likely to happen.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's technical design was based on extensive sector assessments conducted under a 2002
  RISTEK "PERISKOP" project as well as a RISTEK team's feasibility study on overseas training
  programs. A Steering Committee, chaired by the RISTEK Executive Secretary, was established to
  provide the project with guidance and oversight, and a Technical Committee was set up to provide
  technical advice. Key lessons learned from prior international experience (PAD, pp. 7-9) included: (a) for
  reform of public research institutes, staying in the lane of commercialization, leaving basic research and
  innovation to companies; being flexible and adaptive to local and global market forces; and having
  government facilitate but not micromanage strategies and activities; (b) for overseas training for
  researchers, expecting PhD-level program completion to take longer than a few years, and reasonably
  expecting a high return rate of students; and (c) on competitive research grant programming, giving high-
  quality researchers grants large enough to stay in their home countries as key to building capacity in
  critical research areas. Risk assessment was thorough (PAD, Annex 4), with key identified risks relating
  to project complexity and the extent to which LPNKs would share a common vision for reforms; RISTEK's
  lack of familiarity with Bank policies and procedures; the need for the National Innovation Committee to
  effectively mitigate potential fragmentation among key players by building national consensus on the
  enabling policy environment; and the need to translate the development of higher-quality research
  personnel into meaningful research outcomes through market orientation and industry linkages.

  However, as described by the ICR (pp. 27, 28), the project as originally designed was overly ambitious
  and did not take into consideration the level of government experience in the science and technology

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



  area or uncertainties about government commitment. Risk mitigation measures were inadequate.
  RISTEK's administrative and technical linkages with LPNKs were not adequately assessed. These
  shortcomings were particularly noteworthy since this was the second Bank-financed project in the sector
  (the ICR did not provide information on the first project). M&E design had significant shortcomings,
  including results framework indicators that were not consistent with desired outcomes.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 31) noted that Bank supervision and implementation support missions were carried out
 regularly, that the same Task Team Leader was in place throughout the eight-year implementation period,
 and that expert teams from the Bank provided inputs on financial management, procurement, and other
 issues. The Bank team worked closely with the PMO and high-level leadership of MoRT. The project was
 restructured when it became clear that the original objectives and results framework were inadequate. The
 task team facilitated the shift to NDP activities when the COVID-19 pandemic erupted (ICR, p. 31). The
 ICR did not provide further details on Bank supervision following the first restructuring, and the results
 framework remained inadequate to measure achievement of project objectives.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework (PAD, p. 10 and Annex 1) was built around three data collection mechanisms: STI
 surveys at the sector level, coordinated by the Deputy for Science and Technology Institutions of RISTEK;
 annual Independent Assessment Panel review of LPNK performance; and routine project monitoring by the
 Project Management Organization (PMO). The Independent Assessment Panels were to be comprised of
 scientists, engineers, institutional management specialists, and private sector representatives (PAD, p. 31).

 As the ICR noted (p. 28), the original objectives were ambitious, with a formulation that went beyond the
 scope of planned activities. The outcome indicators did not adequately measure intended outcomes, and
 some outcome targets were vague and not operationalizable. For example, "LPNK research agency
 reforms are institutionalized" is not a well-defined or measurable indicator, and the target was an
 unsatisfying binary "in progress."



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR, all three data collection mechanisms were implemented as planned. The ICR (p.
  29) stated that the annual STI survey updated key system indicators that were "comparable to STI
  performance indicators defined by UNESCO or the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
  Development." It also stated that Independent Assessment Panels "carried out annual review and
  evaluation of LPNK performance based on targets set through the Institutional Development Plan of each
  LPNK," and that routine project monitoring was implemented by the PMO. It is noteworthy, however, that
  the ICR did not appear to present information from these sources; for example, there was no mention in
  the ICR of the specific results of the STI surveys, or of the LPNKs having actually formulated and
  implemented Institutional Development Plans, or presentation of the targets and achievements of those
  Plans.

  The ICR (p. 29) stated that there "could have been an issue" with complaints from applicants who did not
  receive scholarship awards following the competitive application process, but that "the number of
  complaints and how they were addressed was not well documented."



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 29) noted that the findings of the 2016 Mid-Term Review "contributed lessons learned and
  ways forward to keep the project on track through project restructurings," but it did not elaborate on the
  ways in which this was the case.

  The ICR (p. 29) stated that an Indonesian Ministry of Religious Affairs staff scholarship program is
  applying this project's guidelines and lessons to its own design and implementation.

  Given the information gaps in the ICR and low quality of indicators for measuring intended outcomes,
  project M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was Environmental Assessment category "C" and did not trigger any safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



   According to the ICR (pp. 29-30), the project experienced significant shortcomings in financial
   management in its initial years, including continued delays in the payment of scholarship-related
   expenditures, and weaknesses in soft expenditures such as travel. The Audit Board of the Republic of
   Indonesia reviewed the project's financial report annually with clean opinions. Ineligible expenditures were
   found in FY2017 and FY2018, all of which were refunded. The ICR (p. 30) reported that a total of US$1.91
   million was refunded. Following those findings, the Project Management Office replaced the assistant
   treasurer and decision-making officer, assigned additional verification staff, and hired financial
   management and procurement consultants. At the second restructuring, the Ministry of Finance required
   MoRT to submit a statement of accountability for the ineligible expenditures. The ICR did not provide
   further detail on improvements in financial management in the project's later years.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                Significant shortcomings in
                                                                                Quality at Entry, and continued
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   uncorrected shortcomings in the
                                                                                results framework during
                                                                                Supervision.
                                                                                Sparse presentation in the ICR
                                                                                of information from the project's
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest                    M&E system, and low quality of
                                                                                indicators to measure intended
                                                                                outcomes.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 32-33) presented findings and recommendations from which some lessons can be
gleaned:

Scholarship programs supporting students to study in other countries can benefit from the services
of education agencies or individual agents to liaise between students and international universities.

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



In the case of this project, students who were awarded scholarships found it difficult to
identify universities in other countries that offered their desired field of study or specialization.

The different administrative elements of a large-scale scholarship program require different
institutional set-ups and skills. Recruiting and selecting candidates, supporting their orientation prior
to enrollment at foreign universities, managing and monitoring funds transfers to them, and helping
them overcome problems during their studies all require different teams or departments with
different capacities and skill sets.

Recipients of government-financed education abroad programs, upon the completion of their studies
and return home, form a valuable talent pool that can be drawn upon with high levels of return for
many years later. In this case, MoRT facilitated professional networking and development programs
for returning scholars that translated into their employment with domestic and international agencies.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR contained all of the sections required by ICR guidelines. It presented the country and sectoral context
for the project. However, there were major shortcomings with the document. The ICR was repetitive and lacked
clarity in many aspects. The document did not, in any section, present a coherent logic or results chain
describing and linking planned project activities with desired intermediate outcomes and final outcomes. The
single key assumption cited as underpinning the theory of change related to achievement of the project's long-
term impact rather than its stated objectives. The ICR reported and rated achievement based solely on
selected indicators, leaving gaps in the assessment of achievement of the stated objectives; the ICR's
Efficiency Analysis (Annex 4, p. 47) provided a more straightforward presentation of project activities than the
ICR's main text did. Results, especially for scholarship recipients, were reported inconsistently at various points
throughout the document; this was especially visible in Annex 1 ("Results Framework and Key Outputs"), which
contained results data that were not cited or matched anywhere in the main ICR text. The ICR's explanation of
the revised objectives and components at the 2017 restructuring was not straightforward. Laws and regulations
were cited with no explanation of their content. Acronyms were not explained and/or used consistently, and
some project activities and institutions were not well defined. The risk to development outcomes discussion
contained recommendations rather than an assessment of risk to achieved results. The lessons section
presented findings and recommendations rather than lessons, many of which were not based on
information presented earlier in the document. The ICR did not perform the split rating analysis correctly, as it
assessed achievement by confined project periods (before/after restructuring) rather than achievements across
the project's entire lifetime, and the application of the split rating calculation was incorrectly based on a list of
indicators rather than on the objectives-based evaluation methodology used by the World Bank.




                                                                                                        Page 15 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ID-Research and Innovation in S&T (P121842)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                             Page 16 of 16
