     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023091

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P110481                                  ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81110,IBRD-88620,IDA-44800         31-Dec-2013                                         61,927,494.29

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2008                             31-Dec-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         35,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                          71,800,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                      61,927,494.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally              Peter Nigel Freeman         Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) the Dam Safety Project (DSP) as articulated in the Financing
   Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 31) and
   aimed to:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



   "(i) contribute to safeguarding the hydroelectric dams on the Drin and Mat river cascades on the
   territory of the Recipient; and (ii) improve the operational efficiency of said hydroelectric dams and
   enhance the stability of power supply in the regional market."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To contribute to safeguarding the hydroelectric dams on the Drin and Mat river cascades in the territory of
   the Recipient.

   2. To improve the operational efficiency of said hydroelectric dams.

   3. To enhance the stability of power supply in the regional electricity market.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following two components:

   1. Physical infrastructure investments (appraisal cost: US$15.70 million, actual cost: US$62.88
   million). This component included three sub-components:

   (a) Remedial Measures of Very High Priority: (i) Dam Safety Alarm Systems for Drin and Mat River
   Basins included the specification and implementation of water alarm systems in the Drin and Mat River
   basins (Euro 2 million); (ii) Dam Monitoring Systems for Drin and Mat River Basins included the
   specification and implementation of dam monitoring equipment including Geographical Positioning System
   (GPS), and implementation of a data acquisition system (Euro 1 million).
   (b) Remedial Measures of High Priority: (i) Fierza Dam - Rehabilitation of spillway no. 3 (Euro 3 million);
   (ii) Fierza and Koman Geological Monitoring System- included the specification and implementation of
   movement/landslide alarm systems linked to GPS for identified potential geological slip zones (Euro 1.6
   million); (iii) Vau i Dejes - Spillway rehabilitations and maintenance (Euro 1.8 million); (iv) KESH Dam Safety
   Department equipment for data archives, monitoring and documentation (Euro 0.1 million).
   (c) Remedial Measures of Medium Priority and Operational Improvements: (i) Koman Dam this would
   include general rehabilitation of spillways 3 and 4 gate seals, stop-logs, as well as frames, cylinders and
   hydraulic power, and modification of outlet for spillway no. 4 (Euro 3 million); (ii) Koman Hydropower
   Plant would include rehabilitation of electromechanical equipment (Euro 6.3 million); (iii) Vau i Dejes and
   Fierza Dams would support the implementation of a Load Frequency Control system to allow for the
   integration of Albania’s electricity system with the Union for the Coordination of Transmission of Electricity in
   Europe (UCTE) (Euro 1.5 million).

   2. Technical Assistance and Training (appraisal cost: US$7.10 million, actual cost: US$9.34 million).
   This component included six sub-components:



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



(a) Hydrology Analysis and Water Management. The project would provide technical assistance to
develop and train the Albanian Electricity Corporation (KESH) staff on an integrated water resources
management approach for the management of the Drin and Mat river basins and the optimization of power
dispatching and water resource management. The technical assistance was designed to: (i) improve the
quality and availability of hydrological data, analysis and modeling; (ii) study the possibility of changes to
operating rules to provide increased economic, environmental and social benefits, and (iii) incorporate
implications of climate change in terms of hydrological profiles.

(b) Project Implementation Consultants. The project would require specialized consultants during its
implementation to assist KESH with procurement, design and supervision of various contracts.

(c) Institutional Strengthening. The development of a Safety of Dams culture within KESH and the
institutional strengthening of the Albanian Commission of Large Dams (AlbCOLD) was a requirement for the
sustainability and long-term implementation of safety measures. Technical assistance would be provided to
prepare an emergency preparedness plan and to strengthen the capacities of KESH’s dam safety
department and AlbCOLD.

(d) Studies for Further Hydropower Development. To address the initial upstream costs of feasibility
studies this technical assistance component would finance detailed feasibility studies for new hydropower
development in Albania.

(e) Financial Management Capacity Building for KESH. This sub-component would include establishing
a new financial management system in KESH Gen and contribute to the allocation of assets and liabilities
and creation of an opening balance sheet.

(f) Safety of Dams Experts Panel. This sub-component would finance the work of the independent panel
of experts to oversee the design and implementation of various interventions in the project dams as per
Safety of Dams safeguards policy.

Revised Components
1. During the first additional financing, the sub-component implementation of load frequency control was
dropped.
2. The Additional Financing PAD had mentioned that additional financing was required as costs were
revised following the completion of detailed inception reports for rehabilitation spillways and
electromechanical equipment as well as newly identified items resulting from the spillways assessment
report following the floods of 2010. The spillways underwater assessment highlighted areas that were not
considered before:
i. Reinforcement of the spillway tower Nr.3 a Fierza HPP, which was not considered during the Feasibility
Study (FS)

ii. Full rehabilitation of spillway gate of tunnel Nr.4 at Fierza, while the Feasibility Study included only the
rehabilitation of spillway gate of tunnel Nr. 3

iii. Full rehabilitation for existing spillway gates at Vau I Dejes (Qyrsaq and Zadeja) while in the Study was
considered only supplying of Vau I Dejes Maintenance (stop logs gate).

iv. Complete rehabilitation of hydromechanics equipment at Komani HPP, while at the time of preparation of
the project only the emergency needs of HPP, and the missing spare parts were included.


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



  3. The additional financing also included TA support to cover: i) Owner’s Engineer and Panel of Experts
  contracts for the remaining period of the project, ii) the strengthening of KESH’s financial management
  capacity; iii) support to continue strengthening the project implementing entity’s dam safety department; and
  iv) completion of the study to assess an integrated water resources management approach for the
  management of the Drin and Mat river basins, as well as the optimization of power dispatching and water
  resources management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated to be US$56.80 million equivalent. This amount was
  revised upwards to US$104.38 million after receiving two additional financings from the Bank, financing
  from European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and from Swiss Agency for
  Development & Cooperation (SDC) (see below for details). This amount was revised downwards to
  US$93.19 million due to lack of counterpart funding. The actual total cost of the project was US$83.31
  million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA credit of US$35.3 million equivalent. The Project also
  received two IDA additional financings of US$21.60 million (AF1) and US$14.90 million (AF2). Total IDA
  financing was US$71.80 million and the actual amount disbursed was US$61.98 million. Co-financing of
  US$5.00 million equivalent would be provided by KESH. Parallel financing of US$16.52 million equivalent
  would be provided EBRD and US$7.36 million equivalent by SECO. The total amount of parallel financing
  was US$21.39 million and the actual amount was US$21.38 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$8.70 million of counterpart funds.
  According to the ICR Data sheet (page 2) none of the expected funds were contributed.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 30, 2008 and became effective six months later on December
  16, 2008. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 7, 2016, which was about eight years after
  effectiveness, and about five and half years after the MTR date specified in the PAD (June 2011). The ICR
  (paragraph 81) attributed the rescheduled MTR to 2016 in order to "properly take stock of the situation and
  propose corrective actions to guide the project toward its objectives." The project closed on December 31,
  2021 compared to an original date on December 31, 2013. The extension in the project by a total of eight
  years was to allow more time to implement activities associated with the two AFs and to accommodate
  implementation delays and allow more time to complete activities (ICR, paragraph 28).

  The project was restructured five times including two AFs, all of which were Level 2 restructurings as
  follows:

  1. On December 20, 2011, when the amount disbursed was US$2.50 million, in order to approve an
  additional financing of US$21.60 million and extend the project’s closing date from December 31, 2013 to
  December 30, 2016.

  2. On December 15, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$25.39 million, in order to reallocate funds
  between disbursement categories.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



   3. On December 27, 2016, when the amount disbursed was US$31.01 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from December 30, 2016, to June 30, 2019.

   4. On May 25, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$43.57 million, in order to approve the second
   additional financing (AF2) of US$14.90 million and modify the results framework (RF), extend the loan
   closing date from June 30, 2019 to December 31, 2020, cancel activities under two sub-components,
   update of components’ costs, and reallocate funds under existing categories.

   5. On December 31, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$57.41 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 so as to accommodate disruptions due to
   COVID-19 restrictions.

   Rationale for Changes and Their Implication on the Original Theory of Change (ToC).

   The ICR did not discuss any changes and only stated that "the changes did not have material impact on the
   original theory of change (paragraph 30)."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Albania’s hydropower plants had been a precious asset both for the country and the
regional electricity system. The two main cascades on the Drin River and the Mat River have had an
installed capacity of 1.45 GW, produce over 90% of domestic electricity and supply normally more than
65% of the country’s total demand. This represented an annual value of more than US$ 450 million, while
the asset value of these hydro dams could be well above US$3 billion (PAD, paragraph 13). Support for
Albania’s hydropower dams was needed not only because of the significant safety risks involved for the
country and the need to bring dam safety in Albania to modem standards, but also to improve the country’s
overall hydropower operation and benefit the whole regional electricity system (PAD, paragraph 15).

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank remains heavily involved in the integration of the South East
Europe (SEE) Energy Market. First, the Bank was participating in regional efforts to promote cooperation
and integration in South East Europe and inter alia supports the Stability Pact. Second, the Bank was an
active participant in the Athens process, at the request of the European Commission (EC). Third, the Bank
has supported individual countries of South East Europe in their efforts to rehabilitate and restructure their
power sectors through policy dialogue, technical assistance and financing since the early 1990s (in some
cases even earlier). This deep regional and country knowledge and participation in the development of the
Athens process puts the Bank in a strong position to provide regional lending, policy advice and technical
assistance to further support the Athens process. The Energy Community of South East Europe Adaptable
Program Loan (ECSEE APL) was approved by the Board on January 27,2005. It was a key component of
the Bank’s support for the Stability Pact and its working partnership with the EC.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Assistance
Strategy for Albania (CAS, 2006-09). The project would contribute to improved energy production and

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



enhanced dam safety measures, as well as to improved, and more financially sustainable, infrastructure
services in roads, energy, and irrigation (under Strategic Objective 1: Accelerating the recovery in Albania’s
economic growth through improved
competitiveness) and decreased vulnerability to natural and manmade disasters (under Strategic Objective
3: Reducing Albania’s vulnerability to climate change). The project was included in the Country Assistance
Strategy Progress Report for Albania (May 9,2008). The ECSEE APL facility was also a key component of
the Bank’s support for the Stability Pact and the working partnership with the European Commission.
Objectives were in line with the findings of the Bank's Dam Safety Survey for Hydropower Plants Located
on the Drin and Mat River Cascades (2006, funded by SECO).

At completion, objectives were in line with Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2015-2019) for
Albania. Specifically, under the Focus Area 2, Creating Conditions for Accelerated Private Sector growth,
where supporting enhanced energy security, efficiency, and supply was a core objective. The CPF also
noted that the power sector suffered from significant inefficiencies related to the speed and reliability of
power supply and that an unreliable
and expensive power supply dissuades large firms looking to enter emerging markets, and existing firms
ranked electricity supply as one of the main constraints. This project helped improve the supply situation of
the country by rehabilitating hydro assets and optimization of power dispatching.

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Albanian Government
priorities for hydropower. The Albanian Government recognized the high importance of hydropower for the
country’s and the regional electricity system and had a strategic objective of developing the remaining
hydropower potential of the country (small and large-scale hydro) under a concession scheme and public-
private partnerships.

At completion, the PDO was in line with Albania’s development and energy security goals, as highlighted by
the government’s National Strategy for Development and Integration (NSDI-II 2015-2020). The NSDI
emphasized connectivity, whereby the government was focused on the provision of energy
sources and the building of the necessary infrastructure for the safe supply of energy to clients.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO was in line with the Government priorities
and consistent with the Bank Strategies. Also, the safety and efficiency of hydroelectric dams will continue
to be a priority for Albania in the future. However, the first statement of the PDO (to contribute to
safeguarding the hydroelectric dams) could have benefitted from more specificity. The statement could
have benefitted from specifying how the project would do this. The second statement of the PDO was clear
and focused. However, the third statement "to enhance the stability of power supply in the regional
electricity market" lacked a connection to the Results Framework as it was not clear how it would be
tracked. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To contribute to safeguarding the hydroelectric dams on the Drin and Mat river cascades in the territory of the
               Recipient.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support preparing an
               emergency preparedness plan and provide staff training, install monitoring and alarm systems and install
               geological monitoring systems, establish a financial monitoring system and a dam safety panel at KESH,
               rehabilitate dam spillways, gateway seals, frames and hydraulic power units and electromechanical
               equipment. These activities were expected to safeguard dams and generation capacity. Anticipated longer
               term outcome was the creation of an area without internal frontiers for energy which was expected to
               contribute to economic and social progress and a higher level of employment as well as balanced and
               sustainable development.

               The ToC as stated in the ICR lacked any assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated PDO.

               While the stated activities were directly linked to the outcome in a plausible causal chain, the infrastructure
               and the technical components of the project were not described and were not reflected in the results
               framework (ICR, paragraph 80).

               Outputs

               The ICR did not explicitly report outputs in Annex 1. Only intermediate outcomes were reported.

                     The rehabilitation works for four spillways were completed.
                     High priority remedial measures were completed including: the completion of the electro-mechanical
                      rehabilitation works in Komani HPP, the completion of the dam's instrumentation and monitoring
                      systems, completion of the Komani dam toe rehabilitation works, and the prefeasibility and feasibility
                      studies were both completed.
                     Remedial measures of medium priority and operational improvements were completed including: the
                      completion of the risk analysis and preparation of Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP),
                      establishment of the new dam safety department, completion of internal organization at Kesh,
                      completion of the rock-fall protection in Fierza HPP, Komani HPP and Vau Deja HPP, and completion
                      of the Drin river
                      operation optimization.
                     Safety of dams expert panel was established and fully operational.
                     Hydrology analysis and water management studies were both completed.

               Outcome

                     By project completion, the dam’s geological seismic and geodetic monitoring systems were functional
                      (ICR, paragraph 40). The rockfall danger protection works were completed in all three Drin River
                      Dams, Komani dam downstream slope/toe rehabilitation and foundation treatment work was also
                      completed. Rehabilitation works involving four generation units at Komani were finalized. Also,
                      rehabilitation works in spillway tunnel NB3, radial gate Nb4, and stoplog Nb4 in Fierza HPP and

                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



       Spillway Tunnel Nb4, Radial Gate NB3, and Stoplog NB3 in Komani HPP were all completed (ICR,
       paragraph 40).
      In all dams the installations of monitoring systems were completed with a Data Processing and
       Management System (DPMS) located in the control room of the powerhouse. The data from the
       automatic readings was transferred directly to the DPMS and stored together with the data of the
       manual readings. The system allowed the graphical representation of the collected data for immediate
       plausibility checking and as a basis for comprehensive evaluation reports.
      According to the ICR (paragraph 40) KESH and Albanian authorities adopted the recommendations
       from the study “Strengthening of the Institution set-up and Dam Safety and Emergency Preparedness
       Study”. The Emergency Preparedness Plan included: (i) Description of the Dam, the reservoir, and its
       environment; (ii) Organization, means, and resources; (iii) Action procedures for emergency situations
       and (iv) Flood areas and damages estimation. The outputs of the plan were communicated to all
       relevant stakeholders, focusing on the need for a coordinated approach.
      The Dam Safety department at Kesh was strengthened through trainings, hiring of skilled staff and the
       provision of instruments and equipment (ICR, paragraph 40). This helped KESH generate regular
       reports and data, which could be used by the government to manage the dam.


Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project completed the dam rehabilitation works, monitoring systems
were installed and the Dam safety Department was upgraded and strengthened. Also, an Emergency
Preparedness Plan was prepared and adopted. By project completion Safeguard
remedies were implemented at the Drin and Mat Rivers Cascades. Therefore, and based on the afore-
mentioned information, it is evident that the project succeeded in contributing to safeguarding of the
hydroelectric dams on the Drin & Mat River cascades. The efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the operational efficiency of said hydroelectric dams.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). Same as above.



Outputs

Same as under Objective 1.



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)




Outcome

By project completion, there was an additional generation capacity of 31 GWh of electricity (target achieved).
This was a direct result from the increase in reliability and efficiency due to the dam rehabilitation and
refurbishment supported by the project. The rehabilitation of hydropower plants helped to increase the
availability and reliability of energy production units and reduced leaks (ICR, paragraph 41). The elimination
of water leakages, increased availability of generation units, and the adoption of customized criterion at
Albania’s largest hydropower plants (Fierza, Komani, Vau I Dejes), which resulted in improved dams’
efficiency and increased energy output.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project succeeded in improving dam efficiency and this resulted in
an additional generation capacity of 31 GWh of electricity. Electricity Output increased by 11 GWh due to
reduced water leakages and electromechanical equipment rehabilitation (exceeding the target of 6 GWH).
Also, electricity output increased by 20GWh due to improved reservoir optimization procedures (target 100%
achieved). Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance the stability of power supply in the regional electricity market.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). Same as under Objective 1.

Outputs

Same as under Objective 1.

Outcome

      The indicator (system load frequency variations) to track the progress of this outcome
       was dropped when the project was appraised for additional financing, as the related sub-component
       was being financed by the Italian Cooperation Credit. As a result of this, there was no direct indicator
       to measure progress on this outcome (ICR, paragraph 42).
      That said, it was evident that the project contributed to safeguarding dams and supported the
       additional generation of electricity. This was expected to prevent a prolonged fall in hydropower which
       would likely help stabilize the power prices in the SEE region.
      The project also contributed to improving operational practices of existing facilities, which according to
       the ICR (paragraph 42) "enabled Albania’s effective participation in the regional electricity market." In
       addition, by supporting KESH improve its financial reporting


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. While the project enhanced electricity supply through improving dam
                            safety and supporting rehabilitation work, the stability of power supply in the regional electricity market could
                            not be assessed due to the lack of indicators to measure this outcome. Also, stability of power supply in the
                            regional electricity market is a function of other factors related to the electricity grid and demand, and not
                            only generation capacity and dam safety. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
                            rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project succeeded in contributing to safeguarding of the
                            hydroelectric dams on the Drin & Mat River cascades. The project also succeeded in improving dam
                            efficiency and this resulted in an additional generation capacity of 31 GWh of electricity. However, enhancing
                            the stability of power supply in the regional electricity market could not be fully assessed due to dropping the
                            indicator to assess this outcome.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex ante

                               The EFA at appraisal estimated the project's Internal Rate of Return (IRR) at 47% under a 12% discount
                                rate.
                               A cost-benefit analysis of the improvement of dam safety was not undertaken because of the difficulty of
                                estimating the probability of failure of one or more of the dams in the absence of the project. Also, the
                                difficulty of measuring the consequences of failure (PAD, paragraph 72). Also, a cost-benefit
                                analysis was not done for the implementation of a load frequency control system at Vau i Dejes and
                                Fierza.
                               Cost-benefit analyses were carried out for the investment and technical assistance sub-components
                                designed to improve efficiency of operation. Three of the investment sub-components would involve
                                elimination of water leakages, which would result in increased electricity production.



                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



      Economic benefits did not take into account benefits from dam failure prevention.

ex ante

      The economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) ranged from 9.2% (at 7.5 Euro per kWh) to 12.9% (at 20
       Euro per kWh), which was above the 7.5% discount rate.
      The total costs of the infrastructure aspect of the project increased almost three times from EUR17.3
       million at appraisal to EUR48.4 million. Also, the 80 GWh of electricity that were estimated at appraisal to
       be generated annually due to improved reservoir management proved to be unrealistic.
      In order to compare the EIRR fairly, the appraisal analysis was conducted again, excluding the additional
       80 GWh benefits, but including benefits such as GHG emissions and O&M savings (which were included
       only in the second additional financing and ICR) to make it consistent with the ICR economic analysis.
       The resulting ex ante EIRR was 22.5%.
      Implementation efficiency. The implementation period of the project was a total of 13 years, more than
       double the envisioned timeline during appraisal. The first three years of implementation were spent on
       conducting technical and ancillary investments and led to significant delays in the beginning.
       Disbursement was low for the first phase of this project. Delays were also experienced as a result of
       sectoral consolidation which, in turn, led to delays in owners’ engineer being contracted (ICR, paragraph
       73). Procurement issues also contributed to implementation delays with regards to the contract for
       spillway gates and stop-logs rehabilitation works in Fierza and Komani HPPs. The project also faced
       higher costs than originally estimated at appraisal. Cost increases because of new cost items, which
       were discovered during the course of the project, including the extent of rehabilitation needed and higher
       bid prices. Finally, the project implementation was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 related
       restrictions which resulted in an overall slowdown in implementation.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex post EIRR ranged from 9.2% to 12.9% which was below the
original EIRR of 47% at appraisal and the recalculated appraisal EIRR at 22.5%. However, the ex post EIRRs
were above the 7.5% discount rate. The project experienced significant implementation delays and costs
increments. These were partially due to the rushed preparation of such a complex project. That said, with the
added benefits of positive externalities and reduced risk of catastrophic dam failure, the project was
economically justified. The project still generated positive economic returns above the discount rate, despite not
accounting for benefits arising from dam safety improvements.

Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial, despite implementation delays and increments in cost that were not
envisioned during the appraisal.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    57.00
Appraisal                                                 47.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              12.90
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall efficacy was rated Substantial. The project succeeded
in contributing to safeguarding of the hydroelectric dams on the Drin & Mat River cascades. The project
also succeeded in improving dam efficiency and this resulted in an additional generation capacity of 31 GWh of
electricity. However, enhancing the stability of power supply in the regional electricity market was not fully
assessed due to dropping the indicator to assess this outcome. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The
project generated positive economic returns above the discount rate, despite not accounting for benefits arising
from dam safety improvements.

Based on a Substantial rating for each of the three criteria: Relevance of Objectives, Overall Efficacy and
Efficiency, the outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following four risks that could potentially impact the development outcome of the
project:

1. Operational Risks. These were assessed as low, since all of the rehabilitation and refurbishment works
were completed. Other dam safety measures were also in place (ICR, paragraph 102).

2. Sectoral Risks. These were assessed as moderate. KESH’s operating expenses are subject to weather
variability, irregular tariff adjustments, and consistency of payments on electricity invoiced to the Power
Distribution Operator. In turn these factors, might impact KESH’s overall operations and hence the
sustainability of this project. That said, the Bank-financed Power Sector Recovery Project would support the
financial stability of the sector through establishing an escrow account mechanism to ensure timely
payments (ICR, paragraph 103).

3. Country Risks. These were assessed as low. According to the ICR (paragraph 104) the country
rebounded from an economic contraction in 2020, which reduced macroeconomic risks. Also, the

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



Government's National Strategy for Development and Integration (NDSI) highlighted energy as a pillar of
growth, and the Government is committed to secure energy supply. This will help preserve the development
outcome of the project.

4. Environmental/Natural Disasters Risks. Climate related events and/or extended drought are major risks to
the development outcome, as they could directly result in changes in hydrology. Changes in hydrology,
specifically a reduction in the amount of water stored in the dam reservoirs, might lead to a reduction in
hydropower generation and could potentially reverse the gains achieved under the project (ICR, paragraph
105).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The ECSEE APL facility was a key component of the Bank’s
           support for the Stability Pact and the working partnership with the European Commission (PAD,
           paragraph 20). The PDO was in line with the priorities of the Albanian government to develop
           hydropower potential of the country. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies where the
           project was included in the Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report for Albania dated May
           9,2008 (see section 3 for more details).
          Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The technical preparation was guided by the Dam
           Safety Survey (2006) undertaken by the Swiss Secretariat of Economic Affairs (SECO) which
           identified hazards and deficiencies. While the project design in itself was simple, it included
           complex rehabilitation works. Design featured two main activities: (i) physical infrastructure
           rehabilitation and (ii) technical assistance and training. The EFA at appraisal showed high
           economic returns of the project, but did not take into account benefits from dam failure prevention.
          Implementation Readiness. Implementation readiness was poor. While the project included
           complex rehabilitation works, it was prepared relatively fast "to avail the last opportunity for IDA
           window financing as Albania was soon graduating from IDA and the availability of the ECSEE
           allocation (ICR, paragraph 73)". The first three years of implementation experienced low
           disbursement and significant delays as technical and ancillary studies were being
           prepared. Despite that price and physical contingencies were part of the costing exercise, the
           contingency amount was not enough given the complexity of the project (ICR, paragraph 73).
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to have a beneficial
           social impact by improving the safety of the persons living downstream of the dams on the Drin
           and the Mat rivers and by reducing the amount of load-shedding, thereby contributing to poverty
           alleviation (ICR, paragraph 95).
          Environmental aspects. The project was expected to have a positive impact through
           the prevention of a dam failure and associated environmental disasters. According to the ICR
           (paragraph 96) "environmental aspects were studied carefully."
          Fiduciary aspects. Financial management risks were identified at appraisal for: project, company
           and country levels. Overall fiduciary aspects were adequate.
          Adequacy of risks and mitigation measures identification. Three main risks were identified at
           appraisal: financial risks, climate-related risks, and monitoring risks. The main financial risk was


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



         identified as the inability of the sector to finance improvements (maintenance and operations) in
         hydroelectric plants. This risk was mitigated through supporting the financial stability of the sector
         through the parallel Power Sector Recovery Project which put in place an escrow account
         mechanism to ensure timely payments (ICR, paragraph 72). In addition, KESH improved their
         financial reserves through selling additional electricity sales in the regional power market, derived
         from high water levels at its dams. Climate-related risks identified were changes in weather that
         would require temporary shutdowns of plants and hence cause delay. During the Second
         Additional Financing phase, risks from earthquakes and landslides were estimated to be high. The
         monitoring risks were expected to be addressed through the implementation of maintenance and
         the Bank’s monitoring. A project related risk was overlooked where the size and magnitude of
         rehabilitation works turned out to be much larger than initially estimated.
        M&E design. The RF design had shortcomings with regards to the clarity of indicators that
         required multiple revisions during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 68) noted that "the results
         framework could have been developed slightly better."

  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The fast preparation of the project resulted in poor
  implementation readiness and implementation delays. Technical studies were not ready at effectiveness
  and costs of rehabilitation works were underestimated. M&E suffered from design shortcomings that
  necessitated multiple revision to the RF indicators. Overall, QAE suffered from significant shortcomings
  and is therefore rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team had to deal with a project that was prepared very fast, which compromised implementation
 readiness. The Bank supervision conducted 20 implementation support missions over the timeframe of the
 project. According to the ICR (paragraph 99) "the Bank conducted regular, adequately staffed supervision
 missions and site visits with sufficient attention to fiduciary and safeguards aspects." The Bank team
 informed the management regularly about the project progress. The project benefited from continuity
 among the project's task team despite several TTLs overseeing the project due to its time length. The ICR
 (paragraph 99) noted that the Bank team facilitated implementation through addressing issues between the
 contractor and the implementing agency to ensure that the project progress was not delayed further.
 Finally, the Bank team was successful in dealing with a lot of unknowns that surfaced during
 implementation due to the rushed preparation process.

 Overall, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.

 Summary of Bank Performance Assessment. QAE suffered from significant shortcomings as noted
 above. Bank supervision successfully guided the project to achieve its outcomes. Overall, Bank
 Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and
        the results indicators as reported in the PAD. However, the infrastructure and the technical
        components of the project were not described in the ToC and were not reflected in the results
        framework (ICR, paragraph 80). Also, the ToC lacked the assumptions that underpinned the
        achievement of the PDO.
       The first PDO could have benefited from more specificity as it was unclear how the objective was to
        be achieved or what the results meant. For example, the outcome indicator for the first objective
        (to contribute to safeguarding the major hydropower plants in Albania) was total safeguarded
        generation capacity, and this was to be tracked numerically with the end target being 95% of
        Albania’s capacity affected by the safeguard measures. However, it was unclear what this
        percentage meant (ICR, paragraph 80). Also, it was unclear how “enhancing the stability of power
        supply in the regional market” aspect of the PDO was tracked and what intermediate indicators
        were linked to it. The outcome indicator that measured the improvement of system load frequency
        variation was linked to stability, but this outcome indicator was related to the sub-component Vau I
        Dejes and Fierza Dams implementation of load frequency control systems to allow for the
        integration of Albania’s electricity system with Union for the Coordination of Transmission of
        Electricity in Europe (UCTE), and that outcome indicator was later dropped.
       The ICR (paragraph 80) pointed out that the intermediate indicators were designed in "a vague
        manner." For example, it was unclear what physical infrastructure was tracked under the
        intermediate indicator "High Priority Remedial Measures Completed." The intermediate indicators
        were not quantifiable as they answered a simple yes/no question. According to the ICR (paragraph
        80) "baselines were adequately measured." This Review also notes that the RF was deficient in
        indicators that tracked the physical activities supported by the project.
       Overall, M&E design suffered from significant shortcomings related to a deficient Theory of Change,
        poorly defined indicators and lack of indicators to assess the third part of the PDO.



b. M&E Implementation
       Monitoring of the project was conducted via normal review procedures for procurement, regular
         supervision missions, financial monitoring reports, and independent annual audits of the project
         and of KESH’s accounts (ICR, paragraph 80).
        The mid-term review was rescheduled to 2016 to accommodate implementation delays. This
         allowed enough time in order to properly take stock of the situation and propose corrective actions
         to guide the project toward its objectives (ICR, paragraph 81).

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



        Restructuring and revision of the RF indicators. The results indicators were revised to make them
           more robust. Also, the definitions and targets were corrected during implementation to make the
           indicators less ambiguous and simplify data collection. While these actions remedied some M&E
           design weaknesses, the ICR (paragraph 82) noted that not all design shortcomings were
           corrected.



c. M&E Utilization
       M&E data was utilized to assess the project's performance and progress. Dam safety require
           detailed inspection and assessment of structural conditions including underwater and sub-
           surface ones. Monitoring and evaluating the progress of the project helped inform changes and
           create rationales for additional financing (ICR, paragraph 83).

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E Quality is rated Modest. M&E design suffered from
  significant shortcomings, implementation had moderate
  shortcomings, and utilization was adequate.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category B (Partial Assessment). It triggered three safeguard
   policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on
   International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project's environmental impact was overall positive as it aimed
   to prevent a dam failure and any accompanying environmental disaster. Its focus on improving hydrological
   analysis and monitoring and better water management was expected to result in further positive
   environmental impacts (PAD, paragraph 92). Potential negative environmental impacts concern mainly the
   management and disposal of limited waste during rehabilitation works.

   The ICR did not include an explicit statement on the compliance with any of the Bank's safeguard policies.
   Also, no information was reported under Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. An Environmental Assessment report was prepared. In
   terms of health and safety, the ICR (paragraph 87) reported that "workers were well-trained, provided with
   protective kits, and the working conditions were consistent with the World Bank’s requirements." However,
   hazardous waste management experienced some breaches of management protocol and the PMU was
   advised on that.

   Compliance with Social Safeguards. While no social safeguards were triggered at appraisal because
   activities did not require resettlement and/or land acquisition, a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was
   set up. According to the ICR (paragraph 86) the GRM system received no complaints.


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



   Compliance with Safety of Dams. The project involved significant and complex remedial works for Komani
   and Fierza dams. A Panel of Experts for dam safety was established to conduct an independent dam safety
   review as recommended by OP/BP4.37. Also, an Emergency Preparedness Plan and annual operation and
   management reports was prepared. The project contributed to enhancing the dam
   safety and improving operational safety and reliability of three hydroelectric dams in Albania. The project
   also contributed to developing institutional capacity for dam safety both at the operational and governance
   level (ICR, paragraph 88).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 89) "the financial management, funds flow
   and disbursement arrangements for the project have been adequate and in compliance with Bank
   requirements." FM benefited from experienced and qualified FM experts. There were no significant issues
   and reporting conditions were revealed by the external audits of the project financial statements. However,
   FM ratings were mostly affected by an overall weak financial reporting at the company level and delays in
   audits (ICR, paragraph 89). The ICR (paragraph 89) pointed out that KESH had low consideration to the
   technical expertise of the audit and consulting firms when it came to selecting and appointing auditors. This
   practice was challenging to efforts by project management to improve FM reporting quality.

   Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 90) "procurement was conducted as per the rules of the
   World Bank." However, in 2015 there were delays by the implementing agency in the processing of the Bid
   Evaluation Report (BER) for the rehabilitation of spillways. Procurement performance was downgraded to
   moderately unsatisfactory as the evaluation bids were delayed. Also, the contract award for the main
   package (the spillway package) failed 3 times. It took more than a year for concluding the bid evaluations
   and signing the contract as client was late in addressing the Bank's comments on bid evaluations.
   This delayed the project implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were unintended outcomes (ICR, paragraph 61).



d. Other
   There were no other outcomes (ICR, paragraph 61).



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



                                                                                QAE had significant
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included eight lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Ensuring implementation readiness for complex infrastructure projects is critical to avoid
future delays during implementation. Early preparation of documents and sites can help avoid
unnecessary initial delays. Feasibility studies and technical designs need to be identified during the
preparation stage and concluded by the time the project goes to the Board. However, often, studies
might take longer, and projects need to be prepared fast (depending on whether the bank is
ensuring the IDA window is met or some regional concessional financing window). In such cases, a
vertical Multi Phase Programmatic Approach (MPA)could be utilized wherein the technical
studies represent the first phase and some rehabilitation works to correctly identify issues and major
infrastructure investment could be the second and/or third phases.

2. The timing of support and coordination between development partners is important to
ensure timely completion of project activities. While the project served as remarkable example
of cooperation between financial development institutions, the timing of support and coordination
needed to be planned better. For instance, Vau I Dejes works were originally supposed to be funded
by the World Bank and had been part of the project appraisal, and KfW took over the project at a
much later stage. Similarly, EBRD did not come into the picture before 2011. Proper delineation of
tasks during the appraisal stage could have helped bring on EBRD and KfW at an earlier stage to
complete the project earlier. Proactive coordination and collaboration between various development
partners need to be improved by proper communication between the World Bank, the Government,
and other bilateral and multilateral partners before or during appraisal.

3. Regional adaptive program loans, such as the ECSEE APL, are complex operations
that need sufficient time and resources to conduct technical studies, engage client
governments, and train implementation agencies to ensure technical correctness,
implementation feasibility, and political supportability. The program has shown that regional
energy market development is a complex and long-term undertaking and is affected by national/EU
regulations. The main challenges in the implementation of such projects could range from the
implementation of a regional action plan for a wholesale market to the integration of transmission
lines into a regional network.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)



  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Further assessment of the APL program is warranted to assess the achievement of the program's objective.
  Also, this project had a poor M&E design, and further assessment would allow verifying the achieved results
  on the ground as well as generating useful lessons for similar future operations.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that M&E design had shortcomings which were partially corrected
during implementation. That said, enough data was collected to enabled tracking the progress of activities and
assessing the achievement of the PDO. However, the third element of the PDO could not be assessed as the
indicator tracking its outcome was dropped.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on
outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the
project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to the extent possible to justify most
of the assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was adequate. However, the efficiency analysis could have
benefited from further evidence to justify the validity of the project investments.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. However, reporting on safeguards did not include an explicit statement on
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies, and no information was reported under Projects on International
Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). Also, the ICR did not discuss the impact of the restructurings and associated
changes in the RF on the ToC. The results reported in Annex 1 were lengthy and could have benefited from
some consolidation. Finally, the ICR reported component costs in Euros rather than US dollars.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ECSEE APL 5 DAM SAFETY (P110481)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
