     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



                                                                                        Report Number: ICRR0022983

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                       Project Name
 P115886                                          BJ: Agricultural Diversification

 Country                                          Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                            Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                                 Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48840,IDA-60130,IDA-H6550,TF-                15-Dec-2016                                          85,002,759.75
 99692

 Bank Approval Date                               Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Mar-2011                                      30-Sep-2021

                                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                  31,000,000.00                                    15,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                   85,255,056.13                                    14,851,926.28

 Actual                                               85,932,453.99                                    14,851,926.28




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                      ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Richard Anson                 Ebru Karamete                    Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the IDA Agreements (IDA H6550, IDA 48840, IDA
   60130), Trust Fund Agreement (TFA 99692) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2010), was to:
   “restore and improve productivity and value addition for selected value chains in the Recipients’
   territory”.



                                                                                                         Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



   While the PDO of Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project (PADA) remained the same, the Project
   had several restructurings and increased some of the key outcome and impact level targets (see below).

   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved (Section 4), this review parses the PDO
   into two objectives:

   Objective 1: to restore and improve productivity for selected value chains;

   Objective 2: to restore and improve value addition for selected value chains.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1) Adoption of Improved Technologies and Restoration of Productivity (Original allocation: US$21 million;
   Revised allocation: US$29 million; Actual cost: US$ 31.0 million). This component aimed to support the
   restoration of farmers’ means of subsistence in flood-damaged areas and the adoption of improved
   technologies. Specifically, the project: supported the production of cereals (maize and rice), aquaculture,
   and livestock through the acquisition and distribution of production inputs to farmers; provided matching
   grants to strengthen producers’ and agro-processors’ access to improved technologies, and competitive
   grants to finance innovative activities for the development of the targeted value chains, including rice,
   cashew, pineapple, and aquaculture;

   2) Development/rehabilitation of Production and Market Infrastructures (Original allocation: US$13 million;
   Revised allocation: US$32.5 million; Actual cost: US$ 26.0 million). This component supported both the
   development/rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and the expansion/improvements of market
   infrastructure. With regard to irrigation infrastructure, the project supported primarily the rehabilitation and
   development of irrigation systems for the rice value chain. With regard to market infrastructure, project
   support under this component funded the construction and rehabilitation of critical market and storage
   facilities (for input and product storage and marketing), and provided critical market information and
   services to beneficiaries (especially spatial price information for inputs and outputs), in synergy and
   complementarity with similar value chain development projects;

   3) Value Chain Coordination and Access to Finance for Private Initiatives (Original allocation: US$
   5.6 million; Revised allocation: US$15.1 million; Actual cost: US$ 13.9 million). This component aimed to
   build value chain coordination institutions/access to markets and to facilitate agricultural financing through:
   (a) supporting creation of well-structured inter-professions, the organization of producers and strengthening
   roles and partnerships between private and public stakeholders involving targeted value chains; (b)
   financing provision of key development services, market information systems, quality control


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



  systems/standards, market promotion at regional and international levels; (c) facilitating access to financial
  services among project beneficiaries along targeted value chains;

  4) Sector Program Coordination and Project Management (Original allocation: US$6.4 million; Revised
  allocation: US$14.4 million; Actual cost: US$15 million). This component aimed to: (a) strengthen the
  capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP) to coordinate the agriculture sector
  program through: financing studies and consultant services that support the expanded role of the private
  sector and enhanced implementation of sector coordination tools; strengthening of fiduciary capacities; and
  improving the quality and targeting of public expenditures in agriculture sector; (b) support project
  management and monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (i) Project Cost: The total original project cost was US$61.4 million (including counterpart contribution of
  $15.4 million from Government and beneficiaries). With an Additional Financing (AF) of $ 45 million
  (approved in 2017), the resulting total project cost was US$ 106.4 million. The actual project cost/actual
  disbursements at closing was US$97.9 million (or 92%). The difference was due to cancellation of some
  IDA funds, lagging implementation of some components and decrease in the Government’s counterpart
  contribution (see ICR, Data Sheet and Annex 3).

  (ii) Financing: At approval, the financing amounts included: IDA Credit:$25 million; IDA grant: $6 million;
  Trust Funds (grant): $15 million; Government counterpart funds: $8.7 million; contributions from beneficiary
  local communities: $6.7 million. An AF IDA Credit was added in 2017, for $45 million, totaling $106.4 million.
  By the closing of the project, total financing and actual disbursements were: $97.9 million, with: World Bank
  (IDA and TF): $85.9 million; Government counterpart contributions: $3 million; and beneficiary contributions:
  $9 million.

  (iii) Borrower/Community Contribution: The original contribution from Government was $8.7 million, and
  from beneficiary local communities was $6.7 million. At closing, the final contribution/disbursements from
  Government was $3.0 million and from local communities was $9.0 million (77% and 134%, respectively).
  The lower contribution from Government was due primarily to the “limited fiscal space and budgetary
  constraints”, experienced especially after the initial 3 years of implementation. The fiscal challenges added
  by COVID also contributed to the lower Government counterpart contributions.

  (iv) Dates: The project was approved on March 22, 2011, became effective on March 13, 2012. A mid-
  term review was carried out in 2014. The original closing date was December 15, 2016, with the actual
  closing being September 30, 2021 (i.e., an extension 57 months). This extension was due to enable
  implementation of additional financing, which was coupled with increased targets, and also due to some
  implementation delays, exacerbated by COVID conditions in Benin.

  (v) Restructurings and Significant Changes During Implementation: While the Agricultural Productivity
  and Diversification Project had four level-2 restructurings (2014, 2016, 2021), coupled with additional
  financing (2017), the PDO remained the same, while increasing some of the key outcome and impact level
  targets. The main revisions included: (i) 2014: to reallocate TF proceeds between disbursement categories
  to help finance additional food security-related subprojects; (ii) 2016: to reallocate IDA funds between
  disbursement categories to correct original under allocations and to enable smooth completion of project
  activities; (iii) 2017: to provide additional IDA financing ($45 M) to: consolidate and scale-up Project

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



   achievements and strengthen project focus on income-generating activities and improving nutritional status
   of poor households; to extend the closing date; increased targets for various targets in the results
   framework; (iv) 2021: to reallocate IDA resources between disbursement categories to support Government
   response to the disruption of food supplies due to the COVID-19 pandemic; to cancel some of the IDA
   resources, and to reallocate funds between disbursement categories, consistent with updated project
   requirements. Available information in the ICR (and other reports) suggests that none of the Project’s grant
   funds were cancelled. The ICR provides further details on the above changes (ICR, paras. 16 – 18,
   including Table 1). The ICR also provides a sound rationale for the above restructurings, which included
   increased output and outcome targets, consistent with the Project’s reconstructed theory of change (see
   below).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project’s objectives were highly relevant to addressing the country’s key developmental challenges
(especially pervasive poverty, high population growth, limited diversification of economy, external shocks)
and food crisis, and to contributing to the implementation and achievement of the country’s main
developmental strategies. At the country level, the country developmental strategy, known as “Benin – 2025
– Alafia”, accorded high priority to the agricultural sector, especially with respect to improving productivity,
strengthening diversification and value chain development, and increasing agricultural exports. The project
also was consistent with and supported operationalizing various other related strategies, including (ICR,
paras. 5, 29): Benin’s long-term development strategy (Benin 2025 – “Alafia”); Benin’s Growth and Poverty
Reduction Strategy (2011 – 2015); Benin Development Strategy and Orientation document (2006 – 2011);
Benin’s Strategic Plan to Revitalize the Agricultural Sector; National Agricultural Investment Plan (2010 –
2014), consistent with the framework of the AU-supported Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development
Program (CAADP; Benin’s National Agricultural Development Strategy -2025; National Agricultural
Investment and Food and Nutritional Security Plan (2017 – 2025);

The project (PADA) development objectives were and remained during implementation strongly aligned
with and implemented key pillars and elements of the Bank’s strategy documents and various analytical
reports of economic and sector work (ESW), including: Country Economic Memorandum for Benin (2009);
Country Assistance Strategy/CAS (2010), which emphasized strengthening competitiveness, accelerating
private sector-led growth and diversification, in support of increased growth and reduced poverty; Bank’s
analytical work, especially with reference to: “Sustainable Options for Agricultural Diversification in Benin”,
2010); Country Partnership Framework/CPF (FY19 – FY23), especially with respect to focus area 1
(increased productivity, improved quality of infrastructure, improving environment for private sector
investment and competitiveness) and to focus area 3 (increased climate resilience). Accordingly, the
project’s focus on promoting increased productivity and competitive value addition were very relevant,
coupled with Government’s capacity and commitment to pursue these objectives at the operational level.

Accordingly, the project’s design at appraisal and additional financing stages used/applied the results of the
relevant analytical and strategic documents from Government and the Bank, guided by sound criteria, in the
selection of the five crops and strategic livestock commodities supported by the project. The selection



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



               criteria included commodities which would promote inclusive agricultural growth, reduce poverty and
               enhance food security.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To restore and improve productivity for selected value chains.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), but did
                             not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR
                             constructed a ToC for the project, which was consistent with the overall PDO, core outcomes and
                             components (ICR, para. 8 and Figure 1). The ICR figure on the ToC highlights the rationale for, operational
                             logic and linkages among various interventions/activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes, “To
                             restore and improve productivity for selected value chains” (ICR, para. 8). The project pursued a sound
                             strategy and design through promoting increased food crop, livestock and fish production, and increased high
                             value crop production and processing for exports (e.g., cashews and pineapples), coupled with strengthened
                             market linkages for smallholders. Accordingly, this strategy was envisioned to contribute to the broader
                             objectives of enhanced food security, increased farmer incomes and improved trade balance.

                             Theory of Change:

                             Restored/improved productivity would be achieved through (with Figure 1 of ICR showing the linkages
                             between outcomes, intermediate outcomes, outputs and priority activities): the expanded provision and use of
                             farm inputs, expanded/rehabilitated small-scale irrigation facilities, the replenishment of the stocks of small
                             livestock and fish stock, with improved breeds and fingerlings, the vaccination of livestock, expanded and
                             improved advisory services, and increased competitive funds and matching grants to farmers, expanded
                             partnerships between farmers and other key actors in the supply and marketing chain.

                             Key IRIs/Outputs (ICR, Annex 1):

                             In summary, the project provided improved technologies on crop production, vaccination services for
                             improved animal health, improved breeds for livestock, as well as small scale irrigation services. All the
                             revised output targets for the various activities were exceeded, with the exception of small-scale irrigation
                             works, where achievements were slightly lower than the targets. Below are further details.

                             (i) Area Planted with Improved Technology Disseminated (has):


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



(a) Total: Original Target: 59,000; Revised Target (2017): 88,000; Actual: 135,549; Actual as % of Revised:
154%;

(b) Pineapple: Original Target: 5,000; Revised Target (2017): 8,000; Actual: 8,509; Actual as % of Revised:
106%;

(c) Cashew: Original Target: 30,000; Revised Target (2017): 45,000; Actual: 79,090; Actual as % of Revised:
176%;

(d) Rice: Original Target: 24,000; Revised Target (2017): 35,000; Actual: 47,950; Actual as % of Revised:
137%;

(ii) No. of Animals Participating in Vaccination Campaign:

(a) Total: Original Target: 1.5 million; Actual: 2.5 million; Actual as % of Target: 167%;

(b) No. of Small Ruminants: Original Target: 0.5 million; Actual: 0.7 million; Actual as % of Target: 140%;

(c) No. of Poultry Birds: Original Target: 1 million; Actual: 1.7 million; Actual as % of Target: 170%;

(iii) No. of Livestock Producers Using Improved Breeding Stock: Original Target: 3,000; Actual: 4,540; Actual
as % of Target: 151%;

(iv) Area (has.) provided with small-scale irrigation & drainage services:

(a) Total: Original Target: 9,000; Revised Target (2017): 12,678; Actual: 11,828; Actual as % of Revised
Target: 93%;

(b) Rehabilitated Area: Original Target: 4,500; Revised Target (2017): 6,950; Actual: 6,450; Actual as % of
Revised Target: 92%;

(c) New Area: Original Target: 4,500; Revised Target (2017): 5,728; Actual: 5,378; Actual as % of Revised
Target: 94%;

Key Outcomes

The PDO was to be assessed through the following outcome indicators, all of which were adequate to
measure the objective and all of which achieved or exceeded their target values: (i) percentage of
beneficiaries using improved technologies; (ii) yields for crops and fisheries; (iii) farmer adoption of improved
technology and restoration of productivity. The main achievements vis-à-vis the outcome indicators are
highlighted below (with further details in the ICR, Annex 1)

(i) Percentage of Project Beneficiaries using improved technologies disseminated through the Project:

(a) Agro-processors: Original Target: 69 %; Revised Target (2017): 80%; Actual: 100; Actual as % of
Revised Target: 125%;




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



(b) Producers: Original Target: 78 %; Revised Target (2017): 80%; Actual: 91; Actual as % of Revised Target:
114%;

(ii) Yields of Crops and Fish (Crops: metric tons/MT per ha.; Fish: MT/ha./year):

(a) Maize: Original Target: 1.5; Revised Target (2017): 3.0; Actual: 2.97 ; Actual as % of Revised Target: 99
%;

(b) Pineapple: Original Target: 60; Revised Target (2017): 70; Actual: 72 ; Actual as % of Revised Target:103
%;

(c) Cashew: Original Target: 0.7; Revised Target (2017): 0.8; Actual: 0.81; Actual as % of Revised
Target:101% ;

(d) Rice: Original Target: 5.0; Revised Target (2017):6.0 ; Actual: 6.2 ; Actual as % of Revised Target: 103%;

(e) Fish: Original Target: 6.0; Actual: 6.5 ; Actual as % of Revised Target: 108 %;

(iii) Adoption of Improved Technologies and Restoration of Productivity (No., 000s)

(a) No. of Project Beneficiaries of relief activities: Original Target: 257; Revised Target (2017): 215.5; Actual:
215.5; Actual as % of Revised Target: 100 %;

(b) No. of maize growers: Original Target: 50; Revised Target (2017): 27; Actual: 27; Actual as % of Revised
Target: 100 %;

(c) No. of Rice Growers: Original Target: 6 ; Revised Target (2017): 7.1; Actual: 7.1; Actual as % of Revised
Target: 100 %;

(d) No. of Livestock Producers: Original Target: 200 ; Revised Target (2017): 170; Actual: 170; Actual as % of
Revised Target: 100%;

(e) No. of Fish Farmers: Original Target: 1; Revised Target (2017): 1.5; Actual: 1.5; Actual as % of Revised
Target: 100 %;

Based on the above evidence (and further details in the ICR), the efficacy with which Objective 1 was
achieved is rated Substantial. The majority of the output and outcome targets (most revised upwards) were
achieved (i.e., of 23 targets, 60% were exceeded, 22% were equaled, and 18% were slightly below the
target). It is noteworthy that all of the revised upwards yield targets for all of the target commodities were
exceeded, which also is consistent with exceeding the targets for farmer adoption of improved technologies,
reflecting also improved provision of inputs and agricultural services. At the same time, the ICR (para. 74)
recognized there were various external constraints to enable the existing seed system to generate/supply
enough improved seeds to producers, thereby limiting the widespread adoption of improved seeds, and
achieving higher yield levels; this seeds constraint also helps explain the difference in the estimated
economic rate of return of the project (at appraisal and ICR stages; see below, sections 5 and 12/Lesson 1).




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To restore and improve value addition for selected value chains

Rationale
Similar to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is reflected in the project’s original design and in the
Theory of Change reconstructed in the ICR (para. 8 and Figure 1) with respect to the priority project-funded
activities, which contributed to generating strategic outputs, which, in turn, contributed to generating
sustainable intermediate outcomes and strategic outcomes involving increased value addition of key value
chains (milled rice, pro processed cashew nuts, pineapple juice, and exports of pineapple and cashew). (See
key output and outcome indicators below). The project’s AF/restructuring also contributed to achieving (and
exceeding in most cases) strategic outputs and outcomes, thereby contributed to the broader objectives of
accelerated agricultural growth and reduced rural poverty.

Theory of Change: The ToC (ICR, Figure 1) identifies and illustrates the linkages between the two of the
four project components with respect to a sound results chain involving the linkages between the priority
activities/actions and resulting outputs, which then contributed to generating the intermediate outcomes, and
to the core outcome, with respect to objective 2. More specifically, improved value addition would be achieved
through the provision of processing facilities and equipment for targeted crops, for construction of storage
facilities and drying area areas, the provision of business development services, such as quality control,
grading standards, market information services, and the participation of producers to trade fairs and market
prospections, and for establishment of permanent market linkages, competitive funds and matching grants,
and improved advisory services to farmers, processors and value chain actors, funded through various
channels/mechanisms. This included support for establishing ten ESOPs (Business Services and Producer
Organizations) established by the Project to support rice processing. The project also supported various
legislative initiatives to promote an expanded role of the private sector in promoting competitive value chain
development, although experienced some delays (see Lesson 2 below). Strengthened institutional policy,
legislative, coordination, environment and implementation capacities for the agricultural sector (component 4),
involving farmers and their organizations, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP)
would help ensure effective implementation of the above activities and sustained achievement of the two
objectives.

Key Outputs/Intermediate Results (ICR, Annex 1, with “intermediate results shown with *):

Based on the above ToC, the project met or exceeded almost all of output targets for carrying out
activities involving: marketing of food and cash crops; marketing infrastructure; access to finance; subproject
competitive fund; establishment of SMEs; performance-based management information system.

(i) Number of Market Infrastructure Built or Rehabilitated: * Original Target: 100; Revised Target (2017): 200;
Actual: 236; Actual as % of Revised Target: 118 %;

(ii) Quantity (000s of Metric Tons) of products collected and stored in Project area:*



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



(a) Cashew: Original Target: 10 ; Revised Target (2017): 25 ; Actual: 111.3 ; Actual as % Revised Target:
445 %;

(b) Maize: Original Target: 10; Revised Target (2017): 50; Actual: 52.9 ; Actual as % of Revised Target: 102
%;

(c) Rice: Original Target: 20; Revised Target (2017): 40; Actual: 40.4 ; Actual as % of Revised Target: 101%;

(iii) No. of Drying areas built in support of rice value chain *: Original Target: 100; Actual: 65; Actual as % of
Target: 65 %;

(iv) No. of Inter-professions created *: Original Target: 2; Revised Target (2017): 4; Actual: 4; Actual as % of
Revised Target: 100 %;

(v) Percentage of cotton producer groups trained: Original Target: 100; Actual: 100; Actual as % of Target:
100%;

(vi) Percentage of Project beneficiaries receiving agricultural credit: * Original Target: 10; Revised Target:
15; Actual: 58; Actual as % of Target: 387 %;

(vii) Number of Innovative Subprojects financed by the competitive fund: *

(a) Total: Original Target: 8; Revised Target: 52; Actual: 52 ; Actual as % of Target: 100 %;

(b) Rice: Original Target: 2; Revised Target:11; Actual: 11; Actual as % of Target: 100 %;

(c) Cashew: Original Target: 2; Revised Target: 9; Actual: 9; Actual as % of Target: 100 %;

(d) Fish: Original Target: 2; Revised Target 20; Actual: 20; Actual as % of Target: 100 %;

(e) Pineapple: Original Target: 2; Revised Target: 12; Actual: 12 ; Actual as % of Target: 100 %;

(viii) Percentage Rate of Loan Repayment (among project beneficiaries):* Original Target: 90; Revised
Target: 95; Actual: 97.7; Actual as % of Target: 103 %;

(ix) Number of Micro Projects Transformed into SMEs:* Original Target: 20; Actual: 23; Actual % of Target:
115 %;

(x) Number of micro-projects funded through matching grants: * Original Target: 180; Actual: 242; Actual as %
of Target: 134 %;

(xi) Percentage of Projects monitored through MAEP M&E system: * Original Target: 75; Revised Target: 100;
Actual: 100; Actual as % of Target: 100 %;

(xii) Percentage of Budget Execution ratio of agricultural sector program: * Original Target: 70; Revised
Target: 90; Actual: 82; Actual as % of Revised Target: 91 %;




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



                            (xiii) Percentage of Execution ratio of approved Project’s work plan and budget: * Original Target: 100; Actual:
                            84; Actual as % of Target: 84 %;

                            (xiv) Number of reports published by project-supported organizations on findings of beneficiaries’ feedback: *
                            Original Target: 6; Actual: 7; Actual as % of Target: 117 %;

                            Key Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1)

                            As shown below, the project-generated outcome targets were exceeded in most cases, involving processed
                            and exported high value commodities.

                            (i) Quantity of processed target crop in project area: (000s of Metric Tons):

                            (a) Total: Original Target: 72.2 ; Revised Target: 240; Actual: 293.4; Actual as % of Revised Target: 122 %;

                            (b) Pineapple Juice: Original Target: 10; Revised Target: 125; Actual: 132.6; Actual as % Revised Target:106
                            %;

                            (c) Processed Cashew: Original Target: 2.2; Revised Target: 15; Actual: 47.9; Actual as % Revised Target:
                            319 %;

                            (d) Milled Rice: Original Target: 60; Revised Target: 100; Actual: 112.8; Actual as % of Revised Target: 113
                            %;

                            (ii) Quantity of Exported Cashew and pineapple: (000s of Metric Tons):

                            (a) Total: Original Target: 74; Revised Target: 350 ; Actual: 477.7; Actual as % of Revised Target: 136 %;

                            (b) Cashew: Original Target: 44; Revised Target: 200; Actual: 218.8; Actual as % of Revised Target: 109 %;

                            (c) Pineapple: Original Target: 30; Revised Target: 150; Actual: 258.6; Actual as % of Revised Target: 172 %.

                            In summary, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated Substantial, because the majority of
                            the output and outcome targets (most revised upwards) were achieved (i.e., of 16 targets, 56% were
                            exceeded, 25% were equaled, and 19% were slightly below the target). It is noteworthy that all of the revised
                            upwards yield targets for all of the target commodities were exceeded, which also is consistent with the
                            targets for farmer adoption of improved technologies, reflecting also improved provision of inputs and
                            agricultural services.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)




  Rationale
  The overall efficacy of the extent to which the original objectives (which remained the same), and their original
  and revised-upward targets (arising in the main restructuring carried out in 2017, which also included AF),
  were achieved is rated Substantial. The project substantially achieved Objective 1: productivity for selected
  value chains (rice, cashews, pineapple, livestock and fisheries) were improved and restored, as evidenced by
  improved yields and adopted technologies. Also, the project substantially achieved Objective 2: value addition
  for selected and strategic value chains were improved/restored, as well as evidence of generating increased
  exports of processed goods.

  As indicated above, most of the output and outcome targets were met or exceeded (26 of 32 targets, or about
  81%). It is noteworthy that all of the outcome targets were met for both objectives. Regarding the output
  targets which were not met, the percentages in most cases were above 80% of the targets (and most were
  revised upwards). It is noted that the AF in 2017 introduced increased targets for nearly all of the
  performance indicators. Also, the project’s evaluation study provided relevant evidence to support the solid
  achievements of the above-mentioned output and outcome targets, as well as to strengthening institutional
  capacities of the key Ministries and farmer-based organizations, coupled with legislative reforms on clarifying
  and expanding the roles of the private sector, to help sustain the increased benefits with respect to increased
  productivity and competitive value chain development of the target crops/value chains.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project’s performance and empirical analyses demonstrated an efficiency rating of Substantial,
based on the application of various evidenced-based tools and analyses applied and presented in the ICR (ICR,
paras. 37 – 42, and Annex 4, present further details). The methodology and results used to assess the project’s
efficiency involved applying sound economic and financial analyses (EFA), with respect to the project’s
components assessed at appraisal. The ICR used a mix of methods and based on a cost-benefit approach to
estimate the incremental benefits attributable to the project’s activities, outputs and outcomes, together with a
cost analysis to assess the efficient use of resources. The ICR used a total of 13 “representative” models linked
to the four main value chains, as the basis for the economic and financial analyses (and using “economic prices”
and financial prices, respectively, for the EFA), using standard methodology to generate incremental benefits
based on “without” and “with” project scenarios for farmers and processing units targeted by the project. The
EFA used various sources of information (including project M&E data, the Government’s project completion
report, various studies on the project’s impact evaluation, available information from other relevant projects in
Benin, discussions with various agricultural sector experts to validate key assumptions and information used.

(a) Economic Analyses: At appraisal of the original project (in 2010), the project’s economic internal rate of
return (EIRR) was estimated at 33.1 %, and a net present value/NPV of $54.6 million. At appraisal of the AF
(2017), the EIRR for the project was estimated at 15.3 %. Both EIRRs resulted from the project’s activities to
improve productivity and value addition of the target value chains, based on the following 6 main types of
interventions: (i) the investments in the production and agro-processing related to the selected value chains:
maize, cashew, rice, pineapple, livestock, and aquaculture; (ii) the adoption of improved production techniques;

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



(iii) the expansion of production area; (iv) improved crop production and productivity; (v) improved aquaculture
production; (vi) increased processing and exports; and (vii) the provision of market facilities.

The ex-post EIRR of PADA was estimated at 16.6 %, the NPV at US$ 33.5 million over a 15-year period (based
on a social discount rate of 6 percent), and a benefit-cost ratio estimated at 1.9. The sensitivity
analysis indicates that the results are robust for small to moderate delays, cost overruns, and reduction in
benefits (see ICR, Annex 4 for further details). While the ex-post EIRR and NPV of PADA are below the
estimates at appraisal (2010) – EIRR of 16.6% vs. 33.1%, respectively --, the ICR results fall close to those of
the additional financing (2017) – EIRR of 15.3%. The ICR concluded that the higher EIRR reflected a “likely
overestimation of the project’s potential returns at design,” (ICR, para. 39), especially with respect to the yield
assumptions; the ICR also noted “the yields obtained under the with-project scenario, although higher, they are
still far from reaching the potential yields”(ICR, para. 39). Therefore, these 2 factors explain the above
difference in the estimated EIRRs.

(b) Financial Analyses: Similar to the economic analysis, the project’s financial analyses is based on the
incremental benefits and financial profitability arising from the 4 project components/associated activities which
helped generate increased crop productivity and value addition of the five target value chains (i.e., rice, maize,
pineapple, cashew, aquaculture). Accordingly, the ICR conducted the financial analyses to assess the
profitability of the proposed project activities (with-project (WP) situation), modelled from the perspective of the
target beneficiaries, and compared with the without-project (WOP) situation. The ICR prepared a total of 13
models to assess the financial profitability of the five target value chains, and estimated costs and benefits
experienced by the project’s beneficiaries, using market prices. The ICR showed and concluded that: (i) all
farming activities supported by the project generate positive additional benefits, ranging from US$ 34 for rainfed
rice production to US$ 781 for irrigated rice production; (ii) the targeted processors secured significant
incremental benefits, in the range of US$ 12,206 – $23,477 per year. For further details, see ICR, Annex 4.

(c) Efficiency of Project Expenditures: The ICR highlighted 4 other efficiency aspects of the project, namely: (i)
less funds were disbursed to achieve the expected results at project closing; (ii) the project was implemented
without cost overruns; (iii) available data on project expenditures (see ICR, Annex 3) exhibited the project’s
administrative and cost efficiency, based on high disbursement rates of most components (about 90 %); (iv)
most of the PDO, output and outcome targets were revised upwards (with AF in 2017), achieved or exceeded,
whereby the AF consolidated and scaled-up the project’s achievements. The ICR recognizes that the project
also showed some administrative inefficiencies which contributed to project delays and extension of the closing
date, especially due to “cumbersome” procurement procedures for irrigation works and to COVID-related
restrictions introduced by Government (ICR, paras. 53 and 55, respectively).

In summary, the positive EFA and other efficiency indicators/assessment (e.g., administrative and disbursement)
suggest that that the project’s overall efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)




                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    90.00
Appraisal                                                 33.10
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    90.00
ICR Estimate                                              16.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating is based on the assessment of the 3 dimensions as summarized above, namely:

(a) High rating for Relevance of Objectives: This rating is based on the project’s initial and continued
(throughout implementation) strong alignment of objectives and activities with: Government’s national and
agriculture sector policies and strategies, and contribution to key targets; the Bank’s CAS and CPS during the
preparation and implementation period of the project, and various analytical reports.

(b) Substantial rating for Efficacy: The project substantially achieved its objective of improving productivity
and promoting strategic and competitive and value chains. It is noteworthy that all of the outcome targets were
met for both objectives, including the increased targets that were revised during the AF., The project’s
evaluation study provided relevant evidence to support the solid achievements of the above-mentioned output
and outcome targets as well as to strengthening institutional capacities of the key Ministries and farmer-based
organizations to help sustain the increased benefits with respect to increased productivity and competitive value
chain development of the target crops/value chains.

(c) Substantial rating for Efficiency: The ICR’s sound ex-post quantitative and qualitative analyses
demonstrated favorable economic, financial and administrative efficiencies and progress in achieving and
exceeding most of the targets.

Based on the IEG guidelines (IEG, 2017, p. 46 – 48), a split evaluation was not undertaken, mainly because the
PDO remained the same, and the additional financing/AF enabled the project to increase its geographical
scope, and to increase most of its outcome, intermediate result and output targets. Accordingly, the assessment
of the entire project is based on the revised/upwards output and outcome targets, and achievements (see
above).


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Overall, the ICR concludes there is modest risk to sustaining the project’s developmental outcomes, based
on the following evidence and conclusions presented in the ICR, and also consistent with other relevant
analyses/reports (ICR, paras. 70 - 73). Given the nature of the risks, “external factors” (ICR, para. 73) and


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



the remaining implementation uncertainties of many of the risk-mitigation measures, this ICRR concludes
that a more realistic risk assessment is “moderate to substantial” risks.

(a) Project design and implementation incorporated and carried out sound sustainability mechanisms to help
ensure project impacts with respect to objective 1 (increased productivity) are sustained, including (para. 70):

   (i) project’s support for capacity building of interprofessional and farmers’ apex organizations within the
targeted value chains (cashew, pineapple, rice, and fish) targeted         towards producers’ organizations
would help ensure the continued advisory support and services to beneficiaries after project closure, and
help maintain the progress           achieved in terms of productivity improvements;

   (ii) project’s support to the seeds subsector, including a national seed crop strategy, would likely
contribute to seed availability for improved seed by farmers, while          recognizing there are still
remaining challenges (see below);

   (iii) project’s support and capacity building for various key public entities providing services to the
agricultural sector, so they can continue providing capacity building,          advisory services, monitoring,
quality control, and other supports to beneficiaries within their respective mandates, even after project
closing. Also, a follow-up Bank-            supported project (Agricultural Competitiveness and Diversification
Project, PACOFIDE – P168132) is providing technical and financial support to many of these
public        entities to strengthen their capacities to provide/sustain these technical services, and also to
contribute to sustaining the project’s PDO.

(b) Project design and implementation incorporated and carried out sound sustainability mechanisms to help
ensure project impacts with respect to objective 2 (expanded value chain development) are sustained,
including (ICR, para. 71):

    (i) provision of storage and processing facilities, as well as training, operations manuals, beneficiary-led
committees, with on-going support from the Ministry, to ensure            efficient operations and sustained use of
infrastructure for processing and storage;

     (ii) continued access to finance is being enabled by a Memo of Understanding signed with the National
Fund for Agricultural Development (FNDA), which has a national           mandate to enable expanded to
finance in various sectors, as well as through fostering the engagement of various private financial
institutions, which are expected to         provide continued support to the value chains;

     (iii) continued and increased support for increased exports of cashew and pineapple, which is expected
to be enabled by the National Agency for the Promotion of              Investments and Exports (APIEx),
which has this mandate. Also, the ongoing Bank Project (PACOFIDE) is strengthening the capacity of APIEx
to fulfill its mandate.

At the same time, the ICR correctly highlights three specific risk factors which could potentially threaten the
sustainability of the project’s achievements, affecting both Objectives 1 and 2, namely (ICR, para. 72):

(a) Insufficient support to seed research and supply system, and a sub optimal organization of public
research institutions to supply the needed volume of breeder seed for onward multiplication by seed
producers and private seed companies, could affect the availability of improved seeds and planting
materials, animal breeds and fingerlings; the ICR team recognizes challenges in ensuring adequate
enforcement of the harmonized seed regulatory framework; the ICR team also highlighted the on-going role

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



of the Bank-supported PACOFIDE Project, especially with respect to supporting a stronger private sector
role in the seeds subsector (refer to note from ICR team to IEG evaluator, dated August 10, 2022);

(b) Uncertain sustainability of the ten ESOP (Business Services and Producer Organizations) established by
the Project to support rice processing, due to various governance and operational challenges, including
access to finance and adequate operational funds. It will be important that the Bank’s follow-up
projects/agricultural portfolio in Benin provide monitoring to help ensure these ESOPs continue to operate;

(c) Various external factors, including (ICR, para. 73): pressures induced by COVID restrictions; significant
decrease in Government revenues and capacity to sustain/increase its allocations to the agricultural sector to
ensure sustained services; fall in the demand of agricultural products in local, regional and international
markets; and periodic natural disasters and increasing threats of climate shocks affecting stable and
increased production supplies of the targeted value chains.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The quality-at-entry of PADA (identification, preparation and appraisal) is rated Satisfactory, based on the
  following evidence (ICR, para. 66):

  (i) project preparation was carried out with an adequate number of specialists, with appropriate expertise
  and experience to address sector challenges and project requirements, to help ensure high quality
  preparation and appraisal of the project, including a generally sound Results Framework and design of a
  M&E system;

  (ii) the project focused on supporting strategic food crops, based on applying the results of the
  Government’s and Bank’s analytical work, and guided by sound criteria of promoting agricultural growth,
  reduced poverty and enhanced food security.

  (iii) the project design considered its complementarity with other relevant projects and incorporated
  relevant lessons learned from the Bank’s previous operations in Benin and the agricultural sector;

  (iv) the Bank’s project team had a good working relationship with the Borrower/key counterparts, and
  consistently and constructively engaged its counterparts during preparation and appraisal;

  (v) the procurement and financial management (FM) systems were designed adequately, with clear
  identification of FM risks and effective mitigation measures;

  (vi) the project was a Category “B” project, the environmental risks associated with project activities were
  clearly identified, together with putting in place before implementation appropriate mitigation measures.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)




b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was Satisfactory, based on evidence provided in the ICR, the project’s
 independent evaluation, and included the following aspects (ICR, paras. 67 and 68):

 (i) the Bank team carried out regular implementation support missions at least twice per year, involving
 technical team members with the required expertise, to cover the 4 components, and to ensure compliance
 with the Bank’s procurement and finance requirements, and environmental safeguards;

 (ii) there was continuity of the Bank’s TTL, with only two TTLs during the entire life of the project;

 (iii) the Bank carried out regular supervision missions, with regular follow-up actions, interim technical
 missions, and prepared Aide Memoires and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). These Bank project
 team actions provided an objective and realistic assessment of project progress, and which also
 highlighted relevant issues which required attention by Government and the Bank.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s M&E design was Substantial, based on the following supporting evidence (ICR, para. 57):

 (i) during preparation and appraisal of PADA, the project team formulated a sound and comprehensive
 results framework, implementation guidance and M&E arrangements;

 (ii) the results framework was consistent with the project’s implicit theory of change (although not
 developed explicitly at design stage), based on generally sound, quantitative and measurable indicators to
 monitor and assess progress in implementation and toward achievement of project outcomes; at the same
 time, the RF presented some indicators as outputs, rather than outcomes; intermediate results, rather than
 outputs (e.g., various indicators involving adoption of improved technologies were shown as outputs, rather
 than outcomes. Subsequently, the ICR team provided to IEG evaluator various clarifications (note from ICR
 team, dated August 10, 2022);

 (iii) there was a formulation of a Project Implementation Manual, which clarified the roles and
 responsibilities of project entities, and the M&E arrangements;




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



 (iv) there was the preparation of a sound and comprehensive M&E operations manual, which also
 specified: clear concepts and variables; data sources, methods, and frequency; institutional roles for data
 collection and processing; and institutional coordination.



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall implementation of the Project’s M&E system was also Substantial, based on the following
  evidence (para. 58):

  (i) There was strong Government and project team commitment to M&E implementation (see below);

  (ii) There was adequate human and financial resources mobilized/allocated for the implementation of the
  M&E system;

  (iii) the M&E team showed continuity, carried out by the same team (with exception of one person), which
  helped ensure consistent and sound M&E implementation of a sound methodology;

  (iv) during the Bank’s implementation support missions, all reports on implementation and achievements,
  and supporting data/evidence, were discussed and vetted (including spot checks and triangulation) to
  ensure reliable data, analyses and conclusions; and

  (v) the Government’s project completion report and the project independent impact evaluation studies
  provided results which were fully consistent with the project’s M&E findings.



c. M&E Utilization
  (i) Throughout project implementation, especially in the last three years, the project generated
  information from the M&E system, which was used for operational decisions (both Government/project
  and Bank teams);

  (ii) the Geographical Information System (GIS) localization of project investments (under the parallel
  Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision/GEMs initiative) made it possible to monitor
  implementation progress more closely;

  (iii) the Central Monitoring Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture carried out field visits to project activities,
  and provided technical advice to support the project’s M&E system, and its utilization;

  (iv) the Project’s M&E information was used to support decision-making and to refine the project’s
  implementation strategy (especially with respect to key indicators which were lagging behind the
  targets);

  (v) the information collected and assessed through the M&E system helped the Government and Bank
  teams to make timely and well-informed decisions, and to provide timely implementation support on key
  issues (including project design issues, reallocation of funds, and financial management issues).




                                                                                                           Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental category “B” (partial assessment), and triggered various
   safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Despite a few shortcomings, the ICR concluded the project
   complied with the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies, as reported in the safeguard
   compliance report at closing (ICR, para. 63).The ICR provided the following supporting evidence (ICR,
   paras. 62/63):

   (i) the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Integrated Pest Management Plan
   (IPMP), and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared, approved and disclosed (ref. to the
   safeguard policy compliance assessment report, initial version: 2017; final version: 2021 (ICR, para. 63);

   (ii) the project provided training for relevant groups to strengthen technical and institutional capacity in
   environmental safeguards (e.g., for decentralized technical government service entities; for beneficiary
   groups, including training in risk mitigation measures);

   (iii) the project conducted sound environmental monitoring of key activities in the field, and identified and
   recommended to beneficiaries relevant mitigation measures;

   (iv) the project team and Bank environmental and social teams monitored the implementation of these
   mitigation measures during implementation support missions;

   (v) the project was implemented with adequate attention to the social safeguard requirements, including the
   formulation, approval and public release of a Resettlement Policy Framework. During the AF assessment
   (2017), the Bank conducted a stock taking study to assess compliance with the safeguard policies; the
   assessment report concluded overall compliance, while reinforcing the need to ensure adequate monitoring
   of key actions. The Project arranged a final safeguard assessment report at closing (2021), which confirmed
   continued compliance with key safeguard policies and guidelines, despite a “few shortcomings” (para. 63);

   (vi) Notwithstanding some delay, the project established a formal and functional grievance redress
   mechanism (GRM), with complaints being addressed on a timely basis;

   (vii) the project complied with OP 4.10 (ref. Indigenous Peoples) by ensuring the implementation
   arrangements at the field level embed its core principles of a “free, prior, and informed consultation, leading
   to a broad community support for the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



  (i) Financial Management: Overall, the project’s financial management was Satisfactory, as follows (ICR,
  para. 64):

  (a) During preparation, the project developed an FM plan to ensure that the Project Implementation Unit
  (PIU) would have the required capacity to implement the project;

  (b) the project complied with the relevant financial covenants and ensured regular and timely submission of
  financial reports and annual audits, to both Government and the Bank;

  (c) the 2020 audit report was received by the Bank, and the auditors issued an unqualified opinion. The
  final audit report was due on March 31, 2022. The Government submitted to the Bank the final audit report
  on June 30, 2022, with unqualified opinion. Subsequently, the Bank reviewed and endorsed the report; and

  (d) The project had a final disbursement rate of about 95%, and no ineligible expenditures were recorded
  during implementation.

  (ii) Procurement: The ICR’s assessment of procurement performance is summarized in para. 65, implying
  moderately satisfactory performance.

  Procurement was foreseen to be a major challenge during implementation, given the project’s national
  coverage and the wide scope of activities supported, and the nature of investments, including infrastructure
  investments. As context, the limited financial capacity of local entrepreneurs to provide counterpart
  guarantee and the general failure to meet agreed deadlines add complexity to the national procurement
  system and hinder the timely implementation of project operations in Benin. Although procurement on
  PADA has been quite challenging (delayed in filing procurement-related documents in STEP (Systematic
  Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement), the PIU had conducted procurement activities in line with agreed
  World Bank procedures. Post procurement reviews were conducted regularly, and recommendations were
  implemented. As indicated in the ICR, procurement delays had called for an extension of closing date with
  additional operational and administrative costs. The ICR concludes that the magnitude of the increase in
  project expenditures induced by this situation was kept within reasonable limits, as the project only slightly
  overspent on Component 4 (104%).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not Applicable



d. Other
  The ICR highlights 4 other positive aspects contributed by the project: gender; institutional strengthening;
  mobilizing private sector financing and expanded private sector role; and poverty reduction and shared
  prosperity. While recognizing some attribution challenges with respect to the precise role and contributions
  of this project to these other strategic benefits, the nature/scope of these “other” benefits are summarized
  below, based on evidence presented in the ICR (paras. 44 - 47).




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



(i) Gender: The project’s documents/ICR provides the following evidence of the project’s positive
contributions to the project’s gender dimensions (ICR, para. 44):

(a) The project reached 40.2 % of women-beneficiaries, against the end-target of 40%;

(b) About 47% percent of the matching grants beneficiaries were women and invested in processing
activities in which women are heavily involved (cashew apple juice, pineapple juice, fish processing);

(c) the matching grant schemes included training tailored to women beneficiaries, focused on helping
subprojects grow into successful SMEs, led either by women entrepreneurs or to create more jobs for youth
and women;

(d) Women were also the key beneficiaries of the nutrition-related activities (promotion of nutrient-rich food
crops, such as soybean, iron-fortified cowpea, sweet potatoes, vegetable gardening, nutrition education and
awareness) supported by the project. Through these activities alone, the project trained 7,708 women out of
13,869 small and marginal farmers, developed eleven (11) gardening farms, and distributed 70,000
seedlings of moringa, papaya, and banana, as well as vegetable seeds (tomato, pepper, okra, watermelon,
cabbage, leafy vegetables) and funded 48 subprojects on gardening farms, leading to a better integration of
nutrition-rich food in their beneficiary diet.

(e) By promoting women participation in the project activities and in decision-making, the ICR concluded
that the project contributed significantly to foster women participation in the labor market in the communities
involved, as well as to improve food security, safety, and nutrition among vulnerable groups, including
women and children.

(ii) Institutional Strengthening: PADA provided various types of strategic support to institutional
strengthening to help ensure effective and efficient implementation, and prospects for sustainability. The
ICR provided the following evidence (ICR, para. 45):

(a) the project supported the establishment, capacity strengthening and staffing for four inter-professional
organizations, in implementing in carrying out project monitoring and citizen engagement activities to voice
the concerns and opinions of the beneficiaries over the project implementation on the ground;

(b) The project supported reforms and capacity strengthening, and equipping of MAEP and its main national
and regional directorates, including: training of MAEP staff on market information system, data collection,
and information system management; mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive agriculture into the projects and
programs under the MAEP;

(c) improvements to the country’s seed research and production system through the establishment of
partnerships and funding of applied research involving various entities;

(d) the support for the structuring and drafting of operation manual for the National Fund for Agricultural
Development (FNDA) and the provision of seed money for the Fund Guarantee Scheme.

(e) The project had a significant impact on the institutional strengthening of the MAEP by supporting: the
organization of several review meetings and strategic exercises; the strengthening of national capacities in
the development of agricultural clusters; the improvement of the quality of agricultural statistics;



                                                                                                 Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



   strengthened capacity and better sector coordination, the Ministry was able to implement 82% of the
   agricultural sector budget against an end project target of 90%.

   (iii) Mobilizing Private Sector Support and Financing (ICR, para. 46): At closing, the project mobilized
   some private sector financing within the targeted value chains through the matching grant scheme and the
   guarantee funds in the amount of about US$5 million. The ICR provided limited evidence regarding the
   expanded role of the private sector, while also recognizing in the lessons the need for formulating and
   implementing an action plan for expanded private sector role (see below, section 12). The Bank’s ICR team
   provided separate and additional clarifications to IEG regarding the role of the project in expanding the role
   of the private sector through supporting various types of project activities, including: facilitating access to
   financial services by small and medium enterprises and services provided along the targeted value chains;
   relevant market-based training for producers, processors and traders; the expanded role private sector in
   supplying improved seeds, planting materials, animal breeds and fingerlings; expanded agro-processing by
   SMEs; and expanded access to expanded local and international markets.

   (iv) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: The ICR highlights the project’s contributions, including
   (ICR, para. 47):

   (a) The project targeted the poorest areas, as well as the areas affected by the 2010 flood (55 out of 77
   communes of Benin);

   (b) the target crops and value chains are produced by a significant number of the poor and smallholders;

   (c) the project interventions impacted the beneficiaries’ livelihoods positively and significantly;

   (d) The project contributed to improving employment, incomes and the living conditions of the beneficiaries
   as indicated in the various monitoring reports, the project completion report, as well as the 2021 impact
   evaluation reports. The project has created 1,079 permanent jobs and about 3,145 temporary jobs. Average
   incomes of project beneficiaries improved by 253,586 FCFA, 620,875 CFA, 1,500,000 FCFA, and by
   between 94,800 FCFA and 201,000 FCFA, for maize, rice, pineapple, and cashew producers, respectively;

   (e) project impact evaluation report (2021) show that the additional income generated as the result of the
   project support was used to support household expenses, as consumption expenditures of project
   beneficiaries had increased significantly compared to non-beneficiaries.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


                                                                                                         Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



12. Lessons

The ICR presents 4 strategic lessons arising from this project (ICR, paras. 74 – 77). The key
elements of these lessons, which especially have relevance for other similar type of agricultural
projects, are highlighted below (including some enhancements with respect to the ICR findings).

(a) Lesson 1: Promoting a strong private sector involvement in the seed production system
is key to improving and sustaining the supply of planting materials to producers. During the
project’s implementation, due to various constraints, it was challenging for the research and public
entities to supply the needed volume of breeder seed for onward multiplication by seed producers
and private seed companies. These constraints have limited the development of the seed system
and its ability to supply enough seeds to fully meet producers’ demand, and therefore, to promoting
a wide scale farmer adoption of improved seeds. Agricultural development projects seeking to
promote sustainable access to improved seeds and planting materials should include priority
activities to foster a strong private sector involvement in the seed system, including enforcement of a
sound harmonized regulatory framework and a clear demarcation of the roles of key stakeholders
and their strengthened capacities to fulfil effectively their mandates; these actions would help ensure
wider farmer adoption of improved seeds, and therefore, to contribute to achieving higher
productivity levels;

(b) Lesson 2: Creating an improved enabling policy and institutional environment is key for
achieving increased private sector investments in the relevant value-chains. The expanded
and sound role of an inclusive private sector in the agricultural sector, similar to the approach being
followed by the Ministry Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP), needs to be mainstreamed
and institutionalized, and become the standard practice in the MAEP, and other relevant entities.
Although the project had mobilized a modest amount of private sector investments (only $5.0
million), in retrospect, more progress could have been achieved if the MAEP was more proactive in
reaching out to other ministries (Ministry of Finance, of Trade and Industry, APIEx) and relevant
private sector entities to capitalize on synergies and share experiences and best practices for
promoting and achieving an expanded private sector role in the targeted value chains. Future
projects seeking to promote the development of agricultural value-chains should include in their
design a clear and comprehensive private sector action plan, with a clear strategy on how the
Ministry of Agriculture and relevant private sector entities will reach out to and engage relevant
public institutions and private sector stakeholders for achieving a strengthened and expanded role of
an inclusive private sector;

(c) Lesson 3: Priority and sound institutional reforms in the agricultural sector are important
to formulate and implement for empowering producers’ apex organizations and
interprofessional bodies, to promote sustainably an expanded role of an inclusive private
sector. The sustainability of these private sector organizations and the effective fulfillment of their
functions (advisory services, training, policy dialogue, promotion of value chains) require the proper
formulation and implementation of their resource mobilization strategy, which is strongly dependent
on the prevailing regulatory environment. The project supported the preparation of the resource
mobilization strategy and funded some of the activities included in their workplan. The project
supported the MAEP in drafting and transmitting the law on inter-professional organizations to the
national assembly for its promulgation (submitted in 2021). This law set the framework for the
organization of inter-professional bodies and their funding mechanisms. Recently, this law was
merged with another relevant law, which is now being reviewed for adoption by the National

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



Assembly. This legislative gap has limited the funding available for private sector inter-professional
bodies to fulfill their mandates. Future similar projects seeking to expand and empower inter-
professional entities (and other relevant private sector actors) should accord high priority to the
timely formulation, approval and implementation of these types of institutional, legislative, funding
and partnership reforms;

(d) Lesson 4: Promoting expanded access to finance, availability of inputs, and efficient and
effective advisory services are key ingredients for fostering the widespread and sustainable
adoption of productivity-enhancing technologies and food and nutrition security. The project
supported strategic value chains, and effectively used a blend of targeted capacity building activities,
and adequate financing instruments (matching grants and competitive funds) to facilitate the
expanded availability and access to inputs (seeds, fertilizers, chemicals, fingerlings, fish and poultry
feed, animal breeds, veterinary products), equipment, and support small scale irrigation schemes.
This strategic support resulted in the adoption of productivity-enhancing technologies, with positive
impacts on production, income, and food and nutrition security. Agricultural development projects
seeking to promote the adoption of technologies for enhancing food and nutrition security and
competitive value chains should design and implementing an integrated approach, customized to
each country conditions and requirements. Also, it is important to help ensure that relevant follow-up
projects help consolidate, expand and sustain these strategic improvements and results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the quality of the ICR is Substantial. The ICR is well written and concise, consistent with IEG
guidelines, analytical and results-focused, supported by adequate evidence to justify the various
assessments; provides strategic lessons; and provides candid assessment, including revealing Government
and Bank weaknesses during implementation.

The most notable shortcomings of the ICR refer to:

(1) excluded reference to increased farmer/beneficiary incomes as a core PDO-level indicator (while
summarizing the results from the financial analyses/farm models);

(2) some conceptual inconsistencies (relatively minor) in the manner which some of the project’s outcomes,
intermediate results and outputs were classified (ref. ICR, summary presented on pages 45 and 46);

(3) limited clarity regarding the Bank’s strategy to enhancing the project’s prospects for sustaining many of the
project’s notable achievements in: (a) continued strengthening of the agriculture research extension systems
involving MAEP and relevant private sector entities; (b) improved enabling environment for an expanded role of
the private sector, especially with respect to ensuring continued competitive and expanded value chain
development, and access to finance; and (c) the role of follow-up and on-going Bank-supported projects to help


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ: Agricultural Diversification (P115886)



consolidate, expand and sustain project achievements, especially with respect to the various risks to sustaining
development outcomes (see Section 7 above); and

(4) Some of the content of the lessons outlined in the ICR are not completely and clearly based on the
analyses, although implied in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 24
