     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023163

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147014                                    BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                      Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58570                                  31-Dec-2021                                           19,708,230.17

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2016                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             20,072,207.14                                                0.00

 Actual                                         19,708,230.17                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Alma Pekmezovic             Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to improve efficiency in public investment management and enhance
   the performance of selected institutions of accountability in Benin. A split evaluation will not be undertaken,
   due to substantial achievements under the project's first objective related to improvements in public
   investment management.




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   1. Enhancing Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Investment Management Expenditure Cycle
   (Appraisal: US$9 million, Actual: US$6.9 million). The first project component was to provide technical
   assistance (TA) to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in the public investment management (PIM)
   expenditure cycle. The component primarily aimed at improving the planning surrounding public investment
   projects (including the identification, preparation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of such
   projects). The intended direct beneficiaries were the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the Ministry of Planning and
   Development (MPD), and the line ministries responsible for managing public investments in the energy,
   water, and justice sectors. Under this component, the project originally aimed to: (a) improve the
   coordination and preparation of public investments; (b) strengthen existing public investment selection
   mechanisms and budgeting procedures; (c) improve the timely and effective execution of public
   investments; (d) build capacity to evaluate public investment results against expected objectives, facilitate
   learning for better design of future public investments, and ensure compliance with fiduciary procedures;
   and (e) build capacity to improve appraisal, selection, implementation, and evaluation of public-private
   partnerships (PPPs).

   A first restructuring (approved in September 2018) maintained this component, while re-designing some
   activities and aligning them with the government's public investment strategy. As PPP support was to be
   undertaken under a complementary Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) funded project,
   activities planned to address challenges associated with managing PPPs were scaled down. At the same
   time, the following activities were added: (a) strengthening government capacity for investment project
   preparation and prioritization; (b) improving the government’s procurement management capacity and
   procurement transparency; (c) strengthening the capacity of key control and verification entities; (d)
   introducing digital tools to plan and monitor public investments; and (e) improving the performance of MPD
   through TA services and the implementation of staff performance management systems.

   2. Strengthening Good Governance and Accountability (Appraisal: US $3.5 million, Actual: US$1.7
   million). This component aimed to (a) establish, on a pilot basis, administrative chambers in selected First
   Instance Tribunals and Appeals Courts and build capacity for their operationalization; (b) carry out a
   targeted case backlog reduction program for administrative cases; (c) contribute to the implementation of a
   strategy and an operational plan for the National Anti-Corruption Authority (Agence nationale de lutte contre
   la corruption, ANLC); and (d) support social accountability by implementing a system of citizen report cards
   (CRCs) to identify and address service delivery bottlenecks in the sectors of justice, electricity, and water.

   The 2018 restructuring introduced the following additional activities: (a) creation of an electronic platform for
   asset declarations ; (b) strengthening mechanisms to report corruption to the ANLC; (c) strengthening civil
   society capacity to implement CRCs; and (d) building capacity for investment monitoring and reporting by
   civil society organizations (CSOs).

   3. Results-Based Financing (RBF) in the Electricity, Water and Justice Sectors (Appraisal: US$15

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



  million, Actual: US$7.5 million). This component was included to incentivize the efficient coordination and
  timely processing of financial flows that would result in higher budget execution rates, as well as timely
  physical implementation of six selected projects provide RBF in the three selected sectors of electricity,
  water, and justice. Through the RBF Component, the project aimed to fund training and operating costs of
  teams working on planning, budgeting, procurement and M&E in the selected ministries to improve PIM.
  RBF was linked to the following government programs : (a) Electricity: (i) promotion and development of
  electricity distribution in urban and semi-urban areas and (ii) rural areas’ electrification; (b) Water: (i)
  provision of drinking water derived from surface water sources and (ii) provision of drinking water in rural
  and semi-rural areas; and (c) Justice: (i) operationalization of administrative chambers and (ii)
  modernization of judicial services. The component supported the implementation of an Eligible Expenditure
  Program that was planned to deal with training and operating costs budgeted and incurred by the ministries
  in charge of electricity, water, and justice.

  The component was originally structured around six public performance-based conditions (PBCs). In the
  electricity sector, the following PBCs were selected: the average capital budget execution rate for selected
  electricity public investments (PBC1); and the average annual project implementation rate for selected
  electricity public investments (PBC2). In the water sector, PBCs included the average capital budget
  execution rate for selected water and sanitation public investments (PBC3), and the average annual project
  implementation rate for selected water and sanitation public investments (PBC4). In the justice sector, the
  PBCs included the average capital budget execution rate for selected justice public investments (PBC5),
  and the clearance rate of administrative cases (PBC6).

  Following the 2018 restructuring, PBC1, PBC2, and PBC5 were revised to incentivize the timely allocation
  of the budget required to execute priority projects. PBC2 and PBC4 were redefined as the share of the
  overall project completed relative to the scope of the approved project . PBC6 was revised to assess the
  efficiency of dispatch of both new and backlogged administrative cases.

  Following a second restructuring in October 2020, all PBCs were dropped except for PBC3, since funds
  were reallocated toward the government's COVID-19 response. Also, an outcome indicator focused on the
  reduction of case backlog was dropped because Bank staff considered that the resized project with
  cancelled amounts could no longer support these activities. As a result of the 2020 restructuring, 50 percent
  of the originally allocated total amount of US$15 million to the RBF component was reduced, and US$7.5
  million was disbursed, with US$2.0 million disbursed to the electricity sector (compared to a planned
  disbursement of US$5 million), US$4.0 million disbursed to the water sector (planned disbursement of
  US$5 million), and US$1.5 million disbursed to the justice sector (planned disbursement of $US5 million).

  4. Support for Project Implementation (Appraisal: US$2.5 million, Actual: US $3.3 million). This
  component was to finance the project's coordination, planning, fiduciary, monitoring, and verification
  arrangements.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



   The project was approved on June 23, 2016 in the amount of US$30 million and became effective on May
   7, 2017, almost a year after its approval and seven months after signing the Financing Agreement. Delays
   were primarily due to the time taken to set up a Steering Committee and Project Coordination Unit (PCU).

   The project was restructured twice to meet the evolving government strategy and priorities, and to address
   the COVID-19 pandemic.

         A first restructuring was approved on September 10, 2018, after delays in the implementation of key
          activities and failure to achieve a planned disbursement rate of 35 percent. At the time, less than
          nine percent of the total financing amount of US$30 million had been disbursed (with 90 percent of
          the disbursed amount being spent on project management). The purpose of the first restructuring
          was therefore to speed up project implementation, and to introduce revisions to the components'
          scope and cost. PBCs were re-aligned with the new investment program of the government, and the
          disbursement mechanism under the RBF component was streamlined.
         A midterm review (MTR) was conducted in December 2020, leading to a re-allocation of funds to
          additional activities. The results of the MTR were made available in March 2021.
         A second and final restructuring was approved on October 7, 2020, as part of an omnibus World
          Bank portfolio reallocation. Its main objective was to adjust the scope of project activities. A partial
          project financing cancellation of US$10 million of the original financing was conducted to redirect
          funds in support the government's COVID-19 response program.

   The project closed on December 31, 2021. Actual project cost was US$19.71 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: At project appraisal in 2015, Benin was experiencing low economic growth to achieve
meaningful poverty reduction. From 2010 to 2015, the annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate
averaged 4.6 percent (1.8 percent in terms of GDP per capita). Benin’s overall investment rate (both public
and private) was below its peers in the West African Economic Monetary Union (Benin’s total investment
rate was 20.3 percent of GDP, compared to 22.7 percent for WAEMU, and its public investment rate was
4.3 percent of GDP, compared to 7.0 percent for WAEMU). In June 2014, the government adopted a Public
Investment Program (PIP) geared toward agricultural mechanization and diversification, construction and
rehabilitation of infrastructure in support of health and education systems, provision of drinking water,
provision of reliable and affordable sources of electricity, and building of water and sanitation infrastructure.



The government recognized there was an urgent need to improve public sector governance, especially
PIM, in order to ensure successful implementation of the PIP. Public investment projects suffered from poor
selection criteria, inefficient procurement, implementation delays, and cost overruns (ICR, p. 1). PIM
performance was especially poor in the energy and water and sanitation sectors, which were identified by
the government as critical to achieving the government’s goals of reducing poverty and increasing
economic growth. Poor PIM resulted in poor delivery of essential services. Benin faced significant


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



               governance challenges, receiving relatively low scores on public sector and governance indicators (such as
               the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index, Worldwide Governance Indicators, and the Mo
               Ibrahim Index of African Governance). Corruption was particularly significant in government procurement.
               Citizens had limited access to the court system to challenge government decisions or actions, and there
               had been several recent corruption scandals involving high-level public officers in critical PIPs.


               Increasing public investment and addressing PIM accountability challenges were therefore seen as critical
               to more effective and efficient PIM and contributing to Benin’s longer-term socio-economic success.



               World Bank Strategy: The government's PIM and accountability reforms were aligned with the World Bank
               supported Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) at appraisal (FY2013–17). The project directly supported
               the foundation pillar to strengthen governance and public sector capacity, as well as Results Area 1.1 on
               improved transparency and efficiency in public financial management . The project remained relevant to
               Benin's Country Partnership Framework at closing (CPF, FY2019-23), directly supporting the CPF's third
               objective on improving governance in management of public finances, by targeting the GoB's capacity to
               manage PIM as well as its planned activities to increase citizen participation for improved accountability.



               Government Strategy: The project was directly linked to the 2016–2021 Government Action Program
               (Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement, PAG). Improvement of PIM and accountability in the public sector
               were identified as key objectives that would contribute directly to the first and second pillars of the PAG,
               aimed at (1) strengthening democracy, governance, and the rule of law, and (2) the structural
               transformation of the country's economy.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve efficiency in public investment management

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change


                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



The PAD did not include an explicit theory of change, but one was reconstructed in the ICR presenting a
credible results chain between project activities, outputs, and outcomes. Project activities were to focus on
process improvements, training, and better inter-ministerial coordination across all four phases of the public
investment cycle (planning, allocation, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)), leading to the
development of fiscal principles and reference frameworks (for example, the PIM Manual), and strengthened
selection criteria for projects. These, in turn, would lead to an overall improvement in PIM efficiency (as
measured and evidenced by improved budget execution, reduced cost overruns and reduced time
overruns). A critical assumption underlying the theory of change was that the government would have
adequate capacity to improve inter-institutional coordination across the public investment cycle.



TA and PBCs were to combine to make capital investments more productive and efficient, i.e., better placed
to contribute more to economic growth and poverty reduction (ICR, p. 19). The project was to provide TA
across all four phases of the public investment cycle to the MOF, MPD, and line ministries responsible for
managing public investments in the energy, water, and justice sectors. The energy and water sectors were
chosen due to of their potential to increase economic growth and improve social outcomes (ICR p. 20). The
ICR notes that increased public investment in these poverty-sensitive sectors also had the potential to build a
more attractive environment for private investment, provide the population with basic infrastructure and better
access to basic social services (ICR, p. 19-20). . The justice sector, more specifically ANLC, First Instance
Courts, and Appeals Courts, were chosen because of their capacity to hold institutions of public
administration accountable, which, in turn, was expected to improve accountability throughout the PIM
expenditure cycle. To this end, the project was to integrate an RBF component that would facilitate high
budget execution rates and the implementation of six selected projects in the three selected sectors.



Outputs

      Output 1 (improved budget control and allocation): The project provided TA to strengthen budget
       processes and procedures, and to support the timely and effective execution of investment projects.
      Output 2 (improved project planning, selection, and costing): The project supported the
       development of feasibility studies and a PIM manual that includes guidelines on the preparation of
       feasibility studies and project concept notes, appraisal, supervision, and contract management. The
       manual also includes guidelines for cost-benefit analysis and independent review of MPD. Since 2020,
       all projects included in the PIP are systematically subject to prior feasibility studies that assessed
       whether objective criteria are being used for appraising and selecting projects.
      Output 3 (procurement): Activities under the project supported the activities effective execution
       of procurement plans to reduce delays and inefficiencies in procurement processes. It provided tools
       to line ministries to prepare Procurement Plans, Annual Work Plans (AWPs), and Credit Consumption
       Plans. Moreover, the project supported the professionalization of public procurement specialists
       (including the formal accreditation of staff responsible for public procurement functions) and capacity
       building through seminars and training of key actors involved in the procurement system. (ICR, p. 9).
      Output 4 (public-private partnerships): The project initially sought to address challenges associated
       with establishing and managing PPPs. Challenges arose due to the need to improve the government's
       procurement management capacity and procurement transparency. Furthermore, there was a need
       strengthen the capacity of key control and verification entities involved in the PPP process, introduce


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



     digital tools to plan and monitor public investments, and improve the performance of the ministry in
     charge of planning (through technical advisory services and the implementation of staff performance
     management systems). These activities were scaled down as the PPIAF was established.
    Output 5 (oversight, and implementation of public investment monitoring processes and
     tools): The project sought to strengthen the capacity of selected line ministries to implement
     performance budgeting tools, including multi-year expenditure programming papers, annual
     performance reports, and authorization of multiyear liabilities. Additionally, a centralized public
     investment dashboard was established for monitoring public investments.



Outcomes

    Investment budget execution rate (%): The investment budget execution rate for FY2021 was 89
       percent, compared to the baseline scenario of 68 percent in 2016, and nine percentage points higher
       than the end-of-project target of 80 percent. In FY2020, the investment budget execution rate
       reached 127 percent due to the implementation of the government’s COVID-19 Response Program,
       which included the acquisition of health equipment and setting up hospitalization sites. During 2018 to
       2021, public investment execution rates reached 84.3 percent on average. This contributed to a
       cumulative increase of public investment of CFAF 372.68 billion (US$212 million) over the period,
       compared to what the public investment amount would have been over the period if the execution rate
       had remained at 68 percent. In 2017, the public investment execution rate was 44 percent. The ICR
       notes that the public investment execution rate in that year was low, mainly due to the election of a
       new Government in 2016, which completely reversed its predecessors' investment strategy and
       portfolio of public investments (ICR, p. 10).
      Release of budgets: The average time taken for the release of budgets to credit managers for
       investment projects selected for the year declined from 3.0 months (baseline in 2016) to 0.23 months
       by 2021, exceeding the target of 0.5 months.
      Feasibility studies: The ICR introduced a target of 100 percent for investment projects being subject to
       feasibility studies, which was met in 2021.
      Percentage of new projects appraised in accordance with PIM Manual: The following targets were set
       for the percent of projects to be appraised in line with the PIM Manual: 20 percent (2017), 40 percent
       (2018), 60 percent (2019), 75 percent (2020) and 85 percent (2021). These targets were consistently
       exceeded, with 30 percent of projects being appraised in line with the PIM appraisal guidelines
       manual in 2017, 45 percent (2018), 80 percent (2019), 100 percent (2020), and 100 percent (2021).
      Average execution rate of public procurement commitment plans: As a result of project-
       related activities, the average execution rate of public procurement commitment plans in selected line
       ministries increased from 50 percent (2016, baseline) to 89 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of
       85 percent. The number of accredited persons who are formally assigned to perform procurement
       functions increased to 243 by 2021 (from a baseline of 0 in 2018), exceeding the target of 100.
      Number of PPP transactions: As a result of initial project interventions, the number of PPP
       transactions increased from 0 in 2016 to 4 in 2021 (against an original target of 5). The end target for
       this indicator was subsequently lowered from 5 to 4 during the restructuring of October 2020. Activities
       relating to this indicator were dropped at the second restructuring, as PPP transactions were to be
       handled at level of the Presidency and no longer fell within the scope of the project.



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)




      Budget execution and project implementation rates: Although the overall value of public investments
       increased, the project did not meet expected budget execution and project implementation rates for
       selected public investment projects in the electricity and justice sectors:
            o The average annual budget execution rate of the two selected projects in the electricity sector
               increased from 10 percent in 2018 to 28 percent in 2020, not reaching the target of 70 percent
               budget execution. The cumulative execution rate for these projects increased from 15 percent
               in 2018 to 46 percent in 2020, not reaching the target of 80 percent. The low performance was
               mostly due to pre-COVID-19 projects no longer being publicly funded in FY2019. Financing of
               projects was interrupted to allocate funds to the GoB's COVID-19 response.
            o The average annual budget execution rate of the two selected projects in the justice sector
               increased from 10 percent in 2018 to 14 percent in 2020, not reaching the target of 70 percent
               budget execution. The average cumulative clearance rate of administrative cases by the courts
               increased from 3 percent in 2018 to 7 percent in 2020, not reaching the target of 30 percent.
               Financing of the PBC was interrupted to allocate funds to the GoB's COVID-19 response.
            o The average annual budget execution rate of the two selected projects in the water sector
               increased from 10 percent in 2018 to 73 percent in 2020, exceeding the target of 70 percent.
               The cumulative physical project execution rate for these projects increased from 15 percent in
               2018 to 72 percent in 2020, short of the target of 80 percent. Financing was interrupted to
               allocate funds to the GoB's COVID-19 response.
      Average variance between planned and actual costs and duration for projects included in the PIP: The
       reported average variance between planned and actual duration of projects decreased from a
       baseline of 50 percent in 2016 to 18 percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 25 percent. The average
       variation between planned and actual costs decreased from a baseline of 50 percent in 2016 to 15
       percent in 2021, exceeding the target of 35 percent. The ICR (p. 23) notes that "an undocumented
       methodology" was used to assess cost and time overruns of investment projects, and data sources
       were not defined in the PAD or the M&E manual . According to the ICR, there are "issues around the
       accuracy and suitability of the data used," and results were not subjected to a rigorous validation
       process. These results are therefore not considered valid for assessing project performance.



Overall, the achievement of this objective is considered substantial, subject to caveats. Project activities
reduced shortcomings in in budget execution and project planning, and contributed to strengthening the
capacity of the government to implement public investments projects more effectively and efficiently. The
project highlighted the importance of more strategic budget planning and implementation. It helped strengthen
and modernize budgeting processes, and improved the timely and effective execution of these projects.
Nonetheless, although the government was able to improve its overall budget execution and project planning
processes, planned budget execution and project implementation rates in the electricity and water sectors
were not achieved. As noted in the ICR report, "cutting half of PBC's allocated amounts did not help meet
expected budget executive and project implementation rates of the selected public investment projects in the
electricity and justice sectors." (ICR, p. 23). Following the 2020 restructuring, key activities were canceled.
Moreover, data and methodology issues leave gaps in the assessment of cost and time overruns for projects
included in the PIP.



Rating

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance the performance of selected institutions of accountability

Rationale
Theory of Change

The ICR presents again a credible results chain linking project activities, outputs, and outcomes. Owing to
corruption and impunity, effective implementation of PIPs was significantly reduced. The project supported
measures to improve the prevention and sanctioning of corruption in PIP s. Major project activities were
focused on capacity building of selected anticorruption and judicial institutions, which was expected to result
in an increase in the clearance rate of administrative cases, identified as a key output, and enhanced
performance of the institutions, identified as a key outcome. These outcomes and outputs were linked to the
higher-level objective of improving PIM. TA would be provided to prevent, investigate, and sanction corruption
through the ANLC, and to strengthen the functioning of the First Instance Tribunals and Appeals Courts.
These measures, in turn, would encourage the government to better allocate and monitor its public
expenditures. The theory of change proceeded from the critical assumption that the government would
increase its financial support to the judiciary and anticorruption bodies to address deep-seated governance
challenges stemming from corruption and impunity; and thereby address the lack of effective systems for
upholding accountability, together with high levels of corruption, which had a direct impact upon PIM.



Outputs

      Output 1 (strengthening institutional capacity of the judiciary to effectively adjudicate
       administrative cases): The project supported the implementation of a targeted backlog reduction
       program for administrative cases. The First Instance Courts, and Appeals Courts were chosen as
       project beneficiaries because of their mandate to hold the public administration accountable, which, in
       turn, would enhance accountability throughout the PIM expenditure cycle. Relevant project activities
       were: (a) operationalization of administrative chambers of First Instance Tribunals and Appeals
       Courts; (b) training of 330 judicial actors on administrative litigation; (c) progressive transfer of
       administrative litigation files from the Supreme Court to the lower jurisdictions; and (d) support for the
       creation of a website for the publication of administrative jurisprudence at the level of the Supreme
       Court (https://coursupreme.bj/jurisadmin/accueil).
      Output 2 (prevention, investigation and sanctioning of corruption): Activities included the training
       of members and staff of the ANLC on investigative techniques and complaint handling (and thereby
       improve its sanctioning capacity), and also the organization of National Anti-Corruption Days, in order
       to raise general awareness about corruption.
      Output 3 (citizen engagement): The project created platforms for citizen participation
       (www.evaluation-citoyenne.bj) and carried out of two rounds of surveys: the Citizen Evaluation of
       Service Delivery surveys, and the publication of a CRC score. The goal of the surveys was to provide
       a clearer picture of beneficiaries’ assessment of government delivery of services, and ultimately
       improve the quality of public services through better citizen monitoring and inclusive and participatory


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



     dialogue between stakeholders (ICR, p. 16). A consortium of CSOs undertook quantitative and
     qualitative surveys to analyze client satisfaction, providing an opportunity for citizens to express their
     views on the availability, accessibility, and acceptability of public services offered.
    Output 4 (control of asset declarations and risk-based auditing): The project improved the quality
     of internal audit through its support to the General Inspection of Finance (IGF), Sectorial General
     Inspections, and the Supreme Audit Institution on risk-based auditing, control of asset declarations,
     and investigation techniques. The following activities were funded through the project: (i) training of
     100 inspectors on fraud detection; (ii) training of 360 inspectors and public servants from seven
     ministries on risk-based auditing; and (iii) purchase of information technology equipment for the IGF
     and 23 Sectorial General Inspections.

Outcomes

    Reduction of case backlog: The second objective was primarily tied to the achievement of one
     outcome: a reduction in the backlog of administrative cases. This outcome was tenuously and
     indirectly linked to the ultimate project objective of improving PIM. The reduction was to be measured
     by the number of administrative cases resolved as a percentage of the total number of backlogged
     administrative cases plus new administrative cases filed and existing throughout the court system.
     The project targeted a reduction in the backlog of cases by 35 percent. Achievements in this area,
     however, were negligible. The backlog of cases had been lowered by only 7 percent by 2020, and at
     the 2020 restructuring, key activities contributing to the outcome and the related PDO and
     intermediate indicators were dropped (rather than revised). The ICR argues that, at project appraisal,
     the target had been based on an assumption that it would take only 4 months to clear an
     administrative case in court. (ICR, p. 15). The basis for this assumption, however, is unclear and not
     explained in the ICR report. The ICR asserts that an extended time frame of 14 months would have
     been a more realistic estimate, given the significant efforts that would be required from the Supreme
     Court, as well as high levels of co-ordination needed between the Supreme Court and the selected
     First Instance Tribunals and Appeals Courts to transfer cases to lower jurisdictions. Target setting also
     did not account for increased access to the court system through the creation of the new
     administrative chambers, increasing the number of administrative cases filed, or the substantial
     foundational support needed to operationalize and strengthen the capacity of administrative chambers
     to deal with case backlogs. The speed of case resolution also failed to improve due to: (a) delays in
     the transmission of cases from the Supreme Court to lower jurisdictions; (b) enrollment issues in the
     courts, (c) challenges with identification of plaintiffs; and (d) coordination difficulties at different
     institutional levels. The ICR (p. 16) notes that “these factors made clearing 35 percent of old and new
     cases nearly impossible to achieve.”
    Submission of corruption cases to ANLC: As a result of project interventions, three cases were
     submitted by the ANLC and acted on by the prosecutor in 2017, not reaching the target of five cases.
     In 2018 and 2019, no cases were submitted, and the target was dropped. The ANLC was disbanded
     in March 2020 and replaced by the Haut Commissariat à la Prévention de la Corruption (HCPC) in
     April 2020.
    Aggregate CRC Scores: Survey results indicate that the population remains underserved, with an
     aggregate CRC score of 2 out of 5 in June 2020 for the three participating sectors, and no
     improvement in December 2020 (date of release of second-round results). A planned third round was
     not conducted due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, there is insufficient information to measure
     progress in citizen satisfaction between the start of the project in 2016 and the closing date in 2021.


                                                                                                Page 10 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)




                                  Asset Declaration: The project made significant progress in increasing the asset declaration
                                   compliance rate, which increased from a baseline of 60 percent in 2016 to 95 percent at project
                                   closure, meeting the target.



                            Overall achievements under this objective were modest. The ANLC was disbanded. The project failed to meet
                            the PDO indicator relating to the reduction of backlog in administrative cases, and target setting did not
                            account for revisions to project funding and scope. Important indicators were dropped. The 2020 restructuring
                            negatively affected the project performance. As the ICR report notes, "in practice the restructuring cancelled
                            one-third of the initial project funding and discontinued all activities contributing [towards the project's
                            objective of improving the effectiveness of accountability institutions] " whilst not revising the PDO. (ICR, p.
                            21). At the same time, the project made some strides in operationalizing and strengthening the capacity of
                            the Administrative Chambers of First Instance Tribunals and Appeals Courts, and contributed to capacity
                            building related to internal risk-based auditing and investigation techniques in several ministries. The results
                            framework, however, provided no evidence of the impact of the latter activities. Finally, the link between the
                            second project objective and PIM was not properly articulated, justified or explained in the ICR report,
                            presenting a serious flaw in project design.

                            The project team later added that the project contributed to enhancing the capacity of the Autorité de
                            régulation des marchés publics (ARMP) to investigate procurement requests and take sanctions against
                            misprocurement acts. As a result, ARMP has published on its website a list of persons and companies
                            excluded from public procurement in Benin for ten years (https://armp.bii/des-agents-publics-exclus-de-la-
                            commande-publique-en-republique-du-benin/).

                            Furthermore, the project team later added that the project improved the quality of internal audit through its
                            support to the IGF and to Sectoral General Inspections. As a result, IGF has increased implementation of its
                            Annal Audit Work Program, with rates of 74 percent in 2018, 93 percent in 2019, and 123 percent in 2020 (53
                            audit missions conducted out of 43 planned missions), as demonstrated in annual reports (www.
                            igflfinances.bi). Seven ministries have developed their own risk mapping, and the process is ongoing in the
                            remaining ministries. Internal controls have been strengthened in these seven ministries, and the quality and
                            timely submission of internal audit reports have improved overall.

                            Lastly, the project team later highlighted that the project contributed to curbing corruption, as measured by the
                            World Governance Indicators. During the project period, the "Control of Corruption" indicator for Benin
                            improved from 34.62 in 2017 to 54.81 and 50.48 respectively in 2020 and 2021, on a scale of 0 to 100.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



  The project contributed to improved efficiency in public investment management through modernized
  budgeting processes, enhanced quality of projects included in the PIP, and improved timeliness of processes,
  though there were shortcomings in the data and results related to some of the targeted sectors. Achievement
  of results related to accountability was modest. On balance, efficacy is rated Modest.




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
The PAD provided an economic analysis but did not calculate an economic rate of return or internal rate of
return (IRR). At project appraisal, it was estimated that the project would contribute 0.5 to 0.7 percentage points
on average to annual GDP growth, based on reasonable assumptions regarding the expected increase in public
investment execution rates and the marginal productivity of investments in Benin at the time. Re-estimates at
completion found that the project added 0.26 percentage points to annual GDP growth over its lifespan (ICR,
Annex 4). The net present value was calculated at US$127.7 million, and the IRR was 149 percent, when the
project's first year was excluded from the analysis (2017 was considered a "lost year" because of a change of
government and related delays in launching the project). Including 2017 in the calculations produces a reduced
but still positive impact, with an IRR of 16 percent and NPV of US$41.27 million (ICR, p. 39). The economic
analysis in the ICR is based on the assumption that the project was solely responsible for all of the
improvements observed in the public investment execution rate since 2016. While the project has contributed to
improvements, sufficient information was not provided about trends prior to 2016 and other activity in the sector
to justify attributing all of the observed progress to the project in the economic analysis. The ICR (p. 19) states
that the project spent less than planned in many areas, especially procurable activities, and that CFAF400
million in savings was reallocated to "additional activities contributing to the PDO"; it does not elaborate on what
these activities were.


Project effectiveness was significantly delayed due to slow set-up of the Steering Committee and the PCU. The
newly elected government transition team within the MPD, in charge of recruiting key project staff, was slow to
implement planned activities in the first year. The departure of the first project coordinator in 2017 further
delayed the early stages of implementation. Changes to the government's public investment strategy and to the
RBF component led to a restructuring after only 18 months.


Given these shortcomings, efficiency is rated Modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                                16.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy from
appraisal through completion. The objective to improve the efficiency of public investment management was
substantially achieved, though there were shortcomings in improving budget execution and project
implementation rates for specific projects in targeted sectors. Furthermore, the judicial component was not well-
linked to the project objective of improving PIM. Improvements in accountability, which were in key ways a
prerequisite for meaningful improvements in PIM, were modest. Project efficiency was modest, with important
shortcomings in implementation efficiency and data limitations in the ICR's economic analysis. These ratings are
indicative of significant shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement, producing
an Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The government has signaled its commitment to continuing with the PIM reform agenda, with future actions
including: (1) implementing computerized systems for public management, such as e-procurement and
systems for human resource management; (2) strengthening transparency and accountability in the
management of public resources by building the capacity of the Court of Accounts, the National Assembly,
and the Finance Inspection; and (3) preparing a Program for Results (PforR) operation in this area. The
PforR is expected to become effective during FY2023.

Nevertheless, crucial reforms relating to improvements in judicial institutional capacity, transparency, and
anti-corruption efforts remain under-addressed. This puts development outcomes at risk, especially since
"the lack of effective systems for upholding accountability, together with high levels of corruption, had a direct
impact upon PIM in Benin" (ICR, p. 2). The ICR also notes that "corruption was also particularly significant in
government procurement." (ICR, p. 2). Although the ANLC has been dismissed in March 2020, and replaced
by a new body (the HCPC) in April 2020, it will be essential to ensure that the HCPC operates efficiently and
effectively in future, with corruption cases being submitted to the new body and acted on by the state
prosecutor. Improvements in the justice sector and anti-corruption reporting and adjudication mechanisms,

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



as well as related reforms (such as improving the efficiency and effectiveness of courts to resolve case
backlogs) are foundational to progress on the overall PIM reform agenda.

The project team later added that the new PforR operation will contribute to consolidating the project's
achievement by addressing remaining economic governance challenge in Benin, including in the areas of
PFM/PIM, statistics capacity, digitalization of services and payments, civil service reform, and impact on
service delivery.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project targeted various dimensions of PIM, which were insufficiently explained or defined in the ICR
  report. Project design was largely appropriate for achieving the first project objective; however,
  improvements would have been desirable for outcomes related to the second project objective.


  The underlying studies and data required to support the design of the accountability objective was
  unfocussed and based on an insufficient understanding of the underlying challenges, reflected in overly
  ambitious targets. Indeed, the design of accountability-related activities was mainly based on a 2013
  study carried out by the European Union, which provided general recommendations on how to effectively
  set up Administrative Chambers in the First Instance and Appeals jurisdictions. This study, however,
  suffered from various limitations. Indeed, “since 2013 there had not been concrete progress, nor a clear
  implementation strategy of the key recommendations” (ICR, p. 20). Moreover, “there were also no
  significant studies carried out during project implementation to identify the bottlenecks in the
  implementation of judicial, anti-corruption and accountability reforms that would have helped the Task
  Team redesign activities, identify adequate indicators and baselines, and set realistic targets.” (ICR, p.
  20).


  Additionally, the flow of funds of the RBF component weakened its impact on improving the clearance
  rate of administrative cases. This contributed to poor results in reducing the backlog of administrative
  cases. Disbursements were initially made to the central government without any condition for timely
  and/or additional transfer of funds to the judicial branch. This issue was resolved only with the
  subsequent introduction of a PBC tied to the timely transfer of funds to the Supreme Court and the
  selected First Instance Tribunals and Appeals Courts.


  In the result, the PBCs were poorly designed and not adequate to incentivize progress toward
  achievement of project objectives. For improving the efficiency of PIM, the PBCs were intended to
  incentivize the efficient coordination and timely processing of financial flows in the electricity and water
  sectors. However, the scope of the PBCs was most likely too narrow, as the PBCs were limited to only 6



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



  projects representing less than 5 percent of the annual investment budget. Eventually, the PBCs’
  allocated amounts were substantially cut and the PBCs subsequently cancelled .


  Furthermore, and as stated previously, there were shortcomings in the methodology used to assess time
  and cost overruns of investment projects. The ICR (p. 23) notes that “neither the PAD nor the M&E
  manual explicitly defined the source of data or methodology" for time and cost overrun estimates."




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision and implementation support missions were conducted regularly. Task team leaders (TTLs)
 were based in the region (Côte d’Ivoire, Togo), and some team members were based in Cotonou to
 facilitate day-to-day implementation support. The project was restructured twice in order to align it with
 evolving government priorities (first restructuring) and mobilize funding to address the COVID-19 pandemic
 (second restructuring). The second restructuring effectively halted project efforts to enhance accountability
 in PIM, but the PDO was not revised, and implementation progress rating in Implementation Status and
 Results Reports (ISRs) remained Satisfactory (from February 2019 to project closing) even though no
 progress was being recorded toward lowering case backlogs.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E arrangements included standard processes, requiring implementation progress reports (such as
 quarterly implementation reports, intermediate financial reports, and annual financial statements), providing
 data on the project’s inputs, use of funds, activities implemented, and outputs. The government was also to
 report on intermediate and PDO indicators, recruiting an M&E specialist to strengthen its capacities in this
 regard. The costs of M&E were budgeted within the fourth project component. The government set up a
 Steering Committee composed of representatives of all ministries and agencies involved in project
 implementation to assist with reporting on M&E. This Committee was to approve AWPs, assess

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



 implementation progress, and issue strategic recommendations and corrective measures to improve
 project performance.


 The choice of several indicators did not adequately reflect a credible TOC. Moreover, the project's results
 framework had significant shortcomings. First, it assessed only the performance of projects that were
 included in the 2016–2018 PIP. While PIPs were developed on a three-year rolling basis, the government's
 annual review of its PIP performance was performed independently of the year in which the project was
 first added to the PIP. Accordingly, the project could not use official data from the PIP Annual Progress
 Reports to measure some outcome indicators. The project’s M&E specialist therefore consulted the
 database of the Directorate General of Budget and reworked the data to limit its scope only to projects
 approved in the 2016-2018 PIP.


 Second, as noted earlier, there were shortcomings in the methodology used to assess time and cost
 overruns of investment projects. The ICR (p. 23) notes that “neither the PAD nor the M&E manual explicitly
 defined the source of data or methodology" for time and cost overrun estimates. Given issues with
 accuracy and suitability of data, some reported outcomes cannot be accepted.


 Third, the effect of prematurely closed projects or closed projects with low physical execution rates was not
 fully explained and reported.



 Fourth, there were shortcomings in the measurement of the outcome on enhancing the performance of
 selected institutions of accountability. Finally, results pertaining to operationalizing and strengthening the
 capacity of Administrative Chambers of First Instance Tribunals and Appeals Courts, and the quality of
 internal audit in key ministries were not captured in the results framework.




b. M&E Implementation
  The PCU was primarily responsible for reporting on project results and liaising with ministries and
  agencies involved in the project to collect data. An M&E manual was drafted and implemented but not
  revised to reflect changes to the results framework. PBC verification through independent agencies
  followed a sound PBC verification protocol. An M&E specialist was engaged throughout project
  implementation. Progress and annual reports were issued on time, though the project could not use the
  official data from PIP Annual Progress Reports (as described above). From February 2019 until project
  closing, the ISR ratings of progress toward achievement of PDOs and overall implementation progress
  remained Satisfactory even though no progress was being recorded in the reduction of administrative
  backlogs (ICR, p. 25).




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 24), the project used M&E data on performance and results progress to inform
  project management and decision-making. An MTR was carried out and completed in March 2021,
  providing relevant recommendations to improve project performance. However, due to delays in
  conducting the MTR, M&E issues were identified late in the project cycle, yielding limited benefits for the
  restructuring process, or for revising the results framework and M&E arrangements.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Category C and did not trigger an environment assessment, as it primarily focused on
   supporting institutional and capacity building. There were no major environmental issues associated with
   the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   CFAF30 million of ineligible expenditures were identified in the use of the Project Preparation Advance.
   The government reimbursed the full total to the Bank. There were no other fiduciary non-compliance
   issues. Provisions for procurement, financial management, and safeguards were adequate. The
   implementation support team included procurement and financial management specialists.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



                                                                                 Modest efficacy due to modest
                                                                                 achievement of the objective to
                                                                                 improve the performance of
                                                                                 accountability institutions, and
                                                                                 some shortcomings in
                               Moderately            Moderately                  achievement of the objective to
Outcome
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              improve efficiency in public
                                                                                 investment management.
                                                                                 Modest efficiency due to
                                                                                 implementation inefficiencies
                                                                                 and data limitations in the
                                                                                 economic analysis.
                               Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG agrees with the lessons and recommendations identified in the ICR (pp. 26-27, drawing
attention especially to the following:

      Operational flexibility and responsiveness, where needed to address broader
       extenuating country circumstances, should be weighed carefully against intended
       project outcomes. Although the Bank worked successfully with the government to
       reprioritize the project to focus on activities focused on mitigating the economic and social
       shocks of the COVID-19 pandemic, this led to key activities critical to achieving
       this project's objectives being dropped. A more balanced reprioritization may have had
       fewer impacts on the project’s original theory of change.
      Feedback from citizen evaluation surveys can be a useful and credible tool to measure
       achievements towards accountability and performance, provided that
       appropriate timing and frequency of surveys are chosen. The timing of citizen evaluation
       surveys is crucial for the surveys to yield credible results. Several rounds of surveys may be
       necessary throughout a project cycle: a first round should be carried out early during project
       implementation to develop a credible baseline (that can possibly be integrated into project
       M&E); a second round may be required midway through project implementation to capture
       progress and identify requisite corrective measures; and lastly, prior to project closure,
       surveys are desirable to assess overall project success and performance. Importantly, this
       ensures citizen and beneficiary involvement throughout the reform process and project cycle
       and can catalyze the government’s continuing commitment to the reform process.
      Flexibility in changing environments should be accompanied with proper and rigorous
       adjustments to project M&E. The re-direction of funds to finance the COVID-19
       response resulted in the discontinuation of activities (and related performance indicators
       including at the PDO level) contributing to the project’s second outcome. Nevertheless, the



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)



         original PDO was still maintained. A proper results chain analysis would have helped ensure
         that activities being implemented were relevant to achieve all the intended outcomes.



IEG adds the following lessons:

        Data collection methods to be used for primary data collection and data sources need
         to be clearly articulated for each project component to ensure that the data produced
         are robust, timely, and relevant. This project highlighted a number of issues concerning
         data sources, methodology for data collection, analysis, and validation, and reporting
         mechanisms.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, well-structured, and clear. It covers pertinent thematic issues and situates the rationale
for the operation within the context of Bank and government strategy, providing a comprehensive and broad
description of project activities and achievements. It includes an excellent executive summary and reconstructs
a credible theory of change, including the assumptions that underpinned the operation's logic. It is candid in its
assessment of key shortcomings in the project's design and implementation, pointing to issues with data
analysis methodology, M&E design, and M&E implementation although the relevance and design of the judicial
component could have been assessed more critically. However, the ICR's lessons and recommendations could
have better addressed some of the key lessons and findings that emerge from these methodological issues. In
addition, some key information to support the ratings was not in the ICR and had to be provided later by the
project team.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BJ-Public Investment Management and Gov (P147014)




                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
