     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023054

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P151058                                   Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mauritania                                Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1040,IDA-D4660                       01-Nov-2020                                          11,532,467.88

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2016                               01-Nov-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             7,750,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            12,249,999.71                                               0.00

 Actual                                        11,606,108.43                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan                Ebru Karamete                Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project in Mauritania was the third in the World Bank's multi-country, multi-phase interdependent Series
   of Projects (SOPs) known as the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program (WARFP). The program's
   overarching development objectives were to "sustainably increase the overall wealth generated by the
   extraction of the marine fisheries resources of West Africa and the proportion of that wealth captured by West
   African countries".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated April 13, 2016
   (Schedule 1, page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (page 8):

   " To support the development of a seafood cluster in Novadhibou that promotes the sustainable
   management of fisheries and generates value for the communities".

   The PDO was amended with the Additional Financing (AF) for the project that was effective on September 30,
   2019. The PDO as stated in the AF agreement:

   i. To support the development of a seafood cluster that promotes the sustainable management of
   fisheries and generates value for communities in Novadhibou and (ii) to improve the business
   environment to boost private sector development in Mauritania.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-May-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two components (PAD, pages 10 - 14).

   1. Developing a sustainable seafood cluster in Nouadhibou. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$5.97 million. With AF of US$1.00 million, the revised estimate was US$6.97. The actual cost was
   US$5.88 million. This component aimed to build capacity of the Nouadhibou Free Trade Authority (ANZF)
   and the stakeholders to design and promote the seafood cluster (Seafood cluster refers to a geographic
   concentration in Nouadhibou of interconnected businesses, suppliers and associated public and private
   institutions involved in the fisheries industry). The team clarified that the ANZF's is responsible for planning,
   programming, organizing and promoting the entire free zone of Nouadhibou, which includes the
   development and support its key sector (the fisheries sector). There were two sub-components:

   a. supporting ANZF in developing a framework for sustainable seafood cluster through Public-Private-
   Partnerships (PPPs) and capacity building at local and national levels. Activities included developing: (i) a
   competitive diagnostics for the cluster: (ii) a cluster strategy; (iii) the legal and institutional framework and
   operational tools for managing the Nouadhibou Eco-seafood cluster (NESC) and (iv) Technical Assistance
   (TA) to the Ministry of Economy and Finance and support for establishing a PPP framework.




                                                                                                        Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



  b. supporting the government in generating responsible investments in NESC and capacity building of the
  Nouadhibou Free Zone stakeholders through: (i) a commercial viability assessment; (ii) targeted investment
  promotion activities: and (iii) skills training and TA for facilitating responsible investments.

  2. Increasing the value of seafood products produced and marketed in the seafood cluster with the
  participation of local actors. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.28 million. With AF of US$3.00
  million, the revised estimate was US$6.28 million. The actual cost was US$ 3.03 million. This component
  aimed to increase the value of seafood products produced and marketed in the seafood cluster and
  increase the participation of the local population in cluster activities. There were two sub-components.

  a. supporting the government in improving handling of landed catch and promoting fresh fish exports from
  the cluster through: (i) consultants' services for strengthening the management of the Autonomous Port of
  Nouadhibou (PAN), the artisanal and coastal fishing port and the Nouadhibou International Airport:
  (ii) improving handling of landed fish for reducing post-harvest losses; (iv) building a refrigerated warehouse
  freight terminal at the international airport; and (v) TA for modernizing trade services and regulations: and
  (vi) increasing fresh fish exports via ground transport.

  b. capacity building of local suppliers' and vulnerable groups through: (i) supporting the transition to the new
  fisheries management regime and improving processing and harvesting efforts; (ii) support the industries
  and institutions in complying with product quality control procedures and acquiring key certifications; and
  (iii) reducing post-harvest losses through improved management practices.

  The following two components were added with the AF for the project.

  3. Strengthen the investment climate for private sector development. The estimated cost was
  US$5.00 million. The actual cost was US$1.43 million. This component aimed to improve Mauritania's
  investment climate. There were two sub-components:

  a. purchasing of essential equipment for modernizing the commercial justice system and registry through
  upgrading and digitalization of the Commercial Registries in Nouakchott and Nouadhibou, renovating an
  existing building for hosting the commercial tribunal and the commercial registry of Nouakchott and
  providing TA to the Public-Private Investment Climate Technical Committee.

  b. supporting the government in operationalizing the PPP agenda and execute three pilot PPP projects
  through capacity building and advisory support to the Government entities in charge of PPP.

  4. Project management. The revised estimate for this component was US$0.5 million (This component
  was to be funded entirely through counterpart funding). The actual cost was US$0.09 million. This
  component planned to support project coordination, supervision, monitoring, fiduciary management and
  communication and outreach.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$9.25 million. The actual cost was US$11.60 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant of US$7.75 million. AF of $8.00 million was
  effective on September 30, 2019. With this, the total Bank financing was US$15.75 million. The amount


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



   disbursed was US$11.60 million. US$3.5 million of the Grant was cancelled. The difference between the
   Bank financing and disbursement was mainly due to exchange rate changes during implementation.

   Recipient contribution. The recipient contribution was planned at US$1.50 million. With AF, their
   contribution was increased to US$2.5 million. However, their actual contribution was US$0.09 million.

   Dates. The project approved on March 24, 2016 became effective on July 6, 2016 and was scheduled to
   close on November 1, 2020. AF was approved on May 17, 2019. The project closed on November 1, 2021.

   Other changes. There were three project restructurings.

   The main changes made through the first Level 2 restructuring on January 8, 2018.

         Funds were reallocated between categories and an unused project preparation advance funds was
          added to the project account.

   The main changes made through the first Level 1 restructuring on May 17, 2019.

         AF was approved at government request based on the project's satisfactory progress and
          performance until then. The activities related to the investment climate and investment climate were
          shifted to component three. These activities were national level activities and not strictly related to
          the Nouadhibou seafood cluster.
         Project activities were scaled up and the PDO was amended to reflect the increase in scope
          (discussed in section two). New indicators were added in view of the increased project scope.
         The closing date was extended by a year from November 1, 2020 to November 1, 2021.

   The main changes made through the second Level 2 restructuring on October 21, 2021.

         Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.
         US$3.50 million of the Grant was cancelled.

    Split rating. The original PDO was retained and the scope was significantly expanded with the AF. The
   PDO was amended to reflect the increase in project scope. Therefore, this review is not based on a split
   rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Mauritania is a sparsely populated (population of four million people), arid (just 0.5% of
the land is arable) and resource-rich country. Mauritania's growth performance is dependent on the
extractive sector and hence its economy is susceptible to swings in international commodity
prices. Diversification of the economy was hence deemed to be essential for accelerating the economic
growth required for sustained poverty reduction.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



Sector context. Mauritania's fishing waters are among the most productive in the world. However, the
economic and social returns generated from the fisheries sector are lower than their potential due in large
part to the overexploitation and depletion of the resource by legal and illegal operators. Moreover, while
Mauritania does get a substantial amount of fisheries resource rents from foreign fishing agreements, the
rents do not directly contribute to the development of the local economy in part because much of the fresh
fish caught in Mauritania water lands in foreign parts, which is whether value is added. The Government
strategy aimed to increase the competitiveness of the seafood cluster by strengthening the enabling
environment for private investment, developing infrastructure services for private sector development and
facilitating forward and backward linkages for the sector.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was fully-aligned with the Government's new fisheries policy
strategy for 2015 - 2019. This strategy emphasized on the importance of sustainability of the sector and
articulated the need for generating greater revenues and creating jobs in the post-harvest sector. The
Government's Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity (SCAPP) for 2016 - 2030 reiterated
the need for promoting a more competitive private sector to generate and sustain inclusive growth.

Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was consistent with the overarching objectives of the
Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2014 -2016. Pillar one of the strategy articulated the
need for growth and economic diversification. The PDO continues to be well-aligned with the current CPF
for 2018 -2023. The CPF highlighted the need for promoting economic transformation for diversified and
resilient growth. While Focus area one of the CPF specifically highlighted the strategic objective of
increasing value-added in the fisheries sector, focus area three highlighted the need for improving private
sector participation in economic activities.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has financed several analytical work and TA programs on the
fisheries sector in Mauritania. A study in 2014 on Transitioning toward Inclusive Green Growth in Mauritania
highlighted fisheries as one of the key sectors likely to drive sustainable economic growth in Mauritania.
The Bank's financed three TA programs (Nouadhibou Free Zone TA in 2013 -2014, Competitiveness of
Nouadhibou Trade Sections and Location in 2014 and Mauritania Public - Private Infrastructure Advisory
Facility (PPIAF) in 2014-2015. These programs prioritized the fisheries and the seafood industry as one of
the key sectors for sustaining economic growth. This project was designed based on the analytical work.

The original project envisioned a sequenced approach with a TA for governance of the fisheries sector and
capacity building for the Nouadhiou Free Zone Authority (ANZF) preceding targeted infrastructure
investments in the seafood value chain (the Nouakchott fish market and the refrigerated warehouse for
fresh fish exports in Nouadhibou). While the governance and capacity building activities were appropriate
for the intended outcome of sustainable management of the sector, the targeted infrastructure investments
were appropriate for the intended outcome of increasing the value added in the sector.

That said, the modified PDO, which incorporated the objective of "improving the business environment to
boost private sector development in Mauritania", was less relevant to the fisheries sector, although relevant
to the country as a whole. The modified PDO did not fit in smoothly with the original focus on the seafood
cluster. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is assessed as substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To support the development of a seafood cluster that promotes the sustainable management of fisheries

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as developing a seafood cluster strategy, developing legal
               and institutional framework for establishing Public Private Dialogue (PPD), and advisory services to the Free
               Nouadhibou Free Trade Authority (ANZF) for designing a seafood cluster strategy were aimed at reducing the
               overfishing in the fishing sector. These outputs were expected to contribute to the outcome of sustainable
               management of fisheries. The theory of change is predicated of the following assumptions: (i) The ANZF
               would continue to engage with the private sector to promote good management practices in the fisheries
               sector; and (iii) There would be political support for adopting new strategies in the Noudhibou Free Zone.

               The activities in this component were mainly technical assistance activities. It is unclear if these activities
               would suffice for realizing the development of seafood cluster that promotes the sustainable management of
               fisheries. Furthermore, neither the term "sustainable management of fisheries" was defined, nor was the
               methodology specified for measuring "sustainable management of fisheries".

               Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 28 and 43).

                     A seafood cluster strategy was developed and disseminated as targeted.
                     The Seafood Task Force - the first Public Private Dialogue (PPD) mechanism - was set up in
                      Mauritania to establish continuous dialogue for private sector development. The task force had
                      representatives from twelve key players including the public sector, including members of both ports
                      (the Commercial Port of Novadhibou (PAN) and the Artisanal Port of Novadhibou), the ANZF, the
                      private sector; and the civil society. The task force held six meetings of the task force by 2018. The
                      task force is however no longer operational.
                     Awareness campaigns of investment opportunities through the Free Zone were held at international
                      fairs and forums as targeted. The Free Zone's investment and communication strategy was
                      developed.

               Outcomes. The outputs described above were expected to increase investments by responsible investors
               (defined as those complying with the provision of the fisheries management plan for sustainable management
               of fisheries).

                     Investments in the fisheries sector increased to US$216 million when the project closed, exceeding
                      the target of US$100 million. However it is not clear whether the investments were made by
                      responsible investors, as the investments were not validated for transparency or environmental
                      compliance. The criteria for determining what is responsible investment were drafted and the metrics
                      were not developed for monitoring this indicator.


                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



The outcome indicator designed to measure the objective, 'new responsible investments' could not be
attributed to project activities. In the absence of sufficient evidence measuring "the development of a seafood
cluster" as well as a clear methodology for measuring "sustainable management of fisheries', efficacy of this
PDO is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To generate value for the communities.

Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change postulated that targeted infrastructure investments such as
constructing a refrigerated warehouse, improving the landing sites of Novadhibou's commercial port and the
artisanal port and extending them and facilitating fresh fish exports at the customs point of Nouadhibou, were
likely to improve the infrastructure for exporting fresh fish. Capacity building activities activities such as
training the private enterprises and small scale actors would help in reducing post-harvest losses. These
activities together were expected to increase seafood products produced and marketed through the seafood
cluster and thereby generate value for the communities. The theory of change assumes that the key
impediments to increasing the value of seafood exports are the lack of refrigerated warehouses and border
crossing procedures.

It is unclear how infrastructure investments and capacity building activities would increase sea food exports,
since the project did not support export promotion activities. Even if sea food exports did increase, it is not
clear how this would benefit the communities since there is no information on the main constraints facing
artisanal fishery households. Furthermore, the underlying assumption that the key impediments to increasing
the value of seafood exports are mainly due to the lack of refrigerated warehouses was unrealistic (discussed
below).

Outputs. (ICR, page 14 and pages 32 - 34).

      Thirty metric tons of cold storage capacity for fish products were built as targeted. A refrigerated
       warehouse and two pumping stations were built as targeted on the last day of the project. Two landing
       infrastructure facilities for improved traceability of fish products were built, as compared to the target of
       three. These infrastructure facilities were however completed at the final days of the project.
      The project provided 41,407 days of training, exceeding the target of 1,500.
      There were no women-led micro-medium and scale enterprises in Nouadhibou when the project
       closed (specified target five). Most activities targeting women such as marketing and operational
       support to local women's cooperatives operating in Nouadhibou were dropped due to the counterpart's
       failure to disburse the committed funds.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)




      A diagnostic study to facilitate exports at the border with Morocco was completed. However, several
       planned studies were dropped due to delays during implementation. The activity of constructing a
       building for the seafood cluster Governance Council in Nouadhibou was dropped.

Outcomes. The outputs of the activities described above were expected to have two outcomes: (i) increase
the volume of fresh fish exports (a proxy for value created under the assumption that improving the landing
and handling facilities for fresh fish will increase business for local communities).and (ii) increase in
the number of direct beneficiaries defined as actors on the ground such as artisanal, coastal and industrial
fishers, processing plant workers and those who sell fish and fish products.

      Annual fresh fish exports increased from 996 tons in 2015 to 29,097 tons, exceeding the target of
       21,400 tons during the project implementation period. However, the increase could not be not be
       attributed to the project activities, as the two landing infrastructure and the pumping stations for the
       commercial and artisanal ports were only completed in the final days of the project closure and the
       refrigerated warehouse was not operational when the project closed.
      1,551 people directly benefitted from project activities. This was far short of the specified target of
       6,000. 38% of the beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 30%. However, it is not clear
       who these beneficiaries were and how they benefited, as as there was no impact assessment or
       beneficiary survey.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the business environment to boost private sector development in Mauritania.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outcomes of activities added with the AF for the project were aimed at encouraging
private sector investment nationally and not related to the seafood cluster. Implementing investment climate
reforms, operationalizing the PPP, and computerizing the business and collateral registries were aimed at
improving the business environment in Mauritania.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 34 -35).

      PPP policy framework was adopted and commercial studies for PPP were completed as targeted.
       Three investors committed to private partnerships, short of the target of five.
      The business and collateral registries in Nouadhibou and Novakhott were not computerized and the
       commercial justice building in Novakott were not renovated as targeted.

Outcomes.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)




                                  The outputs of activities were expected to increase the transaction requests from the collateral and
                                     business registry. This outcome was not realized as the business and collateral registries were not
                                     activated when the project closed.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A traditional cost-benefit analysis was not conducted for most project activities, as the
   activities were in the nature of capacity building activities for the seafood cluster. An economic analysis was
   conducted at appraisal for activities associated with constructing a refrigerated warehouse and associated one-
   stop and streamlining procedures at the border crossing with Morocco. These activities accounted for 24.7% of
   the original project cost. The benefits were assumed to come from the returns on the refrigerated warehouse
   through increased seafood exports and new revenue generated by the warehouse, The Net Present Value
   (NPV) at 5% discount rate was US$1.7 million. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 9%. The
   economic analysis was not conducted at closure as the warehouse was not yet operational when the project
   closed.

   Administrative and Operational shortcomings. The project did not demonstrate value for money. Under the
   original project many activities (development and dissemination of the seafood cluster strategy, establishment of
   the seafood task force, the adoption of the 2017 law governing PPP and adopting investment climate
   reforms) were completed. However, many activities under the AF project were delayed due to a combination of
   factors, including political economy factors and addition of a new component that neither fit with the project
   framework, nor was aligned with the ANZF's mandate. Many activities were dropped (such as the activities
   aimed at targeting women and institutional strengthening activities), due to inadequate counterpart funding. The
   fish hall was not built, collateral and business registries were not digitized and activity associated with the
   construction of the refrigerated warehouse was only in the final days of the project and hence could not provide
   the expected results. About US$3.5 million of the bank financing could not be utilized and was cancelled.
   According to the clarifications provided by the team, the refrigerated warehouse is not functioning to date.

   In sum, efficiency is rated as modest.


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     24.70
 Appraisal                                                 9.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDOs is substantial. With modest efficacy and efficiency, overall outcome is moderately
unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. There is high institutional risk to development outcome. Risks are high that the project
outcomes will not be sustained given the weak institutional capacity for strengthening governance and
institution building and engaging with the private sector.

Government commitment/ownership. There is substantial risk to development outcome as evidenced by
the fact that many of the activities supporting women in the fisheries sector were undermined due to the lack
of counterpart funding by the government.

Technical risk. There is substantial risk to development outcome given that some infrastructure investments
in this project were not yet operational (such as the refrigerated warehouse) when the project closed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The analytical underpinnings of the project were sound (discussed in Section three). The project
  identified the constraints inhibiting fishery sector growth in Mauritania (overfishing, lack of stakeholder
  coordination, inadequate fish landing infrastructure and the lack of forward and backward linkages
  ).The design drew on lessons from the previous Bank-financed fisheries projects. The key lessons
  included: (i) recognizing that without appropriate institutions, infrastructure investments for facilitating fish
  landing or processing can lead to overexploitation of resources, the design sequenced activities with
  governance and capacity building activities preceding infrastructure investments. (ii) recognizing that
  economic zones are not substitutes for larger trade and investment reforms, the design included
  activities aimed to improve the general investment climate: and (ii) The design opted for a value chain
  approach for managing the various fishing segments. The preparation team drew on complementary
  Trust Fund Support (through the International Finance Corporation (IFC). The preparation team assessed
  that there was strong government buy-in and interest in promoting sector growth through private-sector-
  led development and supporting social inclusion through supporting women and the artisanal fisheries
  sector.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including high fiduciary risk and substantial political and
  governance risks and weak implementation capacity risks. Mitigation measures incorporated at design
  included, TA to sector to the main actors and a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) to address fiduciary
  risks. Even with mitigation measures the overall project risk was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD,
  paragraph 23). The arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary and safeguards compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  However, there were significant shortcomings on Quality-at-Entry, as described below:

  -Firstly, the project objectives were overly ambitious and linkages between project activities leading to
  achievement of the objectives were weak, and some of the PDO indicators were not attributable to
  measure the objective. For example: (i) It was unclear if the TA activities would suffice for realizing the
  development of seafood cluster that promotes the sustainable management of fisheries. (ii) It was also
  not clear how the fishing communities would benefit economically, since the project activities included
  only training. In addition, entrusting the funding responsibility to the counterpart regarding the activities
  aimed to benefit women was problematic, as eventually these activities had to be dropped for lack
  of funding.

  -Secondly, the design underestimated the political economy and governance risks.

  -Thirdly, the selection of the implementing agency proved to be problematic and it is not clear why the
  project was not entrusted to an agency with relevant experience. For the first time the Project
  Management Unit (PMU) was located outside the Ministry's control in the Nouadhibou Free Trade
  Authority (ANZF). The ANZF established in 2013 was new and untested and its institutional mandate
  were unclear. The strained relationship between the ANZF and the central ministry led to delays during
  implementation.

  -Fourthly, the activities added with the AF (strengthening the investment climate) had a nationwide scope
  and was not connected to the seafood sector activities. This made the ANZF even less suitable as this
  was well beyond its mandate.



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



  -Lastly, there were significant M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve Implementation Status Results (ISR) reports were filed over the project lifetime of seven years
 (implying on average twice a year missions). The supervision team was based in the region (until the
 COVID - 19 pandemic). This helped in facilitating regular communication between the Project Coordination
 Unit (PCU) and the team. The continuity of leadership was maintained, with two Task Team Leaders
 (TTLs) during implementation. In the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic, supervision were conducted
 remotely. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary and safeguards compliance (discussed in
 section 10). The supervision team identified the problems with M&E in the early years and made
 arrangements for hiring a M&E consultant to support data collection efforts. However, despite this, M&E
 problems with transparency and data validity remained through the project lifetime.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory, due to the shortcomings at
 Quality-at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The four key outcome indicators - increase in responsible investments in the fisheries sector, increase in
 fresh fish exports (a proxy for value created in the sector under the assumption that improving the landing
 and handling facilities for fresh fish will increase the incomes in the local communities), increase in the
 transaction requests from collateral and business registry (a proxy for business activity) and the number of
 direct project beneficiaries) - were measurable.

 However the M&E framework had shortcomings. For example, guidelines for who are "responsible"
 investors was not specified. The volume of fresh fish exported through Nouadhibou showed an increasing
 trend during implemented and the specified target was exceeded at closure. But this was not attributable to
 the project, given that the refrigerated warehouse was completed just before closure. A better proxy for
 business activity in the Nouadhibou would have been to track of private enterprises registered in



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



 Nouadhibou. Sustainable management of fisheries was not defined well and was not measured. The target
 for the number of direct project beneficiaries was unrealistic.



b. M&E Implementation
  The deficiencies in M&E were not rectified during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that
  there were critical deficiencies in data collection and validation of data by the stakeholders, such as
  private investors. This was particularly so with respect to the indicator on "responsible investors". The
  project neither determined the criteria nor followed it up with investors. The absence of validation made it
  difficult to attribute the realized outcomes to the project activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that given the weak implementation of M&E, the data that was collected
  was not utilized for learning, decision-making or adjusting project activities during implementation.

  In sum, M&E is rated as modest, in view of the shortcomings at design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01); and
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). (PAD, page iv).

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (paragraph 86) notes that
   adverse environmental impacts were possible for the activity associated with construction of a refrigerated
   warehouse for fish exports. The planned site was within the perimeter of the international airport. An
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted at appraisal, and an Environmental
   and Social Management Plan was prepared to safeguards issues (PAD, paragraphs 87 and 89). A
   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was instituted at appraisal to address complaints relating to the
   project activities (PAD, paragraph 90).

   The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that environmental and social compliance was moderately satisfactory during
   implementation. There were no environmental issues. However, the ANZF did not have an environmental
   and social specialist until project close, when a specialist was finally hired. The team confirmed that there
   were no issues with the safeguards on physical cultural resources. No complaints were received through
   the GRM.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted a financial management arrangements of ANZF at appraisal
   (PAD, paragraph 76). The assessment concluded that the financial risk was high, due to the lack of staff in
   ANZF. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included, recruitment of an accountant and a financial
   management plan. With mitigation measures, financial risk was downgraded to substantial at appraisal
   (PAD, paragraph 80).

   The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that financial management was moderately satisfactory. Although
   documents pertaining to the works completed (such as the refrigerated warehouse and the pumping
   station) were not submitted in a timely fashion, the external audits were unqualified and the financial
   monitoring reports were submitted within the required deadlines.

   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of ANZF at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 82). The procurement risk was assessed as high due to the weak implementation capacity of
   ANZF. Mitigation measures at design included, training ANZF procurement personnel and preparing a
   procurement plan. With mitigation measures, procurement risk was downgraded to substantial at appraisal
   (PAD, paragraph 84).

   The ICR (paragraph 75) notes overall procurement performance was moderately unsatisfactory. Although
   procurement was satisfactory under the parent project, following the AF, public procurement delays in the
   final years contributed to non-completion of many of the project activities. The ICR does not report any
   case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No significant unintended impacts were identified during implementation (ICR, paragraph 50).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately              Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately              Moderately                  There were significant
Bank Performance
                                Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory              shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from implementing this project, with some adaptation of
language.

1. A careful assessment of the political economy considerations at design can help in
reducing implementation delays. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in this project was located
outside the central government agencies. It was located in the Nouadhibou Free Trade Authority
(ANZF), a newly established entity with limited management experience and an unclear
mandate. The strained relationships between the central government and ANZF contributed to
implementation delays.

2. Adding a component weakly linked to project performance can increase project complexity
and affect performance. In this project, activities covering PPP and investment climate were added
to this project with AF to avoid the time for preparing an entirely new project. The added activities
had a national scope and loosely linked to the original activities in the fisheries sector. This
increased the project's complexity and contributed to the project's low rating.

3. The design needs to be realistic about the time for implementing new activities. The time
span for the AF project was approximately two years, from September 2019 to November 2021. This
time frame was ambitious, given the range of activities supported by the AF project.

4. A clear understanding of the priorities of the private sector would help projects seeking to
target private sector participation in a sector. Although a Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) forum
was created under this project, the private sector was not able to participate in the forum, as its
basic priorities (such as basic service needs) were given little consideration. This undermined
private sector participation in the sector.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written. The ICR candidly acknowledges the shortcomings in implementation arrangements and
the complexities added to the project through the AF for the project. The ICR draws good lessons from the
experience of implementing the project. The theory of change articulates the links between project activities,
outputs and outcomes. Shortcomings of the theory of change are that the links between outputs and outcomes
are rather weak and the assumptions underlying the theory of change unrealistic. Another shortcoming is the
length of the ICR. According to the guidelines, the recommended length is 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)



Substantial




                                                                                Page 16 of 16
