     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0023177

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P074191                                 GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08)

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Ghana                                   Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-43560,IDA-47300,IDA-56290,TF-       30-Nov-2012                                       270,145,842.70
 90450

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jul-2007                             31-Jan-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         90,000,000.00                                  50,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                         266,285,458.53                                  49,822,093.98

 Actual                                     264,695,555.46                                  49,822,093.98




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Maria Shkaratan           Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P070970_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P070970                                 GH-GEF Rural Energy Access ( P070970 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                               5490927.09

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                              Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



 26-Jul-2007

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                    5,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                    5,490,927.09

 Actual                                                    0.00                                    5,490,927.09




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the 2007 Financing Agreement, was “to assist the
   Recipient in: (i) improving the operational efficiency of the electricity distribution system and increasing the
   population’s access to electricity; and (ii) transitioning Ghana to a low-carbon economy through the reduction
   of greenhouse gas emissions.” The 2010 Amended and Restated Financing Agreement replicated the 2007
   PDO while breaking the sub-objective (i) into two parts, as reflected in the PDO1 and PDO2 below. The ICR
   quotes the 2010 PDO mistakenly dating it as a 2017 one and refers to Project PDOs in three different PADs,
   which creates confusion.

   The PDO was not revised.

   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:

   PDO1: to improve the operational efficiency of the electricity distribution system.

   PDO2: to increase the population’s access to electricity.

   PDO3: to transition Ghana to a low-carbon economy through the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Original components:

   Note: total project costs by source are provided in section e: Comments on Project Cost, Financing,
   Borrower Contribution, and Dates. Total costs by component at closure were not available from the ICR or
   from the project team at the time when this review was prepared. The ICR provides component costs at

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



appraisal from all available sources and component costs at closure only from selected sources, which is
confusing and not useful for the purposes of this review. Therefore, only component costs at appraisal are
provided in this section.

Component A: Sector and Institutional Development (cost at appraisal: US$14.0 million).

This component aimed to strengthen the capacity of the following Government of Ghana’s (GOG’s)
agencies: (i) Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC), including in relation to the design of electricity
tariffs and of power purchase agreements (PPAs), as well as to renewable energy (RE) promotion; (ii)
Ministry of Energy (MOE), in relation to donor coordination, managing the Project, and attracting
Independent Power Producers (IPPs); (iii) Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG) (the main electricity
distributor in the country) and Volta River Authority (VRA) (the main generator and supplier of electricity in
Ghana; its subsidiary is the second electricity distributor in the country), in order to improve efficiency of
operations; (iv) the Energy Commission, mainly to design and implement a new RE Law and promote RE;
(v) relevant agencies responsible for environmental monitoring; and (vi) The Interim Access Secretariat and
Rural Electrification Agency (REA), to support a program aimed at increased access to electricity.

Component B: Electricity Distribution Improvement (cost at appraisal: US$94.0 million)

This component financed the following: (i) physical works to upgrade the ECG’s electricity distribution
networks and thus reduce system interruptions/outages and technical losses and (ii) ECG’s commercial and
technical capacity development. The physical works included: (i) upgrading and constructing the overhead
lines, (ii) adding or replacing the distribution facilities, and (iii) providing shunt capacitor compensation.
Capacity development involved establishing customer service centers and a trouble call center; developing
a network and database management system; and extending the prepayment metering system.

Component C: Electricity Access and Renewable Energy (cost at appraisal - US$101.2 million)

This component supported the following: (i) setting up a new institutional, regulatory, and financing
framework for rural electricity access, including the creation of the REA and of the Rural Electrification Fund
(REF) (the financing mechanism for access expansion beyond the project timeline); (ii) financing physical
works, including new connections to the existing electricity distribution networks, extension of the
distribution networks, building mini-grids, and providing solar photovoltaic (PV) systems; and (iii)
establishing a financing mechanism for solar PV, to include consumer credits and capital subsidies, as well
as agreements with dealers for installation and maintenance.

2. New and revised components:

2.1. Component D was added with the first Additional Financing (AF1) in June 2010 to expand
activities under original Component B (Electricity Distribution Improvement):

Component D: Expanded Capacity for Electricity Distribution Improvement (cost at appraisal: US$70.0
million)

This component supported upgrading and expanding the sub-transmission and distribution networks in the
Ashanti region where ECG losses were the highest and demand growth the steepest; roll-out of prepaid
metering to address commercial losses; and establishing additional customer service centers.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



  2.2. New activities under Components A and C were added with level 2 restructuring in November
  2012 (no additional financing was involved). The following new activities were added to the GEF-
  financed parts of Components A and C: (i) establishing the solar testing and certification facility; (ii)
  expanding solar PV installation in public institutions; (iii) assessing the biomass resources for the design of
  feed-in tariffs for biomass-based generation; (iv) installing solar panels in schools; (v) installing PV-based
  streetlights; and (vi) completing a GIS-based electrification planning and management tool.

  2.3. Components E and F were added with the second AF (AF2) in April 2015: Component E, to
  address the ECG’s commercial losses; and Component F, to provide a technology application for managing
  outages and incidents in the supply network.

  Component E: Revenue Collection Improvement (cost at appraisal: US$55.0 million).

  This component supported the installation of innovative metering infrastructure at low and medium voltage.

  Component F: Management and Planning Enhancement (cost at appraisal: US$5 million)

  This component supported the following activities: (i) installing an information technology application for
  management and resolution of outages and incidents in the supply networks, focusing on low-voltage
  distribution and (II) project management activities, including purchase of vehicles and office equipment and
  provision of technical assistance/consultancy services.

  2.4. New activities under Components E and F were added with level 2 restructuring in January 2020
  (no additional financing was involved). Activities adopted under AF2 (Components E and F) were
  expanded, and the timeline extended, to cover additional work to improve ECG’s efficiency: (i) installing a
  corporate resource management system and of an Outage Management System (OMS); (ii) reengineering
  commercial processes and upgrading the commercial management system (CMS) incorporated under the
  project; and (iii) upgrading the data center.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$446.1 million, compared to the appraisal estimate of
  US$210.6 million. Note that the cost by component at appraisal amounts to US$209.6 million because it
  does not include the GEF’s Project Preparation Fund (PPF) in the amount of US$1 million. The ICR does
  not provide financing at closure from all sources, it only contains financing from IDA, the GEF, ACGF, and
  GPOBA. Therefore, the total costs at closure in the ICR are not comparable with the total costs at appraisal
  from the Project’s PAD. The team has provided costs at closure, by source, at IEG request. Total costs at
  closure by component were not available. Costs at appraisal quoted here have been obtained from the
  Project PAD.

  Project Financing: The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit
  (US$90.0 million at appraisal and US$217 million at closure) and a GEF grant (US$5.5 million at appraisal
  and US$5.5 million at closure). Project financing also included co-financing from the following entities:
  GPOBA (US$6.3 at appraisal and US$4.4 million at closure; Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF) (US$50.0
  million at appraisal US$50.0 million at closure); African Development Bank (AfDB) (US$18.3 at appraisal




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



   and US$87.9 at closure) and the Switzerland Government’s State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO)
   (US$11.0 at appraisal and US$33.0 at closure).

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The actual Borrower contribution was U$48.4 million, above the appraisal
   commitment of US$29.65 million. This contribution included the financing from the GOG (US$1.2 million at
   appraisal and US$1.44 million at closure); from the ECG (US$20.7 million at appraisal and US$39.18 million
   at closure); and from private sources (US$7.75 million at appraisal and US$7.75 million at closure).

   Project Dates: The project was approved on July 26, 2007 and became effective on December 6, 2007.
   The mid-term review was on February 19, 2010. The original closing date was November 30, 2012. The
   project was extended seven times:

       i. on June 3, 2010, for 12 months to November 30, 2013, through a level 1 restructuring, which
          supported IDA’s AF1;
       ii. on November 22, 2012, for 10 months to September 30, 2014, through a level two restructuring, to
          reallocate the funds between the sub-components of the GEF project;
      iii. on December 12, 2013, for ten months to July 31, 2015, through a level two restructuring, to allow
          for completion of works in the Northern regions;
      iv. on April 9, 2015, for 24 months, to July 31, 2017, through a level two restructuring, which supported
          IDA’s AF2;
       v. on June 15, 2017, for 18 months to January 31, 2019, through a level two restructuring, due to a late
           approval of the Financing Agreement by the Parliament;
       vi. on January 31, 2019, for 12 months to January 31, 2020, through a level two restructuring, to allow
           for completing two contracts key for the financial sustainability of the power sector;
      vii. on January 29, 2020, for 24 months to January 31, 2022, through a level two restructuring, to
           finance key investments to improve commercial and operational performance of ECG.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: At the time of project approval, deficiencies in the electricity sector amounted to a crisis
due to a significant supply-demand gap (supply below demand) and poor quality and reliability of supply.
Ghana was ranked 84th out of 104 countries in the Global Competitiveness Report in terms of energy
service quality. At the same time, reliable access to energy was a major factor of economic growth, critical
for reducing poverty and inequality, including among the country’s regions and urban/rural population. The
GOG’s strategy in the energy sector covered several areas. First, regional integration through the West
Africa Gas Pipeline (WAGP) and the West Africa Power Pool (WAPP), and a program to expand the
country’s own electricity generation capacity were pursued. Second, measures were developed to address
financial inefficiency of the VRA and ECG caused by the below cost recovery tariffs, poor operational
performance, and significant technical and commercial losses. Third, a demand-side management program
was undertaken. Fourth, an electrification program was implemented since 1989, and at project approval it
included objectives to connect customers located far from the main grid through mini-grids and off-grid
solutions.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 24
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



Relevance to GOG’s Strategies at approval: The PDO was relevant to the country conditions and well-
aligned with national priorities. The Ghana’s Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy II covering 2006 -
2009 (GPRS II) emphasized the energy sector objective of reliable supply of high-quality energy services
across customer classes and urban-rural areas. Access was to be increased from 54 percent to 75 percent
by 2015. Africa’s Clean Energy Investment Framework, launched in 2006, aimed at increasing energy
access while reducing emissions. The GOG focused power sector reform on: (i) a new institutional
framework for rural access; (ii) a tariff review aimed at cost recovery; and (iii) a framework for public/private
partnerships. The Project was to support these strategic objectives, including: reforming tariffs; improving
sector operational performance; reducing system losses; improving quality of power supply; supporting
private investment in RE; and increasing rural access through new institutional and financial frameworks
and innovative technical solutions (mini-grid and off-grid).

Relevance to the WBG’s Assistance Strategies at approval: The Bank’s Ghana Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) 2004-2007 was aligned with the GPRS II. In particular, the CAS acknowledged that
deficiencies in the supply and quality of energy services was preventing the achievement of Ghana’s
economic objectives, targeted reform of the energy sector, and included the Project as a key element of its
program. Also, the Project was to contribute to the achievement of the MDGs by: (a) reducing inequality in
the urban/rural access to electricity and (b) improving the financial health of the power sector and therefore
the sector’s fiscal burden.

The PDO remained relevant at closing. The project objectives were relevant to the January 2022 WBG’s
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2022-26, specifically to the CPF Objective 1.3 Enhanced
Operational Efficiency in the Energy Sector. The CPF notes that the fiscal burden created by the energy
sector is one of the main factors of the diminishing momentum of economic reforms. The government
started the Energy Sector Recovery Program (ESRP) in 2019, aiming to restore sector financial and
commercial viability, and the CPF supports the government plans, aiming to address financial viability of the
electricity sector from two points: (i) tariff review and design; and (ii) assistance to the ECG to improve
operational performance and attract private investments. In this context, the ongoing Energy Sector
Transformation Initiative Project (GESTIP, P163984) supports the sustainability of the GEDAP’s
investments by providing capacity building in the areas of electricity sector planning and revenue
management, gas sector management, regional power trading, and access to power in remote areas. ASA
preparation is also underway, including the ESMAP’s Clean Energy Transition and Operational Efficiency in
the Power Sector and the Ghana Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR, P177261), where
energy sector is key to finding solutions.

Previous WB sector experience in Ghana. In the recent past, the WB supported the West Africa gas
pipeline by financing the Sankofa gas project (2015), which now provides 60 percent of the gas needs of
the country. This project transformed the power sector by phasing out liquid fuels. The WBG also financed
construction of the HV interconnection lines with Burkina Faso and Togo; reinforcement and extension of
the distribution grid to peri-urban and rural communities; installation of mini-grids and solar PV systems in
remote areas; and equipment and tools to improve commercial performance of ECG.

The relevance of objectives is rated high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the operational efficiency of the electricity distribution system.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (ToC), developed for the ICR, showed a direct, logical causal chain from inputs to
               outputs. The inputs were: (i) regulatory strengthening; ECG corporate strengthening; and environmental,
               social, and project management improvement; (ii) distribution network improvements and extension (physical
               works, network and database management); (iii) distribution companies’ revenue collection improvements
               through the installation of metering and customer service centers; (iv) physical works providing RE solutions
               and capacity development for RE management; and (v) provision of the distribution network incidents
               management system. These inputs, if successfully implemented, were expected to result in the following
               outputs: (i) studies finalized and capacity building completed; (ii) distribution network physical works
               completed and network/database management systems operational; (iii) metering systems installed and
               customer service centers operational; (iv) rural mini-grids and solar PV systems installed, RE regulatory
               framework established; (v) the incident management system functional.

               The inputs are logically linked to the outputs, but some of the inputs could be better defined. The point of the
               capacity development input (input (i), Component A) was more specific than just regulatory strengthening and
               ECG corporate strengthening; more specifically, it was to support tariff design, PPA design, and RE
               promotion, as well as to help improve efficiency of operations of the ECG and VRA. The electricity access
               and RE input could also be captured closer to project design: it went beyond capacity building and physical
               works to install mini-grids and PV systems. In fact, it involved setting up a new institutional, regulatory and
               financial framework (consumer credits, capital subsidies, agreements with dealers for installation and
               maintenance) for sustainable rural RE market.

               The TOC’s link from the outputs to outcomes has significant weaknesses. First, there is an inadequate link
               between output (ii) (distribution network improvements) and the outcomes: this output is only linked to the
               outcome of “increasing the population access to electricity” (PDO sub-objective 2), whereas it should be also
               linked to the outcome of “improving the operational efficiency of the electricity distribution system” (PDO sub-
               objective 1) because this output represents a supply-side efficiency improvement. Second, output (iv) (RE)
               should be linked to both PDO sub-objectives 2 and 3 (increased access and mitigation action). Third, from the
               presentational point of view, the list of PDO level outcomes in the TOC is confusing: it lists five outcomes
               instead of the logical three (as it would be per the PDO sub-objectives), repeating one of them twice and
               creating a fourth one with no need to do so. Instead, the TOC should have listed the three PDO sub-
               objectives as outcomes and use arrows to connect the outputs to them.

               The long-term objectives in the TOC are substantively incorrect. They do not include actual long-term
               objectives but instead mix project outcomes, which are already stated in the “PDO outcomes” column using
               slightly different wording (namely, improved reliability of the distribution system, ”increased performance of
               energy public entities and utilities”, and “improved financial stance of institutions active in the electricity


                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



sector”) and objectives outside of the Project scope (namely, “capable and efficient institutions to ensure the
oversight of the electricity sector” and “expansion of connections to RE sources”). Instead, the relevant list of
long-term objectives of the Project would be as follows: reduced fiscal burden from the electricity sector,
reduced financial losses to customers due to such disturbances as blackouts and voltage variations; and
welfare gains/inequality reduction/climate mitigation gains due to increased access and the scale-up of the
rural RE-based access expansion, promoted by the Project.

Outputs

1. Electricity Distribution Improvements and Expansion. The Project delivered all of the expected outputs
as related to investment in physical assets and software to support distribution network improvements and
expansion (Component B, Component D, and Component F). This included (within Components B and D)
installed primary substations; upgraded substations (installed switchgear and transformers, expanded
substations); installed interconnecting circuits from the new substations to the network; installed small
capacity transformers for high-voltage distribution; and installed shunt capacitor banks. This also included the
delivery of the planned 17 customer service centers and nine district offices. In addition, it included the
establishment of a network and database management system and the delivery of prepayment metering
systems. Under Component F, an information technology application for managing outages and incidents in
the supply network was provided.

2. Sector Development (Component A). Multiple outputs in the area of sector development were completed
under the project, including: electricity tariff design, RE law design, REA creation, and RE promotion. The
Renewable Energy Act was developed under the Project and approved by the Parliament in 2011. The
Renewable Energy Directorate (RED) within the MOP was established and is operational. Renewable
resource assessments for biomass energy, wind, and mini/micro-hydro electricity generation have been
completed. Tariff studies and utility benchmarking were also finalized, and the feed-in tariff methodology for
RE was prepared. Oversight agency capacity building was implemented. A solar PV testing and certification
center was established.

3. ECG’s Operational Performance Improvements. Significant efforts to improve ECG’s operational
performance were made throughout project implementation (Component A, Component D, Component E,
and Component F), and the outputs were delivered. Key outputs were: (a) the upgrading and modernization
of the automatic meter testing and the development of the Secondary Automation and Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system; (b) the deployment of the bulk meters for boundary metering; and (c)
the completion of the Commercial Management System (CMS) and the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
system for ECG. Under Component E, smart pre-payment meters were installed, as well as bulk meters for
distribution transformers. Staff was trained.

Outcomes

1. Electricity Distribution Improvements and Expansion The network upgrades/extension under the
Project allowed for better quality of supply and for the intensification of the existing network usage, as shown
in the following outcomes:

- Annual unplanned outages amounted to 24.5 hours at closure, significantly exceeding the target of 100
hours and the baseline of 200 hours. Progress with this indicator was stable over the years of project
implementation: it measured at 130 hours in 2015 (AF2 Restructuring Paper), at 90 hours in 2017 (2017


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



Restructuring Paper), and at 46.8 hours in 2019 (2019 Restructuring Paper). Improved supply quality benefits
customers when their financial losses from unplanned blackouts and voltage variations diminish.

- Over 150,000 households were connected to the distribution networks and 127,983 customers have been
added to ECG’s customer base.

2. Sector Development. The Project made a significant contribution to creating the institutional and
regulatory framework for the RE development and promoting rural RE by piloting mini-grids and starting PV-
based rural electrification. Project’s long-term value-added was expected to be in the scale-up of the
established rural RE-based connections.

3. ECG’s Operational Performance Improvements.

In the area of ECG’s operational performance, none of the targeted outcomes were achieved, specifically:

- ECG’s non-technical losses reached 20.16 percent at closure, significantly worse than both the target of 9.8
percent and the baseline of 13.9 percent.

- ECG’s ratio of revenues to costs equaled 0.69 at closure, significantly below the targeted level of “above 1”.

- ECG’s bill collection efficiency (% of sales) was 84.4 percent at closure, below the target of 90 percent and
the baseline of 85 percent. This indicator showed no improvement over the years, as indicated by the data in
the 2015 and 2017 restructuring papers.

- ECG’s accounts receivable were 184 days at closure, significantly worse (i.e., more than double) than the
target of 90 days and worse than the baseline of 150 days. However, the level of this indicator was 104 days
in December 2019, and the subsequent deterioration of this result can be explained by the impact of the
COVID-19 restrictions (as discussed in the Outcomes section).

- PDO indicator 1 - the ECG’s Performance Verification Index (PVI) (ratio of revenue recovered to GWh
delivered to the distribution system, adjusted to the average end user tariff) – was not achieved. The actual
level at closure was worse at 66.3 percent, below the original target of 75 percent, the revised target of 90
percent, and the baseline of 68.9 percent. The ICR states that the low level of PVI at closure was due to the
covid-related demand decline, reduced payments by customers, and restrictions on bill collection and power
theft control. However, while this is a valid factor, it is certainly not the only one, as the decline in this indicator
started prior to the COVID-19 outbreak: the AF2 restructuring paper (2015) registered the PVI of 87 percent,
the 2017 restructuring paper reported it at 74 percent, and the ICR quotes its level at 80.6 percent in June
2020.

It is important to note that PDO indicator 1 is, in fact, not very useful for Project evaluation because it blends
together technical, operational, and regulatory dimensions of the sector and ECG performance, while Project
outcomes in these three areas were very different: successful network improvements (resulting in reduced
technical losses), unsuccessful operational performance improvements (low revenue collection results), and
insufficient tariff reform (below-cost recovery tariffs). Measuring these three dimensions (that have distinct
determining factors) by using one formula makes the resulting numbers hard to interpret.

IEG disagrees with the ICR’s conclusion that “there was good improvement in the operational efficiency of the
Ghana’s electricity distribution system, but the achieved progress was reversed by the destabilizing effect of

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



the COVID-19 pandemic on the revenue collection” (ICR, page 20). While Project investments supporting
operational and financial sustainability were delivered, the Project achieved limited outcome level results in
this area, as indicated in project documents (restructuring papers of 2015, 2017, 2019, and the ICR itself).
The Project team has shared the information that non-technical losses had been increasing over the years,
and Project interventions did not lead to positive results due to negative external factors. First, tariff increases
were necessary to achieve cost recovery, but they were not fully implemented for political reasons. Electricity
tariffs in Ghana are still significantly below cost recovery. Second, the country has excess generation
capacity, a result of the ECG’s entering into more than 30 (uncompetitively procured and thus expensive)
power purchase agreements (PPAs) during the 2012-2016 power crisis. This excess capacity creates a
financial liability for the sector and pushes the cost of electricity up. Third, poor revenue collection is
persistent despite the efforts made by the Project. The latter has been exacerbated (but not created) by the
restrictions caused by COVID-19.

The Project made significant efforts to improve ECG’s operational and financial performance, starting with the
original project, which emphasized this task. In 2015, AF2 targeted mainly ECG’s operational efficiency,
dedicating more than 90 percent of its total funding to it. Many of the project’s extensions can be explained by
the need to produce outputs that supported improved efficiency of the ECG operations. Namely, Project’s
extension of 2017 was mainly caused by a delay in the implementation of a new metering system (part of the
revenue collection improvement program); and the 2019 extension was due to a delay with the installation of
the pre-payment meters. Project closure extension of 2020 was due to an additional effort to improve
operational and commercial performance of ECG as well: to deliver systems for resource management,
outage management, commercial management, and data management. Despite these efforts, the task of
sector operational improvement is still outstanding, and the Bank’s Energy Sector Recovery Program (ESRP),
approved in May 2019, is aimed at providing an action plan for the Government to bring the sector back into
financial balance (which is critical for the country’s fiscal balance) over the next five years.

To summarize the discussion of efficacy under Objective 1:

1. Electricity Distribution Improvements and Expansion. The Project delivered all of the expected outputs.
The outcomes were also achieved: network upgrades/extension under the Project allowed for better quality of
supply (significantly reduced outages) and for the intensification of the existing network usage, leading to
150,000 new residential connections.

2. Sector Development. Multiple outputs were completed including electricity tariff design, RE law design,
REA creation, and RE promotion. The Project value-added in this area was in creating institutional and
regulatory basis for RE development and piloting/demonstrating rural RE electrification solutions for a scale-
up.

3. ECG’s Operational performance improvements. While the outputs in this area were delivered, they did
not amount to improved operational performance, as shown by the results framework (RF) indicators. In
particular, non-technical losses have been increasing over the years. Project interventions in this area did not
lead to positive results due to factors outside of the Bank’s control, including: the below-cost-recovery tariffs;
excess generation capacity which created an upward pressure on electricity cost; and poor revenue
collection, exacerbated by the restrictions imposed during COVID-19. The task of sector operational
improvement is still outstanding, and the Bank’s Energy Sector Recovery Program (ESRP), approved in May
2019, is currently addressing it focusing on sector financial sustainability, which is critical for the country’s
fiscal balance.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



The efficacy rating for Objective 1 is substantial, but with major shortcomings related to the critically important
outcome of improving ECG’s operational and financial performance. This is aligned with a modest outcome,
as clarified by the Bank team in their response to IEG dated January 20, 2023, which explained the
underlying rationale for the ICR’s overall project outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the population’s access to electricity.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under objective 1.

Outputs:

Access expansion. Outputs under this objective were two-fold: (i) intensification of the existing distribution
network (transformers were added and conductors upgraded to increase voltage, and distribution lines were
extended) and (ii) RE promotion (five mini-grids were installed; PV solar equipment was supplied to
households, health facilities, and schools; and PV solar street lighting was delivered). Outputs included
creation of energy service companies (ESCs) and a credit scheme for home solar systems.

Outcomes:

1. Grid intensification. The need for grid intensification was critical, exacerbated by rapid urbanization in the
country, which significantly increased demand for electricity in the area served by the existing network and
created the need for network extension.

Under objective 1 (Component B), the Project created technical capacity for network intensification, which
was a pre-requisite for the provision of new connections. Under the Project, more than 2.1 million people
received new connections to the grid, exceeding the target.

2. Rural RE-based electrification under the project led to increased rural access to electricity: new
connections that were provided to approximately 100,000 people through individual PV systems and to
10,000 people through mini- and micro-grids. Outcomes also included improved street lighting from PV-
powered systems. The long-term expected outcome was a scale-up of the Project investments in rural
electrification, based on the institutional and regulatory basis for RE development created by the Project and
piloting/demonstrating rural RE electrification solutions by the Project.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To transition Ghana to a low-carbon economy through the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under objective 1.

Outputs:

The Project contributed to the country’s climate change mitigation efforts through the following actions: (i)
support to RE institutional and regulatory strengthening and to rural RE-based electrification (Component A
and Component C); (ii) supply-side energy efficiency investments through distribution network upgrades
leading to improved quality of supply and therefore a reduced need in back-up generators (which are typically
powered by high-emission diesel) (Component Band Component F); and (iii) demand-side energy efficiency
improvements, namely smart meters’ installation, resulting in reduced theft (and therefore reduced over-
usage) of network electricity (Component E). The ICR failed to acknowledge the supply-side and demand-
side measures.

As discussed under Objective 1, Project RE outputs included electricity tariff design, RE law design, REA
creation, and PV systems’ installations in rural areas. Supply-side outputs were the delivered physical assets
and software to support distribution network improvements and expansion. Main demand-side outputs were:
the provided modern automatic meter testing system and data management systems for metering, as well as
the deployment of bulk and individual pre-payment meters.

Outcomes:

The outcome level results in the area of climate mitigation were:

- Ghana’s institutional and regulatory framework for RE was developed;

- RE-based mini-grids had an aggregated installed capacity of 1.7 MW; and individual PV solutions were
provided to 16,822 households, replacing kerosene lamps. In addition, 752 solar PV systems were delivered
to rural health facilities ad schools, also replacing alternative fossil fuel-based lighting solutions.

- By Project closure, 458 Ktons of CO2 were avoided, against the target of 250 Ktons, due to the
implemented RE-based electrification solutions only. Total avoided CO2 emissions during the life of the
physical RE assets delivered by the Project were estimated at 2,220 Ktons.

- Supply-side energy efficiency investment resulted in decreased outages: the achieved level was 24.5 hours
of annual unplanned outages at closure, against the target of 100 hours and the baseline of 200 hours.

- Demand side interventions (the installation of the smart metering systems) were not measured at the
outcome level.

- Long-term expected outcome: climate mitigation gains due to the creation of RE institutional and regulatory
framework and a scale-up of the rural RE-based solutions promoted by the Project.


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For all three objectives, the efficacy is Substantial, except that for Objective 1, the rating is qualified as
                            Substantial with major shortcomings, hence a modest performance with respect to the critically important
                            outcome of improving ECG’s operational performance. The Project achieved the key outcomes of electricity
                            distribution improvements and expansion, leading to a better quality of supply (significantly reduced outages)
                            and allowing for network intensification, which in turn led to more than 2.1 million people being connected to
                            the grid, exceeding the target. The Project created institutional and regulatory basis for RE development,
                            piloted rural RE electrification solutions, and created potential for a scale-up. The CO2 emissions avoided due
                            to the RE-base electrification under the Project amounted to 458 Ktons by Project closure, almost twice the
                            target of 250 Ktons.

                            ECG’s operational performance did not improve by Project closure, although the Project delivered the
                            intended outputs. The reasons for this shortcoming were outside of the Bank’s control. The issue of sector
                            operational performance is still outstanding, and the Bank’s Energy Sector Recovery Program (ESRP) is
                            addressing it. Since the task to improve operational performance constituted a small share of financing under
                            Objective 1, and other tasks under the same objective achieved their expected outcomes, the overall rating
                            for Objective 1 is Substantial.

                            The overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis was conducted both at appraisal (ex-ante) and at closure (ex-post), using cost-benefit
   methodology in both cases. The outcomes are only partially comparable because the analysis at appraisal was
   conducted at the level of specific Project interventions and one Project component, while the analysis at closure
   involved calculations at the component level, as well as for the Project overall. The following
   components/subcomponents were not covered in both ex-ante and ex-post calculations: Component A (Sector
   and Institutional Development); Subcomponent C5 (Capacity Building for Off-grid Renewable Energy Solutions);
   Component E (Revenue Collection Improvement); and Component F (Management and Planning
   Enhancement). The ICR reports that the ex-ante and ex-post analyses covered respectively 95 percent and 90



                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



percent of the total Project costs. However, using the Project costs data by component from the ICR (ICR, page
63), the correct ex-post number is 78 percent, while the ex-ante number is indeed 95 percent.

The ex-ante analysis presented in the Project PAD contained the following outcomes:

The analysis was done for Components B and C (except Sub-component C5 on RE capacity building).

Component B: Electricity Distribution Improvement. The EIRR is 202 percent, while the NPV is USD$682.7
million (at 8 percent discount rate);

Component C: Electricity Access:

      Grid access: The outcomes of the economic analysis are presented by sub project. The EIRR for four
       sub-projects ranges from 10.8 percent to 74.6 percent, while the NPV ranges from US$5.6 to US$147.0
       million (at 10 percent discount rate).
      Solar PV: The EIRR equals to 21 percent. The NPV was not calculated.

The ex-post analysis presented in the ICR had the following outcomes:

The analysis was done for Components B, C (except Sub-component C5 on RE capacity building), and D.

Project overall: The EIRR is 20.7 percent (or 21.9 percent when climate change mitigation benefits are
included); while the NPV is US$175.7 million (or US$198.7 when climate change mitigation benefits are
accounted for), at 10 percent discount rate.

Component B (Electricity Distribution Improvement) and Component D (Expanded Capacity for Electricity
Distribution Improvement). The main economic benefits estimated were: (i) reduction in unserved power and (ii)
additional electricity delivered using new connections. The EIRR is 23.8 percent (or 24.8 percent when climate
change mitigation benefits are included); while the NPV is US$154 million (or US$167.6 when climate change
mitigation benefits are accounted for), at 10 percent discount rate.

Component C: Electricity Access. The main economic benefits were derived from additional electricity delivered
using new connections. The analysis included both grid intensification/extension and off-grid RE solutions. For
the component C overall, the EIRR is 10.3 percent (or 12.2 percent when climate change mitigation benefits are
included); while the NPV is US$1.1 million (or US$8.5 million when climate change mitigation benefits are
included), at 10 percent discount rate. Calculations separately for the grid and off-grid sub-components were as
follows:

      Grid intensification/extension: the EIRR is 12.7 percent (or 14.6 percent when climate change mitigation
       benefits are included); and the NPV is US$10 million (or US$17.6 million when climate change mitigation
       benefits are included), at 10 percent discount rate.
      Off-grid RE solutions: the EIRR is -6.1 percent (or -5.7 percent when climate change mitigation benefits
       are included); and the NPV is (US$6.5 million) (or (US$6.3) million when climate change mitigation
       benefits are included (at 10 percent discount rate).

Administrative efficiency. Operationally, the Project was able to implement its activities without a significant
adjustment of its design. The Project’s scope considerably expanded with AF1 and AF2. This increase was
justified considering the amount of additional financing. Project inefficiency was mainly in its prolonged time

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



frame: the Project was extended seven times for the total extension of ten years, from the original planned
closing date of November 30, 2012 to the actual closure on January 31, 2022. However, this should be viewed
in the context of the AF1 in 2010 and of the AF2 in 2015, both of which involved additional activities. Most of the
original activities (Components A, B, and C) were completed by the end of 2015, when the AF2 was approved.
This indicates a delay of approximately two years with the delivery of the original components. While the
activities under AF1 were completed on time, the implementation of tasks under AF2 was not proceeding
according to the schedule. At the same time, the AF2 activities were critically important to complete because
they were mainly addressing ECG’s financial sustainability, essential for the overall country’s fiscal balance. The
focus was on the provision of advanced metering systems. There were multiple delays with the implementation
of this task, caused by various external factors, including the COVID-19 related restrictions. As a result, while
the original planned closing date for these activities was July 31, 2017, there were three extensions for the total
of four years and six months.

The project efficiency is rated substantial. Despite the significant delays with Project closing, IEG took into
account (i) the completion of the original activities by 2015 and the timely completion of AF1 activities; and (ii)
the persistent difficulty of implementing activities related to the ECG operational and financial sustainability, as
well as the importance of these efforts.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        78.00
 ICR Estimate                                                21.90
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on the high relevance of objectives, substantial efficacy (with major shortcomings, hence modest
performance in the critically important outcome of improving ECG’s financial and operational performance,
under Objective 1), and substantial efficiency, the overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                        Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk. The main project risk is financial sustainability of the ECG, which is critical for the overall
country fiscal balance. The project’s substantial efforts to support ECG’s financial health were unsuccessful.
The Bank’s Energy Sector Recovery Program (ESRP) is currently addressing this issue.

Political. One of the reasons for the poor financial performance of the electricity sector is an inadequate tariff
level (tariffs are well below costs). The reluctance of the authorities to increase the tariffs, as well as to
address the drivers of the high cost of electricity, has political reasons and is expected to continue to be a
risk to Project outcomes.

Government ownership/commitment. Rural electrification has high costs – both financial and operational -
because of the low density of rural population and the need in off-grid, location-specific solutions. This might
push it down the list of Government priorities, creating a risk to the expected scale-up from the Project’s
investment in rural RE-based solutions.

Technical. The assets delivered by the Project are mostly based on advanced technology, and there is a risk
of asset dilapidation due to insufficient capacity to use them and technical capacity to maintain them.
However, the Project invested in creating such capacity by providing training.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was fully aligned with the government’s strategy for improving electricity sector performance
  through addressing power distribution quality, improving operational performance of distribution
  companies, addressing sector financial gap, increasing rural access, and promoting RE-based electricity
  supply. The project was well-informed by financial and sector studies, including those conducted by other
  Bank projects. The team worked closely with the stakeholders to design a project that would be
  consistent with the country needs in the energy sector and address the sector's financial insolvency,
  which was putting increasing pressure on the country’s budget.

  The Project design reflected multiple critical sector issues and was based on a comprehensive approach:
  the Sector and Institutional Development component, as well as the regulatory and institutional sub-
  components of the Electricity Access and RE component, were supportive of the long-term sustainability
  of the project-financed physical investments. To respond to the need to supply electricity to rural areas,
  the Project used innovative technological RE solutions and tested and demonstrated various approaches,
  applying those that were suitable for local conditions, thus setting the basis for eventually promoting a
  scale-up.

  Combining two very different and complex tasks – distribution network improvements and setting up a
  system of rural RE-based electrification – in one project could be seen as a factor of potential low project
  performance (as the ICR states, “the key weakness at entry was the complexity of the project activities
  and scope”). In fact, however, it was a beneficial design approach to combine a component with expected


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



  high financial (distribution network improvements) and a component with, vice versa, low financial return,
  considering that the latter one was bringing high social benefits, both at project closure and long-term.

  The ICR states that while main risks were identified, some mitigation measures were unsuitable.
  However, there is no further discussion of the stated unsuitable measures, and it is unclear which risks
  could be mitigated better. The ICR correctly states that some of the risks stated at appraisal were not
  possible to mitigate. Indeed, the Project took on a very ambitious task of improving sector operational and
  financial performance, which depended on Government’s actions in the areas of tariff reform, competitive
  selection of power producers, and billing and collection reform, and therefore are outside of the Bank
  control. The Project’s RF is heavily focused on the sector operational performance, reflecting those
  ambitions.

  While the project was over-ambitious in its targets related to sector operational performance, most of the
  financing at appraisal was allocated to the lower-risk tasks of improving the distribution network and
  establishing RE-based rural electrification. The high-risk task of improved operational performance was
  justifiable considering its importance for the country's fiscal balance. The rating for quality at entry is
  therefore Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation took 15 years, compared to the five years envisioned at appraisal. However, this
 should be viewed in the context of the AF2, which added new tasks (focused on improving the ECG’s
 billing and metering system) at the time when almost all of the original activities, as well as the AF1
 additional activities, were concluded. It should also be viewed in the context of negative external factors.

 - Prior to AF2, the Project closure was delayed for two years. The implementation of the original activities
 was finalized 2015, with a two-year delay, as compared with the appraisal date of completion. The related
 extensions were needed to complete the tasks under both distribution network and rural access
 components, which took longer than expected. The activities under AF1 were completed on time.

 - AF2 delays amounted to four years and six months, requiring three extensions of Project closure. The
 factors were technical (complexity of the task), bureaucratic, and contextually challenging in relation to the
 adjustment to the evolving country needs. The first extension (from July 2017 to January 2019) was mainly
 due to a late approval of the AF2 Financing Agreement by the Parliament, resulting in the gap of one year
 and eight months between AF2’s Bank approval and its effectiveness. The second extension (from January
 2019 to January 2020) was caused by the technical issues with a newly installed by the Project metering
 system, requiring the contractors to do additional work. The third extension (from January 2020 to January
 2022) was triggered by the Bank decision to step in to provide support in place of a cancelled project,
 which was supposed to be financed by the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC).

 The Bank team was based in the country and was able to monitor project implementation closely.
 Efficiency of supervision was supported by the division of responsibilities between the two Project TTLs.
 One oversaw the implementation of the distribution network improvements and the other managed the rural

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



 RE-based electrification component. The ICR reports that the team “had a flexible and proactive role in
 addressing the barriers that hindered project implementation”, finding solutions, and ensuring that “the
 reporting on progress toward project’s outcome was regular and comprehensive”.

 The project experienced significant delays, in some cases caused by the inability to accomplish tasks
 within the established time frame. However, the implementation was also a difficult task due to the
 technical complexity of the Project and external factors. Therefore, the rating for quality of supervision is
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The strength of the Project RF at appraisal was as follows. The RF included several intermediate outcome
 indicators and included higher level outcome indicators, such as access to electricity and CO2 emissions
 avoided. All indicators in the original RF were quantitative, and all of them were time-bound and had
 baselines and targets. A gender-disaggregated indicator was applied with a consequent revision.

 However, the project's RF had significant weaknesses, specifically:

 (i) The appraisal level RF reads like an electricity performance benchmarking manual because it mainly
 consists of key electric utility performance indicators and has no indicators measuring actual Project
 outputs. It had an emphasis on ambitious outcome indicators, whose achievement was outside of the Bank
 control. Most of them were linked to operational performance of ECG and, considering the extent of the
 lingering issues with ECG operations, it was hard to expect that one project can possibly accomplish so
 much. At the same time, the RF did not include any output indicators, which would be very useful to
 monitor project performance under both the distribution network improvements component and sector
 development component.

 (ii) All three PDO indicators were inadequate for the following reasons:

 - PDO indicator 1 – the ECG’s PVI - mixed technical, operational, and regulatory dimensions of the sector
 and ECG performance and therefore was hard to interpret. It proved to have limited utility for monitoring
 because outcomes in these three areas turned out to be very different: successful network improvements
 by the Project (resulting in reduced technical losses); unsuccessful operational performance improvements,
 which were only partially under the Bank control; and insufficient tariff reform, which was outside of the
 Bank control.




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



 - PDO indicator 2 – Household electrification rate in the ECG service area – was not adequate for
 measuring Project achievements because of the impact of various demographic factors and the steep
 urbanization in the country before and during Project implementation. This indicator was later replaced by
 the indicator of “Direct project beneficiaries, number of people”.

 - PDO indicator 3 – CO2 emissions avoided due to the Project – is not very useful as a PDO indicator
 because the point of the RE-based electrification task under the Project was in creating an institutional and
 regulatory basis for RE adoption and in piloting RE applications in rural areas, thus promoting a scale-up.
 As such, the RE-based electrification under the Project was implemented on a small scale, and this
 indicator did not reflect main Project outcomes in this area. This indicator would be appropriate to use as a
 PDO-level one for a task that would scale up Project RE investments.

 (iii) The indicator of system losses combined technical and commercial losses, while measuring them
 separately would be necessary in order to monitor project performance in two separate areas: distribution
 network improvements and operational efficiency. This deficiency was later corrected, and two new,
 separate indicators were included in the RF: for technical losses and commercial losses.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR states that the PIU performed M&E. Some issues were created by the modifications for the RF
  during the 2010 AF1 restructuring, when indicators specific to the northern Ashanti region were added.
  Specifically, the PIU was unable to monitor the indicators specific to the Ashanti region because making
  the data public for one region was perceived as singling it out, unless the same data were collected for
  other regions.

  Very few improvements were made to the RF in respect to the deficiencies described in the section “M&E
  Design” above, despite the opportunity to do so presented by many project restructurings. Much more
  could be done. However, the RF at closure still had most of its appraisal-level weaknesses.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that M&E played a central role in the oversight of the Project and that M&E data and
  information from the Aide Memoires and ISRs were used to sustain the dialogue with the borrower on
  the sector reforms associated with the project. The ICR further states that “the collaboration between the
  PIU and World Bank could have been improved toward streamlining the number and appropriateness of
  the PDO intermediate indicators”. While it is recognized that the RF data were useful for the discussions
  with the borrower, it is important to mention in this context that because of the deficiencies of the RF
  described above, the RF was not very useful for monitoring Project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



a. Safeguards
  The ICR reports that the World Bank and AfDB piloted the ‘use of country safeguard systems’ in the Project.
  At appraisal, it was concluded that the Ghanaian social and environmental safeguards system was
  equivalent to that of the WBG, with minor gaps with regard to environmental assessment and physical
  cultural property. As a result, the project was not classified in a specific category, but because of the
  identified gaps, the project approval triggered the following World Bank safeguards policies: (a) Natural
  Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), (b) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and (c) Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).
  During supervision and at project closure, these triggered policies were not assessed for compliance with
  World Bank standards or against the country safeguards standards. (ICR, paragraph 86)

  The following environmental issues were identified during distribution network works: (i) in some cases,
  poles were placed in gutters, blocking the flow of water, against the environmental guidelines; (ii) in other
  cases, the power lines were built without clearing the vegetation, against the condition of permit from the
  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). On some occasions, construction works were delayed due to
  difficulty in obtaining permits from the Forestry Department. This could have been avoided if negotiations
  with the Forestry Department had started prior to the commencement of the construction works. (ICR,
  paragraphs 87-88)

  The following social issues were registered: (i) it was observed that mistakes were made during revenue
  collection, and some ECG’s customers were overbilled; (ii) some power lines were built too close to
  people’s houses, posing a safety hazard; and (iii) one site was supposed to be built in a location used for
  recreation, the site was relocated after the local population expressed dissatisfaction. (ICR, paragraphs 87-
  88)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management was overall satisfactory throughout project implementation, with the following
  exceptions (derived from the ICR, paragraph 89):

  - Budget utilization was slow due to delayed procurement processes, pointing to capacity issues that
  needed to be addressed.

  - Implementing agencies had difficulties in accessing funding from other donors (co-financing) due to
  delays in complying with legal requirements or inadequate institutional set-ups. As a result, the Project
  could not fully use the allocated funds prior to its closure.

  - There were long delays for implementing agencies, especially for VRA and ECG, to comply with the
  covenants provided in the Financing Agreement.

  The project complied fully with the requirement of the timely submission of the interim financial reports
  (IFRs) and the project financial audits. At the same time, the Project had challenges in fully complying with
  the submission dates for the entity (ECG) audits. (ICR, paragraph 90)




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



   Procurement management was overall satisfactory throughout the project implementation period, and
   procurement operations were correctly initiated and concluded. The following challenges were
   encountered (ICR, paragraph 91-93):

   - delays in getting approval from ECG’s Board of Directors for tender evaluation reports, leading to
   frequent requests to bidders to extend the validity of their bids;

   - delays caused by land acquisition problems for some of the customer service centers and district offices
   for ECG;

   - frequent requests from civil works contractors for revision of contract price due to fluctuation of prices of
   building materials;

   - VRA's delays in submitting applications for replenishment to the World Bank for the commitment letters;
   and

   - delays by the VRA in the delivery of materials for installation works by contractors.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

- The Borrower’s commitment is critically important for project success. The commitment of the
Government to three tasks under the Project – the improvements of the distribution network, the
increase in the rural access, and the creation of the framework of the RE development – were
essential to the successful implementation of these tasks. At the same time, the lack of Government
commitment to making progress in achieving the operational and financial sustainability of the sector
led to the Project’s inability to achieve the planned results in this area. This was also the reason of


                                                                                                      Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



the significant delays in the implementation of the AF2 activities. (this lesson is based on the ICR,
paragraph 108)

- Close coordination with the counterparts, adaptive project management, flexible implementation,
and careful stakeholder coordination during implementation are important conditions for achieving
project objectives in cases of complex projects like GEDAP. GEDAP was implemented in close
coordination with the counterparts, including the ECG, and was responding to the most important
needs of the electricity sector, as recognized by the Government. The Project was implemented
using a flexible and sequenced approach in the project design and implementation, allowing for
adapting the project to the evolving priorities and needs of the counterparts. The Project benefited
from stakeholder coordination by both the Project team and the counterparts. The stakeholders
included several government entities, several donors, and government implementation agencies;
and (iii) the provision of own budget and public resources. (this lesson is based on the ICR,
paragraph 108)

- Modern and efficient transmission and distribution networks that guarantee sufficient consumer
coverage, reliable access, and acceptably low technical losses, are a critical condition for achieving
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7.1 (universal access to affordable, reliable and modern
energy services) and for the overall economic development of client countries. Importantly,
transmission and distribution sector modernization and expansion require significant and long-term
investment, and the World Bank is one of a few donors with sufficient resources to support client
countries in this area of development. GEDAP’s experience shows that a recognition of such
comparative advantage by the Bank and its commitment to delivering expected results in this area is
the right approach. In Ghana, while the supply-demand gap in electricity sector (power generation
insufficient to cover demand) was reversed during the years of Project implementation and the share
of population with electricity access soared from 54.0 percent in 2007 to 85.3 percent in 2020, the
inefficient transmission and distribution sector was causing limited availability and low supply quality
of electricity. Over the years of project implementation, through several restructurings and two AFs,
adapting the project to new circumstances, GEDAP’s team demonstrated commitment to resolving
this problem. Largely as a result of network modernization and intensification under GEDAP, annual
unplanned outages considerably dropped, and the bottlenecks in connecting additional customers
diminished. (this lesson is a modification of ICR's lesson in paragraph 110)

The following lessons were formulated by IEG:

- The task of supporting off-grid rural electrification is challenging, and the scale-up
requires significant additional investments. The Project’s experience has shown that while the social
benefits are significant, the economic benefits (without accounting for the social ones) are likely to
be negative. The cost of connecting remote communities is very high, and often the amount of
electricity produced by the household level PV systems or through mini-grids is low (and therefore
economic benefits are low). While the Project’s investment in this market segment was large and the
targets were achieved, it is still unclear if the innovative approaches to RE-based rural electrification
promoted by the Project will be scaled up, considering negative net benefits demonstrated by the
Project in this area.

- Setting ambitious tasks that depend on factors outside of the Bank control often leads to the non-
performance of the Bank projects. Instead, it would make more sense to support parts of those tasks
that are within the Bank’s control and exclude the parts that are high-risk because they depend on


                                                                                                     Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



political economy and politically motivated decisions. In the Project, it was a mistake to aim at
achieving a significant progress in improving financial and operational performance of the electricity
sector, while such progress depended on the sector’s complicated political economy. Instead, it
would have been more reasonable to aim at a less ambitious but more realistic task of supporting
the ECG’s commercial performance by investing in its capacity to measure consumption (through
pre-payment metering and the supporting IT systems), manage outages (through IT solutions),
manage resources (using state-of-the art technologies), and collect and analyze sector performance
data.

- While designing the M&E framework, it is important to consider both intermediate (and possibly
long-term) indicators and those that measure direct project outputs and immediate outcomes. The
Project’s RF was focused on ambitious intermediate outcome indicators, which were hard to
achieve, while many outputs and immediate outcomes were not measured (e.g., outputs in the
distribution network improvements component) were not included. It would be beneficial
for adequate measurement and monitoring of project performance to include output and immediate
outcome indicators in the RF while including intermediate outcome indicators only when their
achievement was realistic.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed history of the project and quantitative evidence related to the determining the
efficacy ratings. The justification and transitions from the original project to the two Additional Financing stages
were clearly delineated, as were the reasons for the ensuing delays. Although too long at 44 pages just for the
main text, it is clear that much background research and reconciliation of fragmented sources went into the
preparation of the ICR.

However, the ICR had significant shortcomings, when set in reference to IEG criteria for assessing ICR quality.
In more than one case, the basis for ratings is unclear. The usage and presentation of data (most notably,
Project cost data) are inconsistent and/or not comparable; this has hampered the comparison of costs at
appraisal and closing, since the figures provided contain mistakes and lack references and explanatory notes.
There are cases where the analysis and evidence leading to conclusions are either missing, or not supportive
of conclusions, or confusing, or incorrect. Some lessons lacked logical coherence. For example, para 110
asserts as a lesson that expanding transmission and distribution would be justified even if efficiency and
reliability had not yet been achieved, yet the accompanying paragraph does not mention the serious macro-
fiscal implications of that approach, and the dire yet long-unmet need to increase tariffs. On the latter, para 112
cites as a finding and recommendation that “more research” is required, yet it is well known from decades of
Bank support that the lack of political will to raise tariffs and address ECG’s poor financial performance are key
factors to the unreliable energy supply. Important lessons were missed. The theory of change does not
adequately describe the logical, causal chain of project interventions. Some parts of the long ICR are unclear
and repetitive.


                                                                                                      Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Energy Dev & Access SIL (FY08) (P074191)



These weaknesses have complicated the validation of the ICR, for which it became necessary to conduct a
wider review of documents to understand what was happening with the Project, which factors were important,
what the cost data are, what conclusions can be made, and what lessons should be derived. In light of the
foregoing assessment, the ICR quality is rated as modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                               Page 24 of 24
