     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023146

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P116230                                   EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                   Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17336,TF-B3715                         30-Jun-2021                                           8,841,823.44

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2014                               31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            8,850,000.00                                    8,850,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             8,849,312.42                                    8,841,823.44

 Actual                                         8,842,776.15                                    8,841,823.44




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Chikako Miwa                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.vii) and the Financing Agreement of August 26, 2014
   (p. 5), the objective of the project was “to improve the management and disposal of targeted stockpiles of
   obsolete pesticides, including Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) and Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCBs), in
   an environmentally sound manner.” For this ICR Review, IEG will assess the following two objectives:
   Objective 1: To improve the management of targeted stockpiles of obsolete pesticides, including Persistent
   Organic Pollutants (POPs) and Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCBs), in an environmentally sound manner.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



   Objective 2: To improve the disposal of targeted stockpiles of obsolete pesticides, including Persistent
   Organic Pollutants (POPs) and Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCBs), in an environmentally sound manner.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Destruction of High-Risk Stocks of Obsolete Pesticide (appraisal estimate Bank
   financing of US$3.83 million, actual US$3.83 million): This component was to finance: i) carrying out an
   environmentally sound program for the safe packaging, removal, transportation, export and destruction of
   approximately 1,000 tons of identified high risk stocks of pesticides and other high-risk obsolete pesticides,
   following a risk based prioritization approach, in state-of-the-art facilities overseas, including: a) disposal of
   the stockpiles of about 220 tons of Lindane at the Al-Adabeya port storage facility; b) disposal of the
   stockpiles of about 440 tons of pesticides at the El Saff storage facility; and c) the identification of all high
   risk stockpiles, and dispose of another approximately 350 tons of high risk stocks currently scattered across
   a number of sites; ii) technical Upgrading of Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) Central
   Agricultural Pesticides Laboratory to identify unlabeled products uncovered, as necessary, and to analyze
   pesticide samples; iii) enhancement of the environmental management system of the Ministry of State for
   Environmental Affairs/Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (MSEA/EEAA) to promote the identification,
   packaging, removal, transportation and destruction of high risk stocks of obsolete pesticides. This was to
   include training of staff of EEAA and the Cooperating Ministries to track and monitor obsolete stockpiles and
   ensure the ultimate destruction of high risk stockpiles, Project monitoring and evaluation and enhancing
   EEAA and MALR system of tracking obsolete pesticides, and dissemination of results, including raising
   public awareness.

   Al-Adabeya port and El-Saff were identified as priority locations due to their location (close to international
   waters and densely populated neighborhood).

   Component 2: Decontamination of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB)-Containing Transformer Oils
   (appraisal estimate US$4.27 million, actual US$4.27 million): This component was to finance: i) carrying
   out of a program for the management of PCBs and PCB containing equipment focusing on PCBs in the
   public electricity generation, transmission and distribution sectors, including a) purchasing and installing
   equipment for dichlorination and purification of low to medium-concentration stocks of approximately 1000
   tons of PCB contaminated oils, which were to produce an oil suitable for reuse in transformers; b) providing
   technical assistance to EEAA and MOEE/EEHC staff to address the decommissioning of PCB containing
   equipment; and (c) providing laboratory support and the acquisition and utilization of instruments, electronic
   equipment and chemicals for sampling to measure the level of PCBs; ii) enhancing the environmental
   management system of MSEA/EEAA to promote the identification and decontamination of PCB-
   contaminated oils, including training of staff of EEAA and the Cooperating Ministries to track, monitor and
   decontaminate PCBs and PCB containing equipment, supporting Project monitoring and evaluation and
   enhancing EEAA’s system of tracking PCBs and PCB containing equipment to ensure sustainable

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



   project outcomes, monitoring of project performance indicators, and dissemination of results, including
   raising public awareness.

   When the project received Additional Financing (AF) in September 2020, a third component was added.
   Components 1 and 2 were not modified.

   Component 3: Air Quality Monitoring and Laboratory Equipment (appraisal estimate US$0.75
   million, actual US$0.75 million): This component was to finance the purchase of air quality monitoring and
   laboratory equipment to provide the government with capacity to perform apportionment of air pollution
   sources and other chemical substances.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$23.46 million. Actual cost was US$24.49 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by grants from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the
   Pollution Management and Environmental Health Multi-Donor Trust Fund in the amount of US$8.85 million.
   Actual disbursement was US$8.84 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$15.50 million. Actual contribution was
   US$15.65 million.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times:

         On August 14, 2018, the project was restructured to extend (by 22 months) the project’s closing date
          from November 30, 2018 to September 30, 2020 to allow for the completion of project activities
          which had been delayed due to: i) required re-tender of the Personal Protection Equipment due to
          sharp devaluation of the Egyptian Pound; ii) delays of the inventory of the transformers in the
          transmission and distribution network to determine the amount and concentration of PCB
          contamination; and iii) delays during the fasting month of Ramadan and emergency status in the
          distribution sector during the summer months.
         On September 16, 2020, the project received AF in the amount of US$0.75 million and the closing
          date was also extended from Sep 30, 2020, to Jun 30, 2021, to complete the decontamination of
          PCB oils in component 2.
         On June 25, 2021, the project’s closing date was restructured to: i) extend the closing date of the
          GEF financed activities of the project (TF017336) from June 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021 and
          extend closing date of AF activities (TFB3715) from June 30, 2021 to September 30, 2021 to allow
          for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
          ii) reallocate savings under Component 1 towards project management activities in the extended
          project period.




3. Relevance of Objectives




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 2) environmental protection had become more important in Egypt over the last 20
years. Improving public education and awareness as well as increasing privatization of the industrial sector
put pressure on the Government to take action and strengthen accountability. Also, Egypt had been
experiencing high economic costs due to environmental degradation. A study, conducted in 2009, showed
that this cost amounted to 4.8 percent of Egypt’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), plus an additional 0.6
percent of damage to the global environment. About two thirds of the degradation was related to the impact
on human health. Even though Egypt was able to make some progress since the study was conducted, the
percentages were unlikely to have changed dramatically since there was a widespread use of chemicals in
a large spectrum of sectors. In the rural areas, agrochemicals were extensively used. In industrial areas,
toxic chemicals were widely used in a multitude of sectors found in every town and in urbanized areas
throughout the country, such as textiles, tanning and metal finishing, mining and processing manufacturing.

Furthermore, due to the lack of sufficient treatment and disposal facilities, hazardous industrial waste
generated by industries was disposed in nearby desert areas, public dump sites and mixed with municipal
waste.

Especially, obsolete pesticides constituted an immediate danger to the health of humans and livestock
since they were often stored in populated areas, potentially leaking, and contaminating groundwater and
the environment in general. Many of the toxic emissions from anthropogenic sources and obsolete
pesticides consisted of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) which were some of the most dangerous
pollutants for human health and environment.

In 2005, the government of Egypt recognized the importance of this issue and ratified the Stockholm
Convention on POPs, which aims to eliminate or restrict the production and use of POPs. Also, the
government developed a National Implementation Plan (NIP) in accordance with the requirements of the
convention.

To help achieve the goals highlighted in the NIP, the government sought funding from the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) through the World Bank since the Bank had extensive experience with
hazardous waste management in many regions. Also, the objective of the project supported the
government’s Egypt 2030 Sustainable Development Strategy which aimed to prevent environmental
degradation. Especially, the objective of the project was in line with Key Performance Indicator 5)
“percentage of hazardous waste safely disposed (treatment, recycling, final disposal).”

The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
(FY2015-21), which recognized the negative impact of environmental degradation on health and economic
growth. Also, the CPF identified air, water, and soil pollution among Egypt’s environmental challenges

Finally, the PDO was adequately formulated to achieve outcome-level results and was sufficiently
ambitious.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the management of targeted stockpiles of obsolete pesticides, including Persistent Organic
               Pollutants (POPs) and Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCBs), in an environmentally sound manner

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities/outputs such as the
               upgrading of the centralized OP tracking system and equipping the agricultural pesticides laboratory as well
               as identifying unlabeled products and analyzing pesticide samples were to result in the outcome of improving
               the management of POPs and PCBs within the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR). This
               outcome was to result in the long-term outcome of the management of POPs stockpiles being in compliance
               with international obligations (Stockholm and Basel conventions).

               The project made the following assumptions: i) security clearances for equipment importation obtained in a
               timely manner; ii) cost of international incineration is cost-effective; and iii) co-financing by the government
               provided in a timely manner.

               Outputs:

                     A tracking system for the management of obsolete pesticides (OP) was developed and is operational,
                      achieving the target of this tracking system being operational.
                     A tracking system for the management of PCBs was developed and is operational, achieving the
                      target of this tracking system being operational. The bar code system has been used for labeling
                      identified PCB transformers at five selected storage/screening lab sites.
                     Air quality equipment is operational and provides improved air quality information for decision making,
                      achieving the target of being operational and providing information.

               Outcomes (these results were not measured by the Results Framework and thus did not have any
               formal target):

                     The use of the OP tracking system by MALR supported the identification of a larger number of OP
                      stockpile sites (65 sites instead of the original estimate of 35 sites) resulting in an increase of the
                      number of OPs to disposed by 20 tons and the number of project beneficiaries by 260,000.
                     Through the bar-coding tracking system, a total of 1,013 tons of PCB oil were identified as needing
                      treatment with 789 tons in in-service transformers and 169 tons in out-of-service transformers. The
                      PCB inventory, testing, and bar-coding system supported the prioritization of locations of PCB
                      contaminated oil and to identify optimal transport routes for PCB oils requiring shipment to the
                      centralized decontamination units reducing the overall health and safety risk of disconnecting
                      transformers from the distribution network.




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



The project was able to achieve all its output targets under this objective. While it was able to achieve
relevant outcomes under this objective as well, they were not measured under the Results Framework and
thus did not have any targets. Taking everything together, the achievement of this objective was Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the disposal of targeted stockpiles of obsolete pesticides, including POPs and Polychlorinated
Biphenyl (PCBs), in an environmentally sound manner



Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities/outputs such as
strengthening the capacity to dispose POPs at the Al-Adabeya port, El Saff and Batheem storage facilities
and other sites in Egypt in compliance with international best practice and the Stockholm and Basel
Conventions as well as installing decontamination equipment for PCBs were to result in the outcome of
improved disposal of targeted stockpiles of obsolete pesticides. This outcome was to result in the long-term
outcome of reducing the health risks from OPs, PCBs and air pollution.

Outputs:

      1,082 tons of obsolete pesticides including POPs pesticides disposed of in an environmentally sound
         manner, exceeding the target of 1,000 tons.
        Obsolete pesticides at El-Staff were removed and disposed, achieving the target of being removed
         and disposed.
        Obsolete pesticides at Al-Adabeya were removed and disposed, achieving the target of being
         removed and disposed.
        Workers received training in Occupational Health and Safety aspects and the use of proper personal
         protection equipment for handling and repackaging of materials. The MoERE received training
         workshops on surveying transformers, sampling PCBs, labeling and coding transformers for their level
         of toxicity, and Occupational Health and Safety. These results were not measured by the Results
         Framework and thus did not have any formal target.
        The project decontaminated and purified a total of 418 tons of PCB oils, not achieving the target of
         1,000 tons. The project was not able to achieve the target due to: i) the contractor’s inability to provide
         the third PCB decontamination unit on a rental basis in a timely manner; and ii) the actual time taken
         to decontaminate and reduce the PCB concentration from a high level of PCB contamination to an
         acceptable level.

Outcomes:




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)




                                  1,500 tons of POPs waste was destroyed, disposed or contained in an environmentally sound
                                   manner, not achieving the target of 2,000 tons.
                                  The project benefitted 3.1 million direct project beneficiaries (achieving the target of 50 percent being
                                   female), substantially exceeding the target of 30,000 beneficiaries. The ICR (p. 14) stated that the
                                   target set at appraisal was underestimated since it did not include the population around the 30
                                   additional OP sites, which were identified through the OP inventory and tracking tool or the PCB sites
                                   until the transformers had been tested for PCB contamination and transport routes selected off-site
                                   treatment.
                                  According to the ICR (p. 14) the removal of OPs/POPs directly benefited site-specific workers and
                                   communities living in and around contaminated sites. Given the population density around these sites
                                   about 3.1 million people live within two kilometers from the storage sites. Also, interviews with
                                   residents of El Saf indicated noticeable declines in health-related effects, especially for women, who
                                   might have been more exposed through washing contaminated clothes of workers and children or
                                   working with potentially contaminated food.

                            The project was able to achieve three out of four output targets and was not able to achieve the PDO target of
                            POP waste being destroyed. Therefore, taking everything together, the achievement of the objective was
                            Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was Substantial while the achievement of the second objective was
                            Modest. Overall, the rating is Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 13) stated that it was not possible to conduct a cost-benefit analysis since due to the lack of reliable
   baseline- and on related health impacts- data.




                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



The ICR (p. 16) conducted a cost-benefit analysis, which defined the benefit as “deaths avoided through the
removal of POPs”. Due to the long-term nature of the effects, these benefits were to materialize about ten years
after the removal of POPs. Costs only took the GFF financing into account. The analysis applied a discount rate
of 6 percent. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was 43.5 percent in year 10 assuming a mortality rate of 5 per
1,000. The analysis calculated a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$7 billion, indicating that the project was a
worthwhile investment.

Due to the identification of local disposal options, disposal cost ended up being much lower than estimated at
appraisal. According to the ICR (p. 16) cost of the 712 tons of OPs collected, repackaged and exported
internationally for incineration in France was between US$1,239/ton and US$1,914/ton. Once the institutional
and legal arrangements were made with private operators in the local cement industry, the project did not need
to export OPs for incineration in France anymore. The local option of repackaging and transportation only cost
between US$261/ton and US$418/ton resulting in substantial cost savings. As a result, 30 additional sites,
identified in the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation (MALR) OP tracking system, could be remediated.

Also, the government co-financed the laboratory equipment for PCB testing and the MoERE financed the costs
of decontaminating transformer oils also resulting in cost savings (compared to if it had to be done by private
operators).

While the project was only able to treat 418 tons of PCBs, the unit cost was still lower than estimated at
appraisal (US$5,935/ton vs. US$6,600/ton).

Operational efficiency:

The project was extended three times (by a total of three years). According to the ICR (p. 21) implementation
delays during the first two years of project implementation were a result of PMU hiring delays and lack of
experience in developing the Terms of References (TORs) and bidding documents for hazardous waste. Also,
Egypt lacked experience in logistics and processing the safe transport and disposal of hazardous waste
resulting in legal delays to export POPs. Furthermore, the MoERE was slow in sampling of PCB and verifying
transformers resulting in delays in developing the feasibility study to determine the final options/facilities for
decontamination, procurement and operation of the facilities. Finally, the project experienced additional delays
when the contractor was not able to provide a third PCB decontamination unit on a rental basis resulting in a
significantly longer than planned time (weeks instead of days per transformer) to lower the concentration of the
oils to less than 50ppm.

Despite these implementation delays, efficiency of the project was Substantial given the positive results of the
cost-benefit analysis and cost savings in the treatment of PCBs.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    36.10
ICR Estimate                                              43.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given the objective’s alignment with the Bank’s recent Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) (FY2015-21), which recognized the negative impact of environmental degradation on health
and economic growth. Achievement of the first objective was Substantial while achievement of the second
objective was Modest. Efficiency was Substantial. Taking everything together, the project’s overall outcome
rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (p. 27) there are no major risks to the development outcomes given the safe removal of
hazardous substances and the capacity built to ensure a safe removal in the future. Also, the government
continues to remain committed to the Stockholm Convention as demonstrated by the MoERE having a
dedicated PCB unit and funding the operation & maintenances phase of decontamination. Also, the project
was able to build capacity within the government and sites. Furthermore, the EEAA has an annual budget in
its air quality management program to supply public information on air quality.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design built on lessons learned from other Bank projects in Egypt which stressed the
  importance of local institutions being involved. Also, the project built on the recommendations from the
  National Implementation Plan (NIP) and the ongoing United Nations Environment Program (UNEP)
  Programme for the Assessment and Control of Pollution of the Mediterranean, an arm of the
  Mediterranean Action Plan (MEDPOL) project, which targeted and disposed high concentration PCBs.
  Furthermore, the project conducted a project preparation study, which built on the NIP recommendations,
  and identified locations for OP removal and locations of PCB transformers.

  According to the PAD (p. 12) the Bank team identified relevant risks as High including: i) stakeholder risk
  due to a large number of different stakeholders making coordination challenging and whose
  support/commitment might wane over course of implementation; ii) implementing agency risk due to

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



  limited capacity in key areas including technical, financial management, procurement, and safeguards: iii)
  design risk due to complex project design involving separate programs for the management and disposal
  of two categories of POPs; and iv) social and environmental risks due to danger of handling POPs
  chemicals to workers, the general population and the environment. The Bank mitigated these risks by
  providing training, hiring international experts, and conducting broad consultations and outreach activities
  with various stakeholders. Also, an inter-ministerial steering committee was established to guide and
  coordinate project implementation and ensure cooperation. However, these measures were not sufficient
  resulting in delays in the fully staffing of the Project Management Unit (PMU), developing Terms of
  Reference (TORs) and bidding documents for hazardous waste during the first two years of
  implementation. Also, the Bank did not identify the risk of potential delays due to internal clearances.
  According to the ICR (p. 20) security clearances for the importation of decontamination equipment for
  component 2 delayed implementation of project activities for up to a year.

  The Results Framework had a shortcoming and did not include a PDO indicator to measure the first
  aspect of the PDO (improve the management of stockpiles of obsolete pesticides) (see section 9a for
  more details).

  Taking everything together, the Bank’s quality at entry rating is Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 26) the Bank conducted 14 supervision missions and reported its findings in
 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). Throughout implementation the Bank team was proactive in
 identifying implementation bottlenecks and engaged with stakeholders. The project benefitted from a
 smooth turnover between Task Team Leaders (TTLs) (four TTLs in total) and the core team remaining on
 the project throughout implementation. However, according to the ICR (p. 26) the project could have
 benefitted from more frequent reporting before the Mid-Term Review (MTR) to identify implementation
 bottlenecks for component 2.

 According to the ICR (p. 21) the project experienced several implementation delays due to Egypt’s lack of
 experience in logistics and processing the safe transport and disposal of hazardous waste resulting in legal
 delays to export POPs from Al-Adabya port and delays to obtain importation clearances for PCB
 decontamination equipment. Also, slow PCB sampling and verification of transformers within the MoERE
 led to delays in developing a feasibility study to determine the final options/facilities for decontamination,
 procurement and operation of the facilities. During project implementation, the contractor was not able to
 provide a third PCB decontamination unit on a rental basis and the reduction of the concentration of the oils
 to less than 55ppm took much longer than planned (several weeks instead of days per transformer), all
 resulting in delays and the reduction a lower than planned number of tons being treated.

 While the project was restructured three times, the Results Framework was not revised to include a PDO
 indicator focusing on the management of stockpiles of obsolete pesticides aspect and reduce the target for
 PCB oil decontamination.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



 Taking everything together, the Bank’s quality of supervision rating is Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified. The indicators in the Results Framework were not
 sufficiently relevant since the Results Framework included only one relevant PDO indicator (tons of POPs
 waste destroyed, disposed or contained in an environmentally sound manner) to assess achievements of
 the PDO. Also, the intermediate results indicators were not adequate to measure the contribution of the
 project activities toward achieving the project objective. It would have been better if the units of measures
 for the Intermediate Results indicators on “Obsolete pesticides at El-Staff/Al-Adabeya removed and
 disposed of” were quantities (e.g., tons/year) instead of yes/no. In addition, the intermediate results
 indicators on tracking systems were inadequately designed. It would have been better if the indicators were
 phrased something like: All Ops/PCBs identified and entered in tracking database for Egypt. However, the
 objective of the project included management and disposal of obsolete pesticides. The PDO indicator in the
 Results Framework only focused on disposal, not measuring the second key aspect of the objective. Also,
 according to the ICR (p. 22) the methodology used for estimating the number of beneficiaries did not
 include a significant proportion of project sites that were not known during project preparation since the
 identification of project size was dependent on sampling outcomes for PCB analysis and OP inventorying
 activities. This resulted in a significant underestimation of beneficiaries. Also, the number of beneficiaries is
 an output indicator.

 According to the PAD (p. 11) the EEAA was to be responsible for the overall monitoring and supervision of
 the project and was to report implementation progress in a quarterly basis to the Bank.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 23) M&E reporting experienced delays during the first year of project
  implementation until the PMU was fully set up. By the time of the Mid-Term Review (MTR) M&E reporting
  was more actively used. Also, data was collected on a regular basis when OPs and PCBs were identified,
  inventoried, transported and ultimately destroyed.

  The project’s Results Framework was revised in September 2020 when the project received AF and
  component 3 was added. However, the underestimated target for project beneficiaries was not adjusted
  during implementation.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



  According to the Bank team (October 22, 2022) M&E data was found to be good and reliable. This was
  ensured with adequate sampling and guidance from national and international experts on OPs and PCBs.
  For example, the data on OPs and POPs was initially inventoried during the NIP as part of the GEF
  project and project preparation for this project. During the implementation of this project additional
  sampling was undertaken for OPs to prioritize stocks to be removed and incinerated. Likewise, PCBs-
  contaminated oil needed to be (scientifically) tested in order to know the treatment time (because
  concentrations varied from source to source and had to be treated to <50 ppm). Therefore, data
  collected and verified during the project implementation and its quality was key to the success of
  achieving cleanup objectives.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 23) the project team used the M&E data to monitor implementation progress.
  For example, during the MTR in 2018, M&E data allowed the project team to identify the disposal speed
  and lack of progress on PCB decontamination resulting in the extension of the closing date until
  September 2020. Also, measuring progress towards the achievement of the PDO target required
  sampling results from laboratory testing. For example, results from the sampling of PCB-contaminated
  transformers were assessed on a regular basis to analyze implementation speed and decide which
  areas should be focused on.

  The ICR (p. 23) stated that the Persistent Organic Pollutant Steering Committee (PPSC) reviewed data
  to inform decision making and addressed implementation issues on a regular basis. For example, when
  the explosions in Beirut happened, an accelerated plan to dispose all stocks in Egyptians ports was
  developed.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category A and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management). The project was governed by Bank
   OP/BP 4.00 “Piloting the use of borrower systems to address environmental and social safeguard issues”.
   The project prepared a total of 15 Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA)/Environmental and
   Social Management Plans (ESMP) for various sites which were also reviewed by the Egyptian
   Environmental Affairs Agency/ Environmental Impact Assessment (EEAA/EIA) department and confirmed
   with national Egyptian legislation and the Bank’s OP/BP 4.01 policy. According to the ICR (p. 24) safeguard
   risks were mitigated by national workers receiving all required training for safely repacking OPs. Also,
   trainings were conducted tor PCBs related to surveying transformers, sampling, labeling and coding
   transformers, as well as Occupational Health and Safety (OHS). The project’s safeguard rating was
   Satisfactory at project closing.




                                                                                                Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



   However, according to the ICR (p. 22) there should have been stricter adherence to (and monitoring of) the
   Safeguards Gap-Filling Measures outlined in the PAD (Annex 3, pages 45-46) which could have revealed
   important deficiencies earlier in implementation. Also, the ICR did not provide information if the project
   completed planned mitigation activities and any findings from any independent review of safeguards
   implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 25) the project complied with the Financial Management (FM) arrangements as
   stated in the grant agreement. Also, the Project Management Unit (PMU) submitted Interim Financial
   Reports (IFRs) on a bi-annual basis as well as annual financial statements to the Bank. Audit reports
   identified areas to be reconciled or corrected, which were addressed by the PMU. The external auditor’s
   opinions were unqualified and no material issues were found.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p.25) prior to 2016 the project’s procurement experience delayed due to several
   issues such as legal issues with exporting OPs from Al-Dabaya port and a longer than planned PCB
   sampling of transformers process. In 2016, a full-time procurement specialist was hired, and the PMU was
   able to speed up procurement processes. The ICR further stated that record-keeping of procurement
   documents was of acceptable quality. Furthermore, procurement post-reviews between 2017 and 2021
   found that procurement processes complied with the Bank’s procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   According to the ICR (p. 19) the project was responsive to external events such as the explosion at the
   port of Beirut in August 2020. As a result, the government decided to expedite the disposal of all POPs
   stored in various ports of the country.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)



Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 28-29) provided several lessons learned that may be useful for future projects related to
management and disposal of stockpiles of obsolete pesticides. Two of them are presented below
with rephrasing.

        Local institutional involvement can be critical for addressing a delivery challenge
         caused by a sudden increase in foreign disposal costs strengthening a local disposal
         capacity. In this project, costs for disposal/incineration in France and Sweden increased by
         40 percent. Since the project worked with local incinerators to comply with international
         requirements, the second batch of OPs was disposed locally increasing Egypt’s long-term
         capacity of an environmentally sound and cost-effective disposal.
        Designing an implementation plan that identifies potential bottlenecks is critical for
         achieving set targets. This project encountered several implementation challenges
         including local regulations, customs clearances and working with foreign contractors, which
         resulted in the project not being able to achieve its target of 1,000 tons PCB
         decontamination.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR was internally
consistent, concise and included an adequate Economic analysis. Furthermore, the ICR was sufficiently
outcome driven and critical of shortcomings. The lessons learned included in the ICR would have benefitted
from focusing each on one topic and being more in-depth. Also, the ICR had some missing information on
external audits etc. that was later provided from the last TTL by an email dated October 22, 2002. Taking
everything together, the ICR’s overall quality rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EG: Sustainable POPs Mngt (P116230)




                                                                   Page 15 of 15
