     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023069

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P159653                                    Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 OECS Countries                             Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A5428                                   31-Dec-2021                                           5,946,089.45

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2017                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             6,300,000.00                                    6,300,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,946,089.45                                    5,946,089.45

 Actual                                          5,946,089.45                                    5,946,089.45




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alvina Elisabeth Erman      Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant agreement (p. 7), the project development objective of Caribbean Regional
   Oceanscape Project (P159653) (CROP) was “is to strengthen capacity for ocean governance and coastal and
   marine geospatial planning in the participating countries.”

   For the purpose of the ICR Review, the project objective is parsed into two parts:



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



   (i) strengthen capacity for ocean governance in the participating countries

   (ii) strengthen capacity for coastal and marine geospatial planning in the participating countries

   In addition, the project also contributes to achieving the GEF-6 International Waters (IW) focal area "to
   promote collective management for transboundary water systems and subsequent policy reforms for the
   sustainable use and maintenance of ecosystem services.".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Strengthening Ocean Governance (Appraisal: US$4m; Actual: US$3.94m). This component aimed at
   achieving strengthened ocean governance by supporting more informed decision-making over sustainable
   management of ocean spaces at both national and regional levels. The component supported measures
   that (i) improve decision making, planning and regulatory efficiencies of coastal and marine spaces, (ii)
   reduce conflicts over multiple uses and (iii) preserve ecologically and economically valuable ecosystem and
   functions and services. The component supported the development of coastal and marine spatial plans and
   associated training and national ocean strategies and policies for participating countries absent of such
   strategy or policy, as well as enhanced alignment of Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean Policy (ECROP)
   with the 2030 Development Agenda and Multilateral Environment Agreements (MEAs).

   Strengthening Knowledge and Capacity (Appraisal: US$1.99m; Actual: US$1.71m). This component
   aimed at strengthening knowledge and capacity of public, private, and civil society sectors for ocean
   governance by improving access to ocean data and ocean education and enhancing partnerships. The
   component supported (i) the development and use of innovative tools that aggregate and analyze marine
   data for improved decision-making over ocean assets, (ii) enhancing aggregation of, and access to
   educational content concerning the oceans, primarily via virtual approaches, (iii) strengthen partnerships
   within public and private sectors, as well as international organizations in the blue economy space and raise
   public interest in the blue economy.

   Project Management, Monitoring and Assessment (Appraisal: US$0.31m; Actual: US$0.30m). This
   component aimed at supporting implementation of the project, including compliance with OECS and World
   Bank guidelines, monitoring and evaluation and stakeholder involvement and coordination.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   According to the PAD (p.16) partners supported CROP in parallel with a total of US$13.9 million, in addition
   to GEF funding: The Nature Conservancy (TNC) in the amount of US$4 million, Virtual Educa Foundation in


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



   the amount of US$7 million, and in-kind OECS Commission and participating countries’ contributions
   amounting to US$2.9 million. The contributions of partners were not confirmed in the ICR.

   According to the ICR, there were no major changes made to project design, financing, or dates.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance to country context:

      The OECS countries that are member countries of the WBG include Antigua and Barbuda,
         Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. The
         OECS countries are Small States with a combined population of approximately 625,000. Small size
         limits access to economies of scale, which in turn shapes the structure of the economy by limiting
         diversification and the composition of international trade, and increases exposure to volatility,
         natural disasters, and other shocks. Size also affects returns to scale in the public sector, which has
         implications for government capacity and the organization and financing of service delivery.
         Economic growth in the OECS has been volatile due to the concentration of activities in a few
         sectors, primarily tourism, and the impact of natural disaster shocks.
        The OECS is heavily reliant on tourism, which accounts for 35 percent of GDP on average
         and provides more than half of all jobs. As a result, economic performance is heavily influenced
         by developments in the tourism sector as well as the business cycles of the tourism source markets.
        OECS countries are among the countries in the world that are most exposed to natural
         hazards in terms of GDP and population at risk. The annual formation of tropical depressions,
         storms, and hurricanes, causing floods and landslides is associated with the greatest sources of
         damage and loss in the region. The region is also at significant risk of storm surges, earthquake,
         drought, and volcanic eruptions.
        At the time of appraisal, the OECS countries had been trapped for years in low growth, high
         debt, and limited fiscal space, exacerbated by a number of external shocks. The sluggish
         economic recovery from the Global Financial Crisis had implications for revenue performance, while
         OECS countries implemented fiscal stimulus packages that led to a surge in current expenditures.
         Structural fiscal problems, combined with external shocks, resulted in a sizable accumulation of debt
         in the region.
        Economic growth in OECS had been coupled with overuse and exploitation of the ocean
         resources (Patil, et al., 2016). Rapid growth in coastal development had negatively affected the
         natural barriers against tropical storms, contributed to soil erosion and coral reef degradation,
         increased marine and coastal pollution, as well as competition for space and resources. In addition,
         the region’s fisheries were increasingly threatened by unsustainable fishing practices. These threats
         were compounded by the impacts of climate change and increased uncertainty, expected to
         increase the frequency of natural disasters. The unsustainable situation posed a threat to tourism
         and fisheries sectors, the most important for the region, and future economic growth. Recognizing
         the need for a well-coordinated national and regional response to this challenge, the OECS Heads

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



      of Government approved the Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean Policy (ECROP) and countries
      sought support from public, private and civil society organizations as well as the World Bank to help
      them transition to a blue economy. CROP was designed to support the realization of the shared
      OECS vision of more integrated ocean governance.
     At the time of closing, economic activity in the region had contracted sharply in 2020 due to
      the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and recovery in 2021 was slow. In addition to the health
      impact of COVID-19, the pandemic’s socioeconomic impact on the OECS countries was severe,
      pushing the region into a deep recession. OECS countries were estimated to have contracted by
      13.9 percent in 2020. The region’s tourism industry was losing competitiveness relative to other
      parts of the world and contributes to environmental degradation. International tourist arrivals to the
      OECS had grown by an average annual rate of 0.6 percent between 2005 and 2017, compared to a
      world average of 4.2 percent, and 6.4 percent in Asian and Pacific countries.

Relevance to bank strategies:

     The development challenges that CROP is focused on tackling are disjointed planning and
      unsustainable coastal development practices, overexploitation of marine resources,
      pollution, and increasing vulnerability to natural disasters and other external shocks.
      According to the PAD (p. 10), the current mechanisms in the OECS for planning coastal and marine
      development as well as for addressing user conflict and unsustainable practices are disjointed and
      often lack a cohesive common goal. It further states that the disjointed planning is further limited by:
      (a) incomplete information regarding the overall impact on the marine and coastal resource base
      (from all sectors and users); (b) inadequate internal capacities and skills; and (c) underdeveloped
      and often inadequate planning tools. CROP was designed to address these three limitations by
      strengthening capacity for ocean governance and coastal and marine geospatial planning across
      the OECS region.
     The focus on developing the blue economy is well-aligned with World Bank strategies and
      the relevance was strengthened between the Regional Partnership Strategy (RPS) FY15-FY19
      and the RPS FY20-FY25. At appraisal, the PDO was aligned with Outcome 2, focused on
      enhancing the competitiveness of the tourism industry, which included support to improving
      management of marine resources (RPS FY15-FY19, Report No. 85156-LAC, p. 33). The PDO also
      indirectly contributed to Outcome 9, increased capacity to manage natural hazards (p. 36) and
      Outcome 1, improved investment climate (p. 31). At closing, the relevance of the PDO had
      significantly strengthened, as reflected in the RPS FY20-FY25. Preserving the region’s natural
      capital, reducing the negative effects of climate change and marine pollution, and developing the
      blue economy were placed at the center of the COVID-19 recovery and long-term development
      agendas (RPS FY20-FY25, Report No. 160349-LAC, p. 13). The PDO was strongly aligned with
      Objective 1, enhanced environmental protection and climate change response, for which the bank
      strategy includes strengthening regional and national policies and institutional frameworks to bring
      back, among other priorities (p. 19). In addition, the PDO was also strongly aligned with Objective 5,
      enhance the enabling environment for businesses, for which the importance of developing the blue
      economy is highlighted and relevant bank supported strategies include developing infrastructure and
      management skills to underpin biodiversity conservation, and strengthen the capacity of civil society
      organizations to help protect the Eastern Caribbean’s biodiversity (p. 25).
     Finally, the implementation approach of CROP, combining regional and country level
      engagement, is aligned with the RPS FY20-FY25. The RPS recognizes the importance of



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



                                        optimizing impact by combining regional and country-level support, based on lessons learned from
                                        previous engagement in the region.

               Consistency with government strategies: CROP is aligned with two of the three main priorities of the
               OECS development plan, namely environmental sustainability and climate resilience and economic growth
               and competitiveness (RPS FY20-FY25, p. 15). CROP contributes directly to ECROP and its strategic plan,
               which provides the framework for enhanced coordination and management of ocean resources within the
               Eastern Caribbean.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen capacity for ocean governance in the participating countries

                             Rationale
                             The project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), but did
                             not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR
                             reconstructed a ToC for the project, laying out core outcomes and project components (ICR, Figure 1). The
                             ICR figure highlights the rationale for and operational logic of objective 1 to help achieve sustained
                             improvement in ocean and coastal natural resource management.

                             Theory of change: The prioritized interventions with respect to objective 1 included: (i) developing national
                             and regional strategies/policies to build consensus on policy vision through stakeholder engagement, (ii)
                             updating ECROP to align better with the 2030 Development Agenda and Multilateral Environment
                             Agreements (iii) expanding marine data aggregation and analytical tools to improve ocean data coverage and
                             ocean education access and support improved decision-making on ocean assets, (iv) enhancing access to
                             educational content on the oceans and (v) forging investment and knowledge partnership.

                             Outputs (ICR, Annex 1):

                                        i. Share of stakeholder groups participating in consultations: Original Target: 90%; Actual: 100%; 111%
                                       ii. National policies developed in support of ocean governance: Original Target: 5; Actual: 5; 100%
                                      iii. Decision makers sensitized on how to transition to the Blue Economy: Original Target: 75; Actual: 93;
                                         124%
                                      iv. Knowledge partnerships formed to develop and/or deliver training and data on the blue economy:
                                         Original Target: 4; Actual: 4; 100%



                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)




    v. Learning products developed on the blue economy: Original Target: 4; Actual: 28; 750%

Outcomes: The project sought to strengthen the capacity for ocean governance through (i) strengthened
capacity of decision makers/marine users on marine and climate data to plan and manage resources, and (ii)
enhanced access to educational content concerning the oceans. Each one of these elements is discussed:

    i. Strengthened capacity of decision makers/marine users on marine and climate data to plan
        and manage resources. The outcome indicator associated with these outcomes was achieved:
        Improved OECS ocean data coverage and access to ocean education on existing platforms (Original
        Target: Yes; Actual: Yes; Target achieved). The indicator did not capture whether capacity on ocean
        governance had actually been achieved. One of the main outcomes of CROP is that it legitimized and
        strengthened the OECS Commission's role as a leader in the ocean governance and blue economy
        space. This will benefit the regional integration of ocean governance and hopefully also trickle down to
        the national level capacity of decision-making institutions, where capacity remains weak. Beyond the
        institutions directly involved in ocean governance, the project also helped raised awareness of the
        blue economy issue among the public and decision makers, which helped generate support for the
        finalization and endorsement of the national policies on ocean governance. According to the ICR
        (p.17) “the project has promoted awareness on marine areas to government stakeholders, with all
        OECS countries adopting the Eastern Caribbean Regional Ocean Policy (ECROP) and strategic plan”.
        The activities also improved knowledge on data and tools related to coastal and marine planning that
        are now available to decision makers. According to the training impact survey conducted by the
        Project’s evaluation firm contracted to measure impact, the majority of Project beneficiaries found that
        their knowledge about MSP principles improved following the training offered and that they felt better
        informed about the role MSP plays in terms of sustainable resources management. This training was
        deemed impactful by the Project’s evaluation team as Project beneficiaries, who attended the Project
        training, reported that they were able to expand their knowledge about MSP and ocean governance
        which are both critical elements to successfully applying MSP knowledge in decision-making
        processes. The project also forged and fostered partnerships that will continue to generate results and
        promote awareness of the blue economy across the Eastern Caribbean.
    ii. Enhanced access to educational content concerning the oceans. This outcome was not
        associated with any outcome indicator. However, the project delivered a broad range of educational
        products on the Caribbean Sea and the blue economy. Interactive maps on the value of natural assets
        such as coral reefs for tourism were produced for the CROP countries as well as spatial planning tools
        and applications. A series of webinars and in-person training were also delivered. These education
        and knowledge products have served to sensitize communities and decision makers on the
        importance of the blue economy.

Given the limited budget and length of CROP, the evidence presented supports that the objective was
achieved at a substantial level.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



Strengthen capacity for coastal and marine geospatial planning in the participating countries

Rationale
In contrast to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is not well-reflected in the project’s original design nor
in the ToC, that was reconstructed in the ICR (Figure 1, p.8). It is not clear from the ToC what activities and
outputs that are supporting strengthened capacity for geospatial planning. However, since it is one of the
objectives of the PDO, this section intends to highlight the activities, outputs and outcomes that are related to
Objective 2 and that have contributed to its achievement.

Theory of change: The activities that can be linked to Objective 2 included: (i) developing marine spatial
plans and associated training to support improved decision-making on coastal zone and EEZ use and to
reduce conflict between resource users, improve planning, and support preservation of ecosystem functions
and services and (ii) developing coastal master plans in a participatory manner and associated training, to
support improved decision-making on coastal zone and EEZ use.

Outputs (ICR, Annex 1):

     i. Coordinating bodies formed and actively oversee the development of the national and regional level
       marine and coastal spatial plans: Original Target: 6; Actual: 6; 100%

Outcomes: The project sought to strengthen the capacity for geospatial planning through (i) improved
decision-making over coastal zone and EEZ use, (ii) decreased user conflict, improved planning and
regulatory efficiencies, and preserved ecologically/economically valuable ecosystem functions/services.

    1. improved decision-making over coastal zone and EEZ use. The outcome indicators associated
       with this outcome were achieved: Marine spatial plans (a) developed in a participatory manner, and
       (b) endorsed at ministerial level by participating member states and by the OECS Commission
       (Original Target: 5. Actual: 5; Target achieved) and Coastal master plans (a) developed in a
       participatory manner; and, (b) endorsed at ministerial level by participating member states (Original
       Target: 5. Actual: 5; 100%). Five National Ocean Governance Committees (NOGCs) were established
       by each participating country to provide a national entity for geospatial marine planning. In addition to
       the marine and coastal plan, the project supported development of data and tools. Much of the data
       collated and tools developed under Component 2 can support decision making in geospatial planning.
       For example, the Mapping of Ocean Wealth is a multi-layered geospatial resource that allows users to
       drill down into data on intensity, distribution, and value of blue economy sectors, such as tourism,
       recreational fishing, and coral reef fisheries, etc. According to the ICR (p.14), these geospatial tools
       have “democratized access to data and information, and help decision-makers to make better
       informed resource management choices”. While the activities have clearly contributed to a more
       enabling environment for informed decision-making over coastal zone and EEZ use, there is no
       evidence in the ICR showing that the activities have supported decision-making in any of the
       participating countries. There is some evidence on the effectiveness of training of government officials
       on improved capacity for marine spatial planning. Survey results from the training found “100 percent
       of the respondents reported that their knowledge of marine spatial planning (MSP) principles and
       approaches had improved after the training, 96 percent had improved awareness of practical MSP
       and ocean governance related solutions, and 96 percent either agreed or strongly agreed that they felt
       better informed on the role of MSP in helping their country to deliver [national ocean policies] and
       [strategic action program]“. The ICR also suggests that the plans developed under the project
       “provided proof of concept” and helped leverage a set of new investments and projects in the region

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



                                   that will further build capacity of relevant institutions and improve tools and resources available for
                                   geospatial planning and that the CROP project “served as a statement of intent to global blue
                                   economy stakeholders, demonstrating the Caribbean’s commitment to firmly establish a strong, well-
                                   managed blue economy”.
                                2. Decreased user conflict, improved planning and regulatory efficiencies, and preserved
                                   ecologically/economically valuable ecosystem functions/services. There was no outcome
                                   indicator associated with this outcome and there is limited evidence presented in the ICR on the
                                   achievement of this outcome. Considering the limited budget and time allocated to this project, it may
                                   have been difficult to capture any impact related to reduced user conflict or regulatory efficiencies,
                                   which are more long-term outcomes.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            GEF-6 International Waters (IW) focal area "to promote collective management for transboundary water
                            systems and subsequent policy reforms for the sustainable use and maintenance of ecosystem services."

                            Rationale
                            The project was also designed to “promote collective management for transboundary water systems and
                            subsequent policy reforms for the sustainable use and maintenance of ecosystem services” and specifically
                            the objective 1 of GEF-6 to “catalyze sustainable management of transboundary water systems by supporting
                            multi-state cooperation through foundational capacity building, targeted research and portfolio learning”, and
                            to Biodiversity Objective 4 of GEF-6 to “mainstream biodiversity conservation and sustainable use into
                            production seascapes and sectors”

                            The project has made clear contribution to objective 1 of GEF-6 by strengthening the capacity and role of the
                            OECS Commission in the blue economy space. This is clearly supporting multi-state cooperation since the
                            OECS Commission supports the entire region. It would also be possible to argue that the project has
                            supported mainstreaming of conservation and sustainability practices into production seascapes since the
                            project has helped raise awareness of blue economy issues among decision makers and improved availability
                            of data and tools that can support decision-making regarding conservation of production seascapes and other
                            coastal and marine assets.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)




  Rationale
  For the first objective, the evidence in the ICR point to the success of the project in achieving strengthened
  capacity for ocean capacity, given the budget and scope of the project. The project achieved all PDO
  indicators linked to Objective 1. While evidence on actual strengthened capacity for ocean governance is
  lacking, the evidence presented suggest that activities have contributed to creating the conditions for
  improved decision-making and ocean governance. The rating of efficacy of Objective 1 is therefore
  Substantial.

  For the second Objective, the PDO indicators were achieved. The evidence provided in the ICR suggest that
  while evidence on actual strengthened capacity for geospatial marine planning is lacking, activities have at
  least contributed to creating an institutional environment that is better placed to support geospatial marine
  planning and the coastal and marine plans developed under the project enable better decision-making and
  planning of coastal and marine areas. Achievement of objective 2 is considered substantial.

  The overall rating of efficacy is therefore Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall Efficiency is rated Substantial. The project met and/or exceeded all indicators, and achieved them cost-
efficiently, either at or below all estimated Component costs. Design and implementation efficiency was strong.
Although the borrower’s self-evaluation highlighted that the project was highly ambitious given the timeline. The
project benefitted from the convening power of a well-resourced and respected regional body in the OECS
Commission and common goals were clearly articulated in the project design.

At the same time, there were factors throughout implementation that raised transaction costs resulting in some
inefficiencies during certain periods of implementation, particularly the delay in recruiting the PMU and the
COVID-19 pandemic, both slowing down implementation in the first year. The small size of the PMU led to
pressure on OECS colleagues to review high volumes of deliverables. Delays in finalization of some
deliverables may also have resulted in some missed opportunities for CROP to advance uptake across the
region. Again, the borrower’s self-evaluation reemphasized this by stating (p.58) that “As originally designed and
structured, the project was highly ambitious […] a) the project’s timeframe of four years, which is short
considering what the project sought to achieve; b) the fact that the time for project execution was effectively
reduced by a year, because of the time needed, at inception stage, for recruiting the Project Coordinator, for
finalizing terms of reference and for contract negotiations; and, c) the fact that the Project Implementing Unit
(PIU) consisted of only one person fully assigned to the project.” However, since all the targets of the project
were met, potential flaws in project design did not seem to have affected efficiency enough to consider a lower
rating than Substantial.

The Project Appraisal Document (p.27-28) did not compute an economic rate of return (ERR). The ICR (p.16)
did not estimate an ERR for the full project either, or for any of the project components noting that economic



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



benefits are difficult to quantify given the project context and absence of quantitative indicators to better value
the benefits generated by the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project development objectives were relevant to the Region's challenges related to rapid development and
degradation of coastal areas, putting livelihoods and natural assets at risk, and the lack of regional coordination
on coastal and marine planning and in promoting the blue economy. The project's objectives were also
consistent with the Region's priorities and the Bank's regional strategy. Relevance of Objectives was
therefore rated Substantial. All of the intermediate and outcome indicator targets were met or exceeded. The
ICR makes a strong case for the importance of developing the spatial plans, national policies, as well as the
learning and capacity building exercises for strengthening ocean governance and planning capacity of
participating countries. As a result, despite lack of evidence directly linking project activities to strengthened
capacity of ocean governance or geospatial planning, the achievement of objectives and overall efficacy can still
be considered Substantial. Efficiency was rated Substantial since all the targets were met on time and at or
below expected cost.

There were only minor shortcomings in the project's relevance, achievement of objectives or efficiency and,
therefore, the overall outcome of this project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks to the development outcome have been identified in the ICR:


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



The main risk to development outcome is the lack of capacity in the institutions responsible for
implementation and mainstreaming of ocean governance and the blue economy at the national level.
The ICR highlights (p.30) the general risk associated with “lack of institutional capacity in small island states
in which, civil servants play multiple roles and can be overstretched.” In addition to the typical challenges
associated with capacity gaps in small island states, the Review has identified particular risks to
development outcome linked to the institutional arrangement introduced by the project at the national level.
As highlighted in the summary of borrower self-evaluation (p.59) the “National Ocean Governance
Committees (NOGC) form the basis for effective ocean governance and blue economy implementation in the
participating countries.” These committees were developed under the project and the sustainability of results
will depend on their capacity to use the resources and tools developed under the project and advocate for
change in their respective countries. However, according to the borrower, capacity of the NOGC remains
weak. In addition, according to the PAD (p.51), the mandate of the NOGC is to “provide advice to each
member state on the implementation of its policy and broader aspects of ocean governance and to
coordinate policy relating to the management of the maritime space under the jurisdiction of the member
state.” As a result, the ability of the NOGCs to generate change will also depend on the willingness of
national institutions to enable cooperation and take their advice on board. According to the ICR (p.29), Bank-
executed Technical Assistance (TA) was provided to the OECS Commission to help address lack of
capacity. However, the main concern at the regional level in relation to project implementation was related to
bandwidth (limited staff) rather than capacity. Perhaps the TA would have been better allocated to the
NOGCs.

Lack of institutional uptake of the marine spatial plans, coastal master plans and national ocean
policies produced under Component 1. According to the ICR (p.29), there are promising signs of
institutional uptake since edits and updates have been done to the plans since the closure of the project.

Uptake and use of knowledge resources generated under the Component 2. While there was a
significant effort to promote uptake, it is unclear the extent to which additional uptake will take place moving
forward. According to the ICR (p.29), the OECS Commission continues to promote uptake activities and is in
charge of monitoring and operating online platforms including Ocean Explorer app, OECS Academy and
Ocean Explorer Board Game.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives were highly relevant and well-aligned with regional and bank strategies (see
  section 3 for more details). By aligning the project with the mission and strategy of ECROP, the project
  built on ongoing engagement in promoting improved regional integration in the ocean governance and
  blue economy space.

  The project design and the development challenge the project sought to address were targeted and
  clear. Yet this was not well reflected in the PDO (see section 9 for more details). The PDO could have
  better reflected project components. With this in mind, the project components were relevant to address
  the development challenge. The focus of Component 1 was on developing coastal and marine geospatial
  plans, which is crucial for ocean governance. Developing them in a participatory and consultative way
  was relevant for buy-in and elevating the quality and relevance of the product. Component 2 included

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



knowledge and capacity strengthening, which was key to sensitize decision makers on the relatively new
concept that is the blue economy and to introduce the wealth of data synthesized under the project. The
activities reflected well the capacity of implementing agency, as well as their mandate. Project design
was built on ongoing engagements and lessons learned from ongoing and previous projects, as well as
relevant analytical work.

In addition to GEF funding, partners supported the initiative with a total of US$13.9 million: The Nature
Conservancy (TNC) in the amount of US$4 million, Virtual Educa Foundation in the amount of US$7
million, and in-kind OECS Commission and participating countries’ contributions amounting to US$2.9
million. The project also helped leverage several new projects and grants, including Unleashing the Blue
Economy in the Caribbean (UBEC) Project, the $US60 million IDA and PROBLUE funded project
approved in FY22.

The project focused on upstream development and capacity building. Thus, the effects on poverty,
gender and social development, while relevant, are likely to emerge in the medium to longer term. As the
ICR notes, this is an intended emphasis in the follow-on UBEC program which will specifically invest in
supporting expansion of women-owned and managed businesses in the blue economy through roll out of
a regional Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise matching grants program to help address this imbalance
in industry participation. Thus, CROP is likely to have a follow on effect on important gender
considerations in the Blue Economy in OECS countries.

The policies and reforms supported by the project were expected to have a positive effect on the
participating countries’ coastal and marine environment, as they promoted improved environmental
management. The project had no direct impact on the environment since it did not finance construction.
However, since the resources developed under the project were expected to inform decisions about
environmental management, as well as the people who live there, appropriate safeguards concerning the
social and environmental impacts were triggered, and a regional Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) was conducted. The project complied with environmental and social safeguards.

Implementation arrangements were appropriate. The regional focus of implementation arrangements
enforced the OECS Commission as a driving force in the regional integration of ocean governance and
the blue economy and was aligned with ECROP. The ICR mentions (p.24) that “the project may have
benefitted from a Project Preparation Advance to facilitate early implementation and upstream
establishment of the PMU”. This would have mitigated the delays caused by the recruitment process for
the PMU. M&E arrangement were appropriate. However, there were shortcomings in M&E design
(explained in section 9). The risks identified at entry were appropriate (institutional capacity, fiduciary risk,
and stakeholder risk). The Review believes more emphasize could gave been put on the mechanism to
mainstream resources and tools at the national level and on strengthening the main institutions
supporting ocean governance at the national level, namely the NOGCs. While strengthening these
institutions technically and by defining a clear mandate at the national level would have been outside the
scope of the project, it seems too important for the development outcomes of the project and
sustainability of results to not consider in project design.

Overall, quality at entry is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings identified in preparation, related to
M&E design and risk mitigation.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the World Bank team provided proactive support to the PMU throughout project
 implementation, including trainings. Interactions with the PMU and the OECS Commission were regular
 and helped address issues as they arose. Project ratings and details in the ISR reports were candid. The
 ISRs, progress reports and Aide Memories described the issues encountered in sufficient detail, and urgent
 issues were promptly brought to management's attention. Issues raised at the MTR were addressed in a
 proactive manner. The bank team helped the PMU adapt its stakeholder engagement strategy in response
 to the COVID-19 pandemic. There was a change of Task Team Leader toward the end of the project, but
 the handover was smooth and rapport with the client was swiftly established.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) did not require a Theory of Change (ToC) or results
 chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included a ToC that was re-constructed based on activities, outputs,
 outcomes and the PDO. The ToC did not clearly reflect the inputs, outputs and outcomes related to
 Objective 2 (strengthened capacity for coastal and marine geospatial planning) but was otherwise sound.
 The Review agrees with the ICR that having developed a ToC at the design stage would have helped the
 project make the connection between the PDO, outcomes and indicators more clearly.

 The PDO was composed of two objectives: strengthen capacity for ocean governance and strengthened
 capacity for coastal and marine geospatial planning. Since strengthening geospatial planning would
 support governance, these two objectives could be considered part of the same development challenge
 and the activities supporting ocean governance and coastal and marine geospatial planning in the project
 design were closely intertwined. A clearer PDO statement would have been, for example, “to strengthen
 capacity for ocean governance for participating countries by improving access to coastal and marine
 geospatial data and enhancing knowledge and learning on the blue economy”.

 The PDO was to be assessed through three PDO level indicators.

     1. Marine spatial plans developed in a participatory manner and endorsed at ministerial level by
        participating member states and by the OECS Commission (number);
     2. Coastal master plans (a) developed in a participatory manner; and, (b) endorsed at ministerial level
        by participating member states (number);

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



     3. Improved OECS ocean data coverage and access to ocean education on existing platforms
        (Yes/No).

 The Review agrees with the ICR that the PDO indicators were output oriented and did not capture any
 change in the outcomes associated with the activities and outputs. The PDO indicators were also not
 clearly aligned with the parsed objectives. The Review linked PDO indicator 1 and 2 to Objective 2 and
 PDO indicator 3 to Objective 1 (see section 4).

 The Results Framework (RF) included six intermediate results indicators. The indicators were specific,
 measurable, achievable, relevant, and timebound. Indicators had clear targets and baselines were reflected
 in the RF. However, similar to the shortcomings of the PDO indicators, the results indicators could have
 been better linked to the PDO.

 Since it was a priority of the project to make sure traditionally exploded populations, such as women and
 indigenous populations, were consulted in the stakeholder consultations and since it had been observed
 that the OECS Commission and composition of the Ocean Governance Team (OGT) were overwhelmingly
 male, the RF would have benefitted from indicators monitoring gender and/or other identify of stakeholders
 consulted, and/or the decision-makers sensitized through the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 26), “the Commission provided the Bank with quarterly reports that gave a
  complete picture of implementation progress, including progress against indicators.” There was
  continuous communication between the PMU and the World Bank team on the implementation status.
  M&E reporting was provided to the OECS Commission and used in decision making. A lessons learned
  workshop was carried out toward the end of the project with broad participation where lessons from
  project implementation were captured and steps to ensure sustainability of outcomes were identified.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 27) the “information from the M&E process has been utilized by the World
  Bank, project management, and decision-makers to monitor progress, identify issues regarding
  implementation progress.” The M&E data collected, and the lessons learned captured from the project
  have been used to inform the design of the UBEC Project.

  Conclusion: The quality of M&E is rated Modest, driven primarily by the poor alignment of the indicators
  and the outcomes of the project, resulting in lack of evidence towards the achievement of the project as
  a whole. The implementation and utilization of the M&E system were otherwise sound.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as an environmental Category B. It triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
  Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
  Resettlement and OP/BP 4.36 Forests. Since this was a TA, it follows the Guidelines on the Application of
  Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance in World Bank-financed projects. As a result, analyses of
  environmental and social impacts were considered outputs of the project rather than prerequisites.

  Since the project supported spatial planning covering protected and unprotected areas, including coral reefs
  and forests, a regional Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) was conducted. The SESA
  focused on the impacts of natural habitats, forests and other environmental assets. The SESA informed the
  spatial planning process and had the buy-in of participating stakeholders.

  Since the project included significant stakeholder engagement, including with the Kalinago Indigenous
  Peoples, an Indigenous People’s Planning Framework and associated Social Assessment were prepared
  under the SESA. Since studies and outputs prepared under the project includes recommendations related
  to spatial planning, including the establishment of protected areas, construction of infrastructure projects,
  etc., an Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework and Process Framework were prepared, which
  “outlined the process and tools by which stakeholders, particularly those at risk of potential disruption to
  livelihoods, would be actively engaged during the coastal and marine planning process” (ICR, p.27).

  Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards: At closing, the project had no outstanding issues.
  All the instruments were consulted, disclosed and used to inform the project throughout implementation.
  According to the ICR the project “met the target with respect to categories of stakeholders consulted and
  exceeded the target with respect to engagement with decision makers.” The ICR also states that a
  “Grievance Redress Mechanism was set up and widely promoted”. No grievances were received.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: According to the ICR (p.27) the OECS Commission “maintained satisfactory
  financial management performance throughout project life”. Project Interim Financial Reports were
  submitted on time, except for a slight delay in 2020 due to the impact of COVID-19.

  Procurement: With respect to the procurement process, the ICR states that (p.28) “Most of the activities in
  the procurement plan were completed.” And that “No irregularities have been identified”.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Positive regional spillover effects: stakeholders in OECS countries that were not part of the CROP
  expressed how relevant the project was in assisting them move forward their approaches for enhanced
  ocean governance. Non-participating country stakeholders interviewed also noted that they had used the
  revised ECROP and draft NOPs produced under CROP to define their own national plans.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included nine lessons learned. The following two lessons are highlighted since they have
broader application. The language has been adopted and some related lessons have been
consolidated.

Institutional buy-in is critical to ensure the sustainability of the coastal marine spatial plans
and other initiatives on blue economy and can be achieved with an effective and targeted
communication strategy. To obtain the right level of support, the institutions and decision makers
must have a clear vision and expected outcomes of project deliverables. Communication strategy
plays a pivotal role in promoting blue economy concept and helps shape a common vision and goals
of the project amongst all relevant target groups. And since the blue economy concept is relatively
new to many stakeholders, developing a communication strategy early on could lessen the risk
of leading to diverging interpretations and shape a collective vision from the beginning of the
project. For example, concise summaries of Coastal Master Plan and the Marine Spatial Plans
would have been helpful for decision makers to capture the key information, accompanied by in-
depth analysis for technical staff. Achieving buy-in and endorsement of the coastal marine spatial
plans and other initiatives of blue economy were critical factors in sustaining the project.

Monitoring and Evaluation of these projects need to be thoughtful, pragmatic and focused on
looking for where the project has added outcome oriented change. There was the poor
alignment in the results framework's indicators and the intended outcomes of the project, resulting in
a lack of evidence towards the achievement of the project as a whole. Focusing less on what can be
measured and what needs to be measured is essential to better understanding what these
diversified projects actually contribute to the regions where they are being implemented.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR used both the results from the indicators, as well as survey results from trainings
and interviews to support the analysis and fill in gaps in the evidence base. The ICR did not use the borrowers
self-evaluation as much as the Review deemed necessarily considering some of the points raised there that
contradicts or at least weakens the arguments made in the ICR.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR underpinned conclusions with evidence and made well-supported arguments.
The use of multiple sources and types of data helped build a strong case.

Lessons. The lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis in the ICR.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a discussion on the achievement of the PDO. Due to the shortcomings
of the M&E design, the ICR could not provide strong evidence on the achievement of objectives. Despite this
challenge, the ICR was able to clearly outline how the project contributed towards the achievement of
objectives and report on some results, by, for example, using data collected after trainings.

Internal Consistency. The ICR was internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR was not clearly aligned with the objectives of the PDO. For example,
when looking at achievement of objectives, it discussed achievements under each component of the project
instead of achievement towards objectives. As a result, Objective 2 was not clearly evaluated in the ICR since
this objective did not have an corresponding component like Objective 1 had. Since the PDO objectives were
not clearly aligned with the project components, structuring the analysis around the objectives would have
required additional work (in mapping activities and outputs to each objective) so the Review understand the
rationale of the ICR design. However, it did not follow ICR guidelines.

Conciseness. The ICR was well-written and concise. There were a few long detailed tables that did not have to
feature in the report, Table 1 and Table 2, which would have shortened the ICR (now at 32 pages). The
Lessons section could have been significantly shortened as well.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with modest shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Caribbean Regional Oceanscape Project (P159653)




                                                                               Page 18 of 18
