     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023085

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P112158                                   Pumped Storage TA Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80570                                31-Dec-2018                                          36,091,438.35

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2011                               31-Dec-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          640,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            36,091,438.35                                                0.00

 Actual                                        36,091,438.35                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joel J. Maweni             Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Project Development Objective

   The PDO statement reads as follows in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) dated April 27, 2011: The
   development objective is to "significantly increase the peaking capacity of the power generation system in
   Java-Bali in an environmentally and socially sustainable way and strengthen PLN’s institutional capacity in



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



   hydropower planning, development and operation.” The statements of the PDO stated in the Loan Agreement
   and the PAD are virtually identical despite the slight difference in wording.

   Revised Project Objective

   The December 2018 restructuring significantly modified the objective of the project "to strengthen the
   institutional capacity of PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) for planning and preparation of pumped
   storage and hydropower projects." (Restated Loan Agreement dated December 28, 2018).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Development of the Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage (UCPS) Power Plant (Estimated
   cost at appraisal – US$674.79 million, Actual cost – US$44.97 million).

   This component comprised: (i) power generation plant (1040 MW) and appurtenant structures, including
   dams, reservoirs, waterways, powerhouse, access roads, switchyard and power supply during construction;
   (ii) two double circuit 500 kV transmission lines to connect the power plant to the Java-Bali power system;
   (iii) project implementation support, including assistance in pre-construction engineering design,
   procurement, and construction management and supervision; and (iv) project administrative activities to be
   conducted by the Project Implementation Unit.

   Component 2: Social and Environmental Impact Assessment (Estimated cost at appraisal –
   US$76.36 million, Actual cost – US$57.94 million)

   The component included: (i) Land acquisition, resettlement, and livelihoods restoration; and (ii)
   environmental management.

   Component 3: Feasibility Study and Preparation of Basic Design and Bid Documents for
   Matenggeng Pumped Storage (MPS) Power Plant, and related capacity building (Estimated cost at
   appraisal – US$12.00 million, Actual cost – US$11.09 million).

   This component comprised: (i) updating of previous studies to verify engineering and economic feasibility,
   preparation of basic design and bid documents and of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
   (ESIA), and development of Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plans (LARAPs); and (ii)
   capacity building to PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) (PLN) for the planning, development, and
   operation of hydropower projects, especially pumped storage.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



   Revised Project components

   The project components were revised on December 31, 2018, to delete Components 1 and 2 leaving
   a single component for the preparation of the prefeasibility and feasibility studies and basic design and bid
   documents for MPS; (ii) preparation of the ESIA and development of LARAP for the MPS; and (iii) related
   capacity building assistance to PLN for the planning, development, and operation of hydropower projects.
   This was to align the project scope with the partial cancelation on May 2, 2017, of US$596 million
   corresponding to Component 1. The World Bank’s supervision for Component 1 was limited to the activities
   and milestones set forth in a Safeguards Action Plan that was agreed and confirmed by PLN in a letter
   dated November 30, 2017, following the partial loan cancelation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Total project cost at completion was US$114.00 million (ICR, Annex 3, pp. 45 and 46) compared to
   US$800.00 million estimated at appraisal (PAD, p. 17), including interest during construction and front-end
   fees totaling US$37.5 million. The financing plan at appraisal envisaged that US$640.00 million of the total
   cost would be financed by the World Bank Loan with the Borrower’s contribution covering the balance of
   US$ 160.00 million (PAD, Datasheet, p. ii). However, about 93 percent of the World Bank Loan was
   canceled due to intractable implementation issues which led to a major revision in the scope of the project
   during a restructuring on December 30, 2018, as described above. Hence, the substantial reduction in total
   project costs and in the World Bank’s total financing from US$640.00 million to US$36.09 million and the
   Borrower’s from US$160.00 million to US$77.91 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 26, 2011, and it became effective on May 1, 2012. The project
   was restructured twice. On May 2, 2017, the World Bank canceled US$596 million of the loan amount
   following major project implementation delays and after suspension of disbursements had not resulted in a
   resolution of the implementation issues. The purpose of the first restructuring approved on December 30,
   2018, was to revise the project objectives and design to align them with the substantial change in project
   scope that had resulted from the partial cancelation of the IBRD Loan. The design changes included
   amendments to the scope of the project, project costs, results framework, legal covenants, reallocation of
   loan proceeds among withdrawal categories, disbursement estimates, implementation schedule, technical
   and financial analysis; etc. The Loan closing date was extended by 23 months from December 31, 2018, to
   November 30, 2020, to accommodate the longer time required for completion of the engineering and design
   studies for Component 3 as well as the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. The second
   restructuring that was approved on November 12, 2020, extended the Loan closing date by 13 months to
   December 31, 2021, to allow enough time for completion of delayed tasks for the MPS - phase 1
   preparation review of scope of work for detailed geological investigations and conducting investigations,
   and preparation of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



Alignment with The World Bank strategies

The project was consistent with the World Bank country strategies throughout its life from inception to
closure. At inception it was aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Indonesia (CPS FY09-
FY12) which included support for building effective and accountable institutions in the power sector. This
meant support for (i) improving the business climate by better meeting the increasing demand for electricity
(in line with Core Engagement 1 for supporting private sector development); and (ii) strengthening the
technical, managerial and operational capacity of PLN to implement large scale investment projects (in line
with Core Engagement 2 for supporting infrastructure development) (PAD, para. 10 and ICR, para.
30). The project was also aligned with the subsequent World Bank strategy for Indonesia - the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF FY10-FY20) which highlighted sustainable energy and universal access as a
separate engagement area. As a dispatchable resource pumped storage is suitable for facilitating increased
penetration of variable renewable energy sources.

The overall objective of the World Bank’s country partnership framework for Indonesia at project closure
(CPF FY21-FY25) was to promote sustainable and inclusive economic recovery and long-term growth. The
CPF was organized around four broad objectives to: (i) strengthen economic competitiveness and
resilience; (ii) improve infrastructure; (iii) nurture human capital; and (iv) sustain management of natural
assets, natural resource-based livelihoods and disaster resilience (CPF, para. 41). The UCPS project
supported objective (ii) on improving infrastructure which encompassed improving infrastructure provision
and quality of service and transition to low carbon energy and attainment of universal access to reliable and
sustainable energy. The project was expected to support system reliability improvement by providing
flexible peaking capacity in a rapidly expanding system that was largely reliant on base load coal power
plants. In addition, it would support the low carbon energy transition by enabling development of renewable
energy power plants.

Country context

The project was relevant to key issues facing Indonesia, specifically acute peaking and supply reliability
risks in the absence of increases in peaking capacity in the mid-term. The commissioning of large coal fired
power plants in the near term would worsen the situation (PAD, para. 6). The project was expected to
make a substantial contribution to peaking capacity -1040 MW initially with completion of the UCPS and
eventually this amount would increase to 1,920 with the completion of the MPS (preparation of the latter
was to be financed under the project and its financing was expected later by the Bank or other donors).

 The ICR notes a greater shift to renewable energy, including pumped storage in PLN’s ten-year electricity
supply plan for 2021-2030 (ICR, para. 33). The shift reflects Indonesia’s goal of reducing GHG emissions
by 29 percent by 2030 and reaching carbon neutrality by 2060. Thus, the pumped storage investments
(UCPS under new Bank financing and MPS under preparation) would make a significant contribution
towards improved system reliability and increased variable renewable energy penetration in the Java-Bali
system.

The PDO is rated Substantial for relevance because while the project objectives remained aligned with both
the World Bank’s strategy for Indonesia (CPF FY21-FY25), PLN’s ten-year electricity supply plan and the
Government GHG emissions reduction targets, they were not appropriately pitched at the level of PLN's
institutional capacity which was deficient as demonstrated by frequent organizational and staffing changes,




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



               slow decision making, including taking key decisions only when the World Bank threatened suspension of
               disbursements.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             "..to significantly increase the peaking capacity of the power generation system in Java-Bali in an
                             environmentally and socially sustainable way."

                             Rationale
                             The ICR (pp. 8 and 9) presents a theory of change (TOC) based on the results matrix in the PAD and
                             conversations with the World Bank’s project team members. The TOC describes the chain of activities and
                             outputs that were expected at project completion to lead to a significant increase in peaking capacity in the
                             Java-Bali power generation system in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner and to contribute
                             to decarbonization and improved system reliability of the grid in the longer term. Thus, the main activities for
                             achieving this PDO were the development and construction of the UCPS, management of land acquisition,
                             resettlement and restoration of livelihoods and of the environment. These activities were to result in the
                             commissioning of 1,040 MW of pumped storage hydropower capacity in the Cisokan valley, completion
                             of transmission lines for connecting the power plant to the Java Bali power system, implementation of three
                             land acquisition and resettlement action plans (LARAPs) for the dams and reservoir areas, access road and
                             quarry and transmission lines, and successful mitigation of adverse environmental impacts of the UCPS.

                             Outputs

                             The ICR indicates the status of completion of the expected outputs as follows:

                                       1. Commissioning of the 1040 UCPS Power plant: The power plant was not constructed due to a
                                          dispute with the main civil works contractor over access to the project site after a major landslide
                                          occurred after the contractor had been given notice to proceed but before mobilization. This meant
                                          that other contracts which had been procured could not be awarded until this issue was resolved. The
                                          World Bank canceled the loan allocation for the UCPS component after the failure by PLN and the
                                          contractor to agree on a resolution.
                                       2. Successful implementation of LARAPs, including completion of compensation payments to all project
                                          affected households.
                                       3. Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts of the project.

                             Outcomes


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



Three indicators and their respective targets were selected at project appraisal for assessing the achievement
of this PDO as follows: (i) increased peaking capacity due to the UCPS with a target of 1,040 MW; (ii) the
percentage of project affected households that achieved increased /restored incomes or assets with a target
of 100 percent; and (iii) evidence of satisfactory compliance with the UCPS’s Environmental and Management
Plan (EMP) with the target being no pending cases of non-compliance at project completion.

The actual outcomes achieved by the project were as follows:

    1. Increased peaking capacity due to the UCPS was zero compared to the target of 1040 MW because
       the power plant was not completed as described above.
    2. Sixty-five (65 percent) of the project-affected households had achieved increased/restored incomes or
       assets at the time the UCPS component was dropped from the project (December 30, 2018,
       restructuring) compared to a target of 100 percent. The ICR notes that progress was slower on
       livelihoods development with capacity developed in 22 percent of the villages. By early 2021 about 99
       percent of the required land had been acquired, compensation payments had been largely completed
       and the planned livelihoods support had been implemented under all three LARAPs.
    3. PLN continued to monitor implementation of the EMP even after the termination of the road access
       contract as some issues such as erosion and slips, slow revegetation and stabilization slopes, and
       inadequate drainage management required attention. The World Bank continued to provide
       supervision support on environmental and social issues based on a Safeguards action plan agreed
       with PLN.

The PDO indicators were appropriate, and the related targets were mostly measurable (peaking capacity,
percent of project affected households who achieved increased/restored livelihoods, no pending cases of
non-compliance with the EMP) or assessable.

The ICR rates the efficacy of this PDO as “Modest” based on the assessment that the UCPS will be
completed by 2027 with the new financing provided by the Bank and the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank
under a new project (Development of Pumped Storage Hydropower in Java Bali System Project
(P172256)). The ICR cites several factors to support the assertion that the project will be completed and
become operational including: (i) the completion of the access road which was the main factor that led to the
cancelation of the portion of the Bank Loan that was financing the UCPS; (ii) the large investment already
made by PLN; (iii) the advanced stage of land acquisition and resettlement processes; and (iv) the continued
strategic relevance of the UCPS as an enabler of renewable energy given PLN’s ambitious targets for
renewable energy capacity additions (6.5 GW by 2025 and 45 GW by 2050).

A Modest rating is justifiable based on the progress made in the provision of road access, land acquisition
and resettlement, including compensation payments under all three LARAPs and the bidding of several
packages.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



"..strengthen the institutional capacity of the project implementing entity (PLN) in hydro power planning,
development and operation."

Rationale
The TOC describes the chain of activities and outputs that were expected to lead to improved institutional
capacity of PLN for planning, developing and operating hydropower projects by project completion date and
increased flexibility of the Java Bali power system for integrating variable renewable energy in the longer
term. The institutional capacity improvements were expected to be achieved through the participation of PLN
staff in the preparation activities for the UCPS and the MPS and through custom tailored training. PLN's staff
participation in procurement, land acquisition resettlement and livelihoods restoration processes for the UCPS
was expected to improve its institutional capacity and so were preparation activities for the MPS whose
expected key outputs were: (i) completion of a feasibility study, detailed design, bid documents and
environmental and social documentation for the MPS; and (ii) delivery of training to PLN personnel on
hydropower planning, development and operation. Additional outputs which are not reflected in the TOC
were production of a training and capacity building plan by PLN, and preparation of training completion
reports.

Outputs

The ICR indicates that the following outputs were produced:

    1. Preparation of training and capacity building plan for PLN staff: This was not done until after the World
         Bank had threatened cancelation of the bulk of the Loan.
    2. Procurement of key contracts under UPCS (civil works, turbine generator equipment,
         hydromechanical works, etc.)
    3.   Land acquisition, substantial completion of resettlement and livelihoods restoration activities under
         UCPS
    4.   Feasibility study for the MPS was completed in July 2018.
    5.   Preparation of safeguards documents was paused in mid-2018 due to the consultant’s non-
         performance. A new consultant was engaged in September 2021 well after the project restructuring in
         December 2018 and about three months before the Loan closed on December 31, 2021.
    6.   No information was provided in the ICR regarding preparation of training completion reports.

Outcomes

The outcome for this component is rated Modest by the ICR. The outcome indicator was preparation of
training completion reports for all training and capacity building activities. The ICR reports that training
activities were reported through quarterly progress reports but does not report on the outcomes. The non-
reporting in the ICR of the outcome of training activities as reported in the completion reports is a
shortcoming in the assessment of the efficacy of this PDO. In addition, The ICR bases its rating on the
studies and preparation activities in which PLN staff participated as summarized in the outputs above. In this
context the delivery of outputs was only partial especially under the MPS.

Nonetheless, it is reasonable to assume that PLN would have gained significant institutional capacity during
the project preparation activities, especially on land acquisition resettlement and restoration activities
under the UCPS. .. Efficacy of this PDO is, therefore, rated Modest.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
"..to strengthen the institutional capacity of PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) for planning and
preparation of pumped storage and hydropower and operation."

Revised Rationale
The revised objective is almost identical to the original objective, except that the scope of the capacity
strengthening was revised to focus on planning and preparation of pumped storage and hydropower project
and to exclude capacity strengthening for operation of such projects.

The PDO indicator target was changed from “training completion reports for all training and capacity building
activities” to “improved capability of PLN in planning and preparation of hydropower pumped storage projects
in accordance with international practice.” The revised target became vague and less amenable to objective
assessment. The TOC remained substantially the same as for the original PDO. A small change in the
intermediate indicator for the MPS studies was the spilt into two indicators for: (i) a finalized feasibility study
by PLN; (ii) design finalized and bid documents for MPS approved by PLN management. In addition, a third
indicator required ESMP and LARAP to be prepared for MPS and approved by PLN.

Outputs

The ICR indicates that the following outputs (these are in addition to those accomplished on the UCPS) were
achieved:

    1. A training and capacity building plan for PLN staff was prepared covering several key areas such as:
       planning and operation of hydropower /pumped storage projects, design and procurement
       management, etc.
    2. Feasibility study for the MPS was completed in July 2018.
    3. Detailed engineering design and procurement strategy were initiated under the project but had to be
       carried over to the next project because they could not be completed by the revised project closing
       date of December 31, 2021.
    4. ESIA and LARAP were also carried over to the next project due to delays.

Outcomes

The outcome for this component is rated Modest by the ICR. The outcome indicator as revised during project
restructuring was improved capability of PLN in planning and preparation of hydropower pumped storage
projects in accordance with international practice” which was also incorrectly stated as the indicator target
(ICR, Annex 1). Overall PLN would have gained some significant capacity improvements in carrying out the
procurement, land acquisition, resettlement and livelihood activities under the UCPS. However, the indicators
and targets for institutional capacity strengthening are not adequate to provide a basis for objective
verification of the extent to which this PDO was achieved. Therefore efficacy of this PDO is rated Modest.



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)




                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on minimal progress made in implementing the UCPS component Objective 1 of significantly
                            increasing peaking capacity of the power generation system in Java-Bali in an environmentally and socially
                            sustainable way was modestly achieved. Although there are no verifiable indicators it is reasonable to
                            conclude that PLN achieved significant capacity strengthening (Objective 2) in course of its staff
                            participation project preparation activities, principally under the UCPS; however, in the absence of verifiable
                            outcome indicators for both the original and the revised Objective 2, their efficacy ratings are each rated
                            Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal the project was shown to be part of PLN's least cost expansion study for the Java Bali system for
   the years 2010-2030. A cost benefit analysis confirmed that the project was economically and financially viable
   with economic and financial rates of return of 19 percent and 16 percent respectively. Sensitivity analysis
   indicated that the project rates of return were robust against significant changes in the most important variables -
   fuel prices and investment costs.

   During the project restructuring on December 30, 2018, the UCPS component was dropped following the
   cancelation of the related portion of the Bank Loan in May 2017. Hence, the economic and financial analysis
   which had been based on this component was no longer relevant as the project became a purely technical
   assistance operation. Thus, no project economic and financial analysis was carried out for the ICR.

   The efficiency rating for the project is, therefore, based only on the administrative efficiency of
   implementation. Overall administrative efficiency was weighed down by procurement and contract
   administration issues. Substantial delays occurred in procurement of key consultants and construction contracts
   and once awarded several contractors and consultants performed poorly (the engineering consultant for UCPS,
   the original access road contractor and the E&S consultant for the MPS component). Contractual disputes with
   the main civil works contractor over access to the project sites took more than five years to resolve (2016-2021).
   Thus, seven years after Board approval (2011-2018) the UCPS component had to be dropped. The ICR notes
   frequent changes in PLN personnel involved with the project, a factor that must have contributed to
   implementation inefficiencies. In addition, PLN was slow in taking decisions and took some key decisions only
   after the Bank had threatened and implemented suspension of disbursements.




                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



There were, however, some significant efficiencies in the procurement of major contracts through competitive
bidding resulting in huge cost savings of up to 25 percent on three awarded contracts. Although not
implemented under the project the contracts were transferred to the new Bank financed project, thus ensuring
that PLN retains the benefits of savings.

Overall, the efficiency rating for the project is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    84.00
 Appraisal                                                 19.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre 1st Restructuring (Original) Objectives 1 and 2

The relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial as described above. The efficacy is rated Modest because:
(i) some progress was made towards the objective of achieving a significant increase in peaking capacity in the
Java Bali power system in an environmentally and socially sustainable way, but the power plant could not be
completed during the project implementation period; and (ii) training completion reports, an indicator target for
the objective for strengthening of PLN’s institutional capacity for planning, development and operation of
hydropower and pumped storage projects were not prepared. Although there is no easily verifiable evidence of
the achievement of this objective the completion of substantial project preparation activities by PLN indicates
that some significant capacity strengthening was achieved.

Based on a Substantial rating for PDO relevance, Modest for efficacy of original objectives and Modest for the
project’s efficiency the outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in line with OPCS guidelines.

Post 1st Restructuring (Revised) Objective 2.

The relevance of the objective is rated Substantial as described above. The efficacy is rated Modest based on
the completion of substantial project preparation activities by PLN and its consultants.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



Based on a Substantial rating for PDO relevance, Modest for efficacy and Modest for efficiency the outcome
rating is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

In accordance with OPCS’s ICR Guidelines the project’s overall outcome rating is derived by calculating a
disbursement weighted average of the outcome ratings for the pre and post restructuring ratings. The resulting
overall rating as calculated in the table below was Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                                            Pre 1st Restructuring              Post 1st Restructuring
         Rating dimension
                                             Objectives (1 and 2)               Objectives (1 and 2)
            Relevance                            Substantial                         Substantial
              Efficacy
            Objective 1                            Modest                           Not rated
            Objective 2                            Modest                            Modest
            Efficiency                             Modest                            Modest
         Outcome rating                    Moderately Unsatisfactory      Moderately Unsatisfactory
      Outcome rating weight                            3                                3
     Amount disbursed (US$ m)                       35.79                             0.50
      Amount disbursed (%)                            99                                1
          Weight value                               2.96                             0.03
      Overall Outcome rating                               Moderately Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the successful development and operation of flexible peaking capacity at UCPS are considered
low in the ICR due to the provision of new financing by the Bank and the Asian Infrastructure Development
Bank for UCPS. This low-risk rating is consistent with the priority accorded to renewable energy in PLN's
electricity supply plan and the role of pumped storage hydropower in enabling variable renewable energy,
the large commitment of resources already made by PLN and the progress already achieved in addressing
key issues related access to the project sites and in land acquisition and resettlement processes.

However, concerns about institutional inefficiencies in PLN’s management of procurement and contract
administration processes, particularly slow decision making worsened by continual changes in organizational
and staffing responsibilities may persist in the future unless special efforts are made to manage these risks
under the new operation.

PLN’s financial performance continued to rely on the PSO subsidy from the Government of Indonesia, but
efforts were in progress through analytical and advisory services provided by the Bank to move the sector
towards full cost recovery. Strong financial performance will remain an imperative for PLN to successfully
mobilize financing for projects such as the MPS whose preparation was supported by the project and the
new Bank financing.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well conceived to address key issues of adding significant peaking capacity that was
  needed in the Java Bali system to improve reliability and enable the development of increased variable
  renewable energy in line with PLN’s electricity supply plan. It was firmly grounded in the Bank’s country
  partnership strategies for Indonesia as described earlier.

  PLN retained a Project Review Panel (PRP) in 2010 comprising international and national hydropower
  experts to undertake periodic, comprehensive, independent reviews of the project design, construction
  and initial filling of the reservoir and emergency preparedness measures. By project appraisal the PRP
  had already provided comments on the detailed engineering design, and these were to be addressed by
  the project engineer who was expected to be hired by PLN by mid-2011. The updated designs were to be
  reviewed again by the PRP and agreed to by PLN and the Bank before bidding of the main contracts
  (civil works). Similarly, an Environmental and Social Panel comprising reputable international and
  national environmental and social experts was also retained early in the project preparation stages to
  provide PLN with advice on environmental and social aspects of project design and construction and on
  enhancing the project’s environmental and social outcomes.

  There were some shortcomings, however, which subsequently contributed to protracted implementation
  delays. For example, while the Project Review Panel (PRP) and the Environmental and Social Panel
  (ESP) were retained early in the project preparation stages, the project design and supervision engineer
  were not retained by PLN until October 2012. To speed up implementation after Board approval the
  project engineer should be retained sufficiently in advance to complete detailed engineering design and
  preparation of bidding documents, thereby enabling advance procurement or issuance of bids
  immediately after confirmation of financing.

  The risks derived through the operational risk assessment framework (ORAF) were appropriate. The
  overall risk was assessed as ‘High’, and the risk management measures were properly
  identified. However, with hindsight the risks related to PLN’s management inefficiencies, particularly the
  slow decision-making processes, seem to have been underestimated.

  The results framework was properly designed with clear linkages between activities, outputs and
  outcomes for the Objective 1 (significant increases in peaking power capacity in the Java Bali power
  system). The indicator for strengthening PLN’s institutional capacity (improved capability of PLN in
  preparation, development and operation of pumped storage hydropower projects in accordance with
  international best practice) could have been supported more verifiable objective targets. There was no
  specification of the contents of completion of training reports that were to be used as the target for
  assessing achievement of this indicator.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)




b. Quality of supervision
 The project was intensely supervised over a period of about 10 years by a Bank team comprising country
 and Headquarters based staff. The composition of supervision missions generally mirrored the project’s
 supervision requirements as planned at appraisal to include environmental and social experts,
 procurement, and financial management specialists.

 Missions were undertaken twice a year, but country-based staff engaged in continual project supervision
 including frequent site visits (sometimes twice a month) at critical stages of the project. The mission’s aide
 memoires were comprehensively prepared and were action oriented. At least two ISRs were prepared
 each year to inform management of key issues and required actions and decisions.

 A mid-term review undertaken by the Bank in 2015 provided a comprehensive status report on the slow
 implementation progress of the project and slow disbursements. The mission reports outlined the key
 actions that were needed to advance implementation and laid the basis for the partial loan cancelation in
 2017 and the subsequent comprehensive 1st restructuring at the end of 2018 in which the UCPS was
 dropped.

 The chronology of events reveals some large, elapsed times between the mid-term review’s (2015)
 surfacing of significant project implementation issues, the partial cancelation of the Loan in 2017 and the
 eventual 1st restructuring at the end of 2018. These are indicative of the Bank’s substantial support to
 advance the project under very difficult circumstances such as the access road landslide whose impact
 eventually led to the partial loan cancelation and to the restructuring. Once the project was restructured
 the Bank worked with the GoI to develop new financing for the UCPS which was approved in 2021 shortly
 after the contractual dispute with the civil works contractor had been resolved.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E arrangements including a set of intermediate and final results indicators to measure PDO
 achievement, baseline values of the indicators, the sources of data, and responsibilities and frequency of
 data collection were clearly laid out in Annex 1 of the PAD. These included annual, semi-annual, quarterly
 and one-time reports (Project reports on completion). As described earlier the indicators were relevant to
 the PDOs and verifiable except for the capacity building which lacked assessable targets. The PDO level
 indicators were to be verified through specific project reports such as surveys of PAH and Engineer’s
 semi-annual reports for compliance with EMPs. Progress on implementation of the UCPS and capacity
 building were to be assessed through the PIU’s quarterly progress reports.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



 M&E design was appropriate, except for the weakness in the PDO indicator and target for capacity building
 (as described above) and the failure to fully reflect in the portal all the results framework changes approved
 in the restructuring paper.



b. M&E Implementation
  Annual, semi-annual and quarterly progress reports prepared by the PIU were generally adequate and so
  were the resettlement activities and restoration of livelihoods reports prepared by the Independent and
  Monitoring Evaluation Team (IMET).The reporting on the UCPS related indicators ceased after the
  component had been removed from the 1st restructuring in 2018.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E reports provided valuable information and a basis for discussion between PLN and the Bank
  supervision missions, especially the MTR in 2015 and the 1st restructuring in 2018. They also provided
  information for decision making such as the second extension of the Loan closing date from November
  30, 2020, to December 2021. Preparation of ISRs also benefited from PLN’s quarterly progress and
  other reports.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At project appraisal 5 safeguards policies were triggered as follows: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01); (ii)) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4. 11); (iv)
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The project was assigned a
   Category A for safeguards based on the World Bank’s rating system at the time.

    The potential issues identified during project preparation were: (i) substantial land acquisition, resettlement
   and compensation for thousands of project-affected households; (ii) impacts for natural habitats and
   endangered mammal species in the catchment areas; (ii) slips and erosion damage to private property and
   possible water quality issues; and (iii) slow revegetation and stabilization of slopes.

   Three LARAPs were prepared for dams and reservoirs, roads and quarry, and for transmission
   lines. Progress was achieved in the implementation of LARAPs such that about 65 percent of the affected
   households had their incomes increased/restored by the time of the 1st restructuring and there had been
   substantial delivery of compensation payments. The World Bank continued to monitor implementation of
   the LARAPs after the UCPS component had been dropped. A review made in the context of the preparation
   of the new Bank financing for the UCPS revealed some outstanding compensation payments and delivery




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



  of infrastructure to local communities in line with local regulations. An action plan to address these issues
  was agreed with PLN and was made a precedent for disbursement of the new UCPS Loan.

  Studies were carried out on natural habitats and a biodiversity management plan was completed in 2015
  compliant with OP4.04. A cooperation agreement was signed between PLN and with Perjanjian Kerjasama,
  PKS, a state-owned forestry company to implement reforestation and forest enrichment in the catchment
  areas. This agreement was renewed in May 2022 after closure of the project.

  The E&S work on the MPS was considerably delayed and the outputs at project closure were limited
  because of the slow and poor performance of the initial consultant whose contract was subsequently
  canceled in 2018. A new consultant was engaged in September 2021. Thus, at project closure the outputs
  of this activity were limited to: (i) an initial screening of three alternatives prepared by the engineer as part of
  the pre-feasibility and feasibility level studies; (ii) a preliminary ecological assessment carried out by the
  World Bank in 2017, (iii) stakeholder engagement plan (2017); (iv) public information meetings; and a (v)
  draft scoping report carried out by the new consultant in 2021. The remaining ESIA and ESMP are part of
  PLN’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan and will be transferred to the new project

  The project’s overall safeguards performance rating was Satisfactory at closure according to the ICR (p.
  26).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  Procurement was seriously delayed for packages 1, 2, 4 and for the design and supervision engineering
  consultant. The main contracts (package 1, civil works) were signed in September and October 2015
  more than 4 years after Board approval of the Bank Loan. The engineering design and construction
  supervision consultant contract was signed in October 2012 more than a year after the Loan had become
  effective. International best practice requires engineering design and supervision consultants to be
  retained early in the project preparation process so that at all the pre-construction engineering work and
  bid documents are either ready or already issued by the time the financing becomes available.

  The ESIA and EMP consultant contract was terminated in 2018 after slow and poor performance. The
  selection of a replacement consultant took more than two years (April 2019 to September 2021), a long
  time although some of the delay was due to the impacts of Covid -19.

  Overall procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closure.

  Financial Management

  PLN submitted Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) to the Bank on a regular basis and in the agreed
  formats. Only small delays were encountered at times. PLN’s unqualified audit reports were submitted on
  a timely basis and disclosed on the company’s website.

  Several shortcomings in financial management included: delays in payments to contractors and
  consultants due to lengthy payment procedures between PLN, Ministry of Finance and the

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



   contractors/consultants, and problems with the availability subsidiary loan agreement funding in the GoI
   budget. Poor documentation of payment requests by contractors and consultants also contributed to
   delayed payment processing.

   Overall financial management was rated Moderately Satisfactory at closure because of the contracts
   payment issues described above (ICR, p. 29).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
   Gender

   The project had no specific targets for female participation in project activities as contractors/consultants or
   as beneficiaries. However, it was expected that males and females would benefit equally from the improved
   power reliability resulting from the additional peaking capacity in the Java Bali system. About 30 percent of
   the participants in livelihoods restoration training are reported to have been women.

   The ICR noted the following gender related measures: (i) inclusion in LARAPs of special efforts to ensure
   that women were not disadvantaged in relation to the restoration of livelihoods, (including access to work on
   hydropower projects), and access to assets, including land; (ii) a monitoring mechanism to track gender
   disaggregated data for participation in rehabilitation and income recovery programs and for gender equity
   in the composition of grievance redress mechanism personnel; and (iii) a minimum of 30 percent for new
   female hires was established in PLN to address existing serious gender imbalances.

   Institutional Strengthening

   This was an objective of the project and is, therefore, assessed under Efficacy above.

   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing

   The project did not include private sector financing. It was unlikely to be attractive to private sector
   participation due to its large environmental and social imprint. The ICR cites (p. 22) a recent International
   Energy Agency (IEA) report which observes that only 27 percent of hydropower capacity installed during
   2011-2020 was privately financed and that for large capacities the percentage is even lower. However,
   when completed the pumped storage hydropower capacity will potentially enable significant variable
   renewable energy which will likely be mostly private sector financed.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR details several important lessons that would be useful to inform preparation and
implementation of similar projects in Indonesia and in other countries. The ICRR amplifies and adds
additional perspectives as follows:

Financing a new operation for a client with no recent experience on similar projects requires
careful consideration and planning to ensure the availability of adequate implementation
capacity. PLN had no recent experience in implementing a major hydropower power project and
this was the first pumped storage hydropower project to be attempted in Indonesia. The retention of
technical and environmental and social panels by PLN early in the project process was a critical
element for mitigating technical design and E&S risks which were adequately identified. The need to
strengthen to PLN’s institutional capacity was recognized and made an explicit part of the project
development objective. Nonetheless, under these circumstances an implementation schedules of 6
years compared to the average coefficient of 7 years for hydropower projects did not adequately
factor PLN’s lack of recent experience.

Project readiness is critical to ensure timely implementation as soon as financing
effectiveness has been achieved. Best practice requires completion of project preparation
activities related to detailed engineering, bid documents, safeguards instruments and project
supervision arrangements prior to effectiveness of the financing. In this case while the Project
Review Panel had conducted its technical review by appraisal the engineering design and
construction supervision consultant was not hired until more than a year after Loan effectiveness.
This delayed the update of the detailed designs and the procurement process such that the
contracts for UCPS were not ready for award until more than 4 years after Board approval.

Intense World Bank supervision effort can turn around poorly performing projects due to
deficiencies on the part of the client, contractors and consultants, Through intense supervision
efforts the Bank team, which comprised a significant in-country presence, was able to maintain the
interest of both the client and the World Bank management in this important project leading to an
eventual new financing solution after the cancelation of the Loan provided under this project. The
co-location of the World Bank’s Country Director and key members of the project team in the country
and the location of the practice managers in a nearby country (for part of the project duration)
facilitated frequent high-level discussions with key GoI officials on project issues.

Non-performing projects can be creatively restructured to maintain a level of presence
necessary for continued dialogue, thus enhancing prospects of designing improved
operations. The Bank’s continued support for institutional strengthening of PLN in relation to the
MPS after the restructuring and the monitoring of E&S issues on UCPS after the Loan cancelation


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pumped Storage TA Project (P112158)



facilitated the preparation of new financing once the contractual dispute with the civil works
contractor had been resolved in 2021.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is very well prepared and argued. There are, however, some shortcomings, related to the verification
of outcomes for the institutional capacity strengthening of PLN. In this respect the ICR does not present
verifiable data to support the claim that the revised objective after restructuring was partially achieved. In
addition, the indicator and target data in the results framework appears to be incorrect.

Other than these shortcomings the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
