     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023223

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P129524                                      MZ-Social Safety Net project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52260,IDA-59920,IDA-D5200,TF-            30-Jun-2018                                       106,662,890.23
 B4885,TF-B1121

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2013                                  31-Dec-2021

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                    36,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             114,005,238.69                                    15,913,529.74

 Actual                                         105,768,384.58                                    15,913,529.74




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Basab Dasgupta              Salim J. Habayeb               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                            Maldonado




 P149536_TBL
 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P149536                                      Building gender-sensitive SPL Systems ( P149536 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                      900000.00



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)




 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Apr-2014

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                       900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                       900,000.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                       900,000.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were defined by the Financing agreement between IDA and the Republic of
   Mozambique as follows: to provide temporary income support to extremely poor households, and to put in
   place the building blocks of a social safety net system.

   The original project objectives remained during the lifetime of the project. A series of three additional
   financings increased the scope of the project and the timeline.

   As also noted by the ICR, there was no need for a split evaluation, as the restructurings expanded the scope
   of the project. Some end-of-project targets were revised upward and some new PDO indicators were added
   to measure a new temporary income support delivery modality that was introduced to support vulnerable
   households. This ICR Review assesses the achievement of objectives based on the expanded scope and
   revised outcome targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Mar-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Originally, there were two components of the project to support the Government of Mozambique in scaling
   up the Productive Social Action Program (PASP): Institutional strengthening and capacity building to

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



support the consolidation of the National Basic Social Security Strategy, and Labor-intensive Public Works,
which aimed to directly support approximately 100,000 extremely poor households living in 40 districts and
five municipalities in the poorest and most vulnerable areas in Mozambique (PAD, p 10). A third component
was later added in the First Additional Financing to provide emergency social assistance through Direct
Cash Transfers to address a severe drought in the Gaza province. The activities covered under these three
components were as follows:

Component 1: Institutional strengthening and capacity building to support the consolidation of the
National Basic Social Security Strategy (Original cost: US$13.7 million. Actual cost: US$21.96 million)
was comprised of 2 sub-components:

Subcomponent 1.1 was proposed to build permanent systems for the implementation of the National
Social Protection Strategy (ENSSB) by developing (a) a common targeting system to identify potential
beneficiaries for the Recipient's three core programs of its social safety net; (b) a single registry of
beneficiaries to support National Institute of Social Action (INAS) in implementing the national social
protection strategy; (c) a payment system guaranteeing secure, predictable and timely payments to
beneficiaries of their entitlements while minimizing administrative and transaction costs; and (d) a
knowledge generation and information management activities to enhance the capacity of Ministry of Women
and Social Action (MMAS).

Subcomponent 1.2 aimed at capacity building of the implementing partners for successful monitoring, and
evaluation of the labor-intensive Public Works Program (PWP), through (a) development and
implementation of a MIS (e-INAS) to monitor Public Work Program (PWP) progress; (b) carry out an impact
evaluation to measure changes in the welfare of the PWP beneficiaries; (c) development and
implementation of an information, education, and communication (IEC) strategy; (d) integration of a
grievance management system (GRM), into the MIS ; (e) carrying out of a series of activities to enhance the
capacity of INAS staff to plan, implement, coordinate, and monitor the PWP; and (f) development and
implementation of information and communication technologies (ICT).

Component 2: aimed to support Labor-intensive Public Works (Original cost: US$36.3 million. Actual
cost: US$41.66 million) through the provision of timely and predictable supplemental income from
participation in labor-intensive public works activities. It had two sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1 aimed to support labor-intensive public works through (a) implementation of a Public
Works Program in the form of labor payments to beneficiaries; and (b) public work grants to districts and
municipalities.

Sub-component 2.2 aimed in strengthening the capacities of selected beneficiaries to improve livelihoods
through the financial literacy training, saving promotions and other related productive opportunities.

Component 3 (Original cost: US$ 0. Actual cost: US$ 41.38 million.) was added in the project’s first
additional financing (AF1) to support Direct Cash Transfers programs to respond to shocks of different
nature, as well as achieving gender specific results. It supported the government response to the severe
drought caused by El Niño in 2016 in the Gaza province by providing emergency social assistance through
12 months Direct Cash Transfers (DCT) to 20,000 households. It used a third-party payment delivery
system to avoid overburdening the limited institutional capacity and expanded Public Work Program
activities in thirty additional districts. To respond to additional sudden extreme climate events that affected
Mozambique, the second additional financing (AF2) sought to expand coverage further by changing its


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



   emergency eligibility criteria, benefit duration, and establishing referral processes for affected populations.
   To deliver social protection programs in difficult to reach areas affected by these additional sudden extreme
   climate events, the project relied on other organizations such as the World Food Program (WFP) to
   implement AF2.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The original cost at appraisal in March 2013 (PAD, 2013) was estimated at US$50 million, financed by an
   IDA credit. Afterwards, the changes in country context triggered the Project’s restructuring and three
   additional financings to broaden the scope of the Project and to bring a systemic perspective to the sector in
   Mozambique. With three additional financing, the total revised cost was US$131.20 million and total actual
   cost at project closing was US$ 105.00 million.

   In March 2017, the Project was restructured under the First Additional Financing (AF1) (Social Protection
   Project - Additional Financing, P161351), which consisted of financing in the amount of US$ 10 million from
   the Crisis Response Window. The key reason that triggered the AF1 and the restructuring was the severe
   drought caused by El Niño in 2016 in the Gaza province. The AF1 expanded the original project to provide
   post-emergency social assistance by adding a new component (i.e., Component 3), which provided US$ 7.5
   million (of the total US$ 10 million) in DCT transfers to households affected by the drought. The remaining
   funding (US$ 2.5 million) was allocated to M&E, project management and communication. The Project
   closing date was also extended under the first restructuring.

   In October 2019, the Second Additional Financing for the Social Protection Project and Support to Cyclone
   and Flood Emergencies (AF2, P170327) was approved. The US$45 million AF2, approved in 2019, was
   supported by IDA’s Crisis Response Window (US$35 million) and the MDTF (US$10 million). It was
   provided to support families affected by two cyclones and flood emergencies. The Multi-Donor Trust Fund
   (MDTF, TF073250) was established by the World Bank in 2018 to serve as a platform for integrated
   financial support with donors’ contributions and to provide technical assistance to the sector, including
   support for coordinating activities between partners.

   The Third Additional Financing and COVID-19 Response (AF3, P174783) was approved in February 2021.
   It brought complementary financing to support the Government measures to mitigate the adverse economic
   impact of the lockdowns and social distancing measures associated to the COVID-19 pandemic. To provide
   immediate support, the World Bank mobilized US$73.5 million via the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism
   through the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) of the Cyclone ‘Idai’ and ‘Kenneth’
   Emergency Recovery and Resilience Project (P171040). This financing source allocated US$53.5 million to
   the social protection sector and US$20 million to the health sector. The AF3 provided complementary
   US$26.2 million, solely funded by the MDTF, to cover the planned US$79.7 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
More than half of Mozambique's population remained poor and highly vulnerable despite its rapid economic
growth. According to the PAD, poverty was as high as 58 and 74 percent in the rural north and central

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



regions respectively when annual growth averaged 7.5 percent per year between 1992 and 2009. Already
high food insecurity was further exacerbated by external shocks that reduced household consumption,
depleted asset-holding, and diminished their investments in human capital. Seasonal and frequent climate-
related shocks also affected close to 80 percent of Mozambicans' income who were primarily dependent on
rural farming sector. Similarly, about 65 percent of urban residents, who were dependent on non-
agricultural activities for their primary income, faced income shocks in the form of protracted
underemployment, low income, food price increases, and other financial shocks. Besides income
vulnerability to economic shocks, social insurance, access to credit, and insurance markets were also very
limited for poor households in the country. Most of the social protection programs in the country were either
fragmented, had low coverage, or they were not well targeted.

Given this backdrop,

The project objectives were highly relevant to the needs of social protection and job creation in
Mozambique. They were aligned well with the Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-FY15). The PDOs
remained relevant at project completion and were consistent with the main goals of the latest World Bank
Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mozambique (Report No. 104733-MZ, FY17-21). This
Project was also in line with the CPF Focus area 3: “Enhancing Sustainability and Resilience”, and its areas
of intervention, “Coverage of Social Protection and Labor Programs” and “Accountability and Transparency
of government institutions”.

The project objectives were also aligned with government's poverty reduction strategy for rural and
urban areas. The PDOs were in line with broader development goals for Mozambique to improve
inclusiveness by improving coverage of social protection programs, and sustainability through strengthening
the institutional framework for managing public resources. It constituted a central element of the Productive
Social Action Program (PASP) strategy to reduce poverty in rural (through the ENSSB) and urban areas
through the Plano Estrategico de Reducqjo da Pobreza Urbana (PERPU). Overall, the project was well
aligned with the country’s policy priorities for Social Protection, specifically, with the government’s National
Strategy for Basic Social Security 2016-2024, and its operational Five-Year Program 2020-2024 that set
specific targets to boost consumption level and resilience of the poor and vulnerable population in rural and
urban areas; prevent and respond to risks of social exclusion through social welfare services, and develop
the institutional capacity to implement and coordinate the basic social security sub-system in the country.

The project objectives supported the WB COVID-19 crisis response goals. The PDOs were in line with
Pillar 2 of the World Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach which focused on “protecting the
poor and the vulnerable” in the challenging context of mitigating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
COVID-19 social protection response by the WB was provided through two pillars in support of the
Government of Mozambique’s plan. The first pillar was a vertical expansion supported by the Emergency
Project (Contingent Emergency Response Component, US$53.5 million). The second pillar expanded
emergency cash transfers to poor and vulnerable population (DCT) mostly in urban and peri-urban areas
(horizontal expansion).

The broadened scope of the project under the three additional financings shifted the exclusive
focus on the extreme poor to cover also support for populations vulnerable to external shocks. The
PDOs captured the emerging demands during the project implementation that required different programs
and instruments beyond the original PWP for effective delivery of support against vulnerability to external




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



               shocks and build resilience. Specifically, the project aimed to mitigate the impacts of climate change and
               extreme weather events, and reduce vulnerability to droughts, cyclones, and Covid-19 pandemic.

               The relevance of the project was highly enhanced to comply with wider project scope to incorporate
               emerging needs during implementation and increased attention for dealing with a more comprehensive
               social protection system. Considering its enhanced relevance, the assigned rating is high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: Provide temporary income support to extremely poor households

                             Rationale
                             At the time of the project appraisal during 2013, about 80 percent of the poor lived in rural areas of
                             Mozambique. The poor households experienced seasonal underemployment and inadequate resources
                             because of the annual cycle of agricultural activities and severe fluctuations in the resources that they derived
                             from these activities. Similarly, around 3.2 million poor people lived in urban areas who were more vulnerable
                             than rural residents to rising food and fuel prices, and to any potential reduction in or removal of government
                             subsidies. They faced unemployment throughout the year and faced longer-term challenges, such as, lack of
                             access to adequate training, and to economic opportunities.

                             The result chain of the Project suggested that the provision of timely and predictable supplemental income in
                             return for complementary training, and participation of rural and urban households in labor intensive public
                             works activities would help households to address their challenges in both rural and urban areas during lean
                             seasons and after the occurrence of shocks. These short run gains would eventually lead these poor and
                             vulnerable households to achieve consumption stabilization and overall welfare in the long run.

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes

                             Over the course of implementation, broadly, the project -

                                        surpassed its revised target of 90 percent by putting 100 percent of implementing partner’s
                                         delegations from National Institute of Social Action (INAS) in place in the areas of project
                                         implementation with functioning e-INAS.
                                        implemented complementary training programs such as financial literacy and employability in
                                         partnership with other organizations to improve capacity of beneficiaries.
                                        implemented PWP in all eligible provinces. It completed 852 PWP subprojects against a target of 800.

                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)




      as measures of climate change and disaster response, involved 18,000 beneficiaries to participate in
       143 short durational post emergency public work subprojects to complete community infrastructure
       repairs, production of local construction materials, rehabilitation of access roads, and community
       agricultural lands, and reforestation of coastal mangrove.

Outcome

The results were largely output-oriented, and the project could not achieve the intended end targets of
some of the key outcomes. Through provision of both PWP and DTC, the project reached overall, 482,411
beneficiary households, which was 9.1 percent short of the combined intended end target of 530,500
households. The disaggregation showed that PWP subprojects covered 131,756 households meeting the
target of 130,000 households but direct project beneficiaries of DCT transfers reached 350,655 beneficiaries,
which was 13.1 percent short of the end target of 403,500 beneficiary households.

Similarly, in terms of the PDO statement on supporting extremely poor households in rural areas, the project
served 85.9 percent of extremely poor households, that exceeded the intended target of 66 percent from the
bottom two quintiles of rural households. The project, however, did not achieve its support to extremely poor
household in urban areas. It attained 58.7 percent of extreme poor from the bottom two quintiles, short of its
intended target of 75 percent.

On a more granular level, the ICR (pp. 41-44) reported that:

      135,413 beneficiary households were covered under labor intensive public works program that
       exceeded a set target of 131,000.
      62 percent of project beneficiaries were female who received temporary income support. The
       achievement was short of a revised target of 65 percent.
      214,361 beneficiaries received direct cash transfers for COVID-19 response which was short of its
       target of 280,000.

In addition, evidence on consumption stabilization was limited. In the absence of an impact evaluation as
planned in the PAD, the ICR drew reference from a project beneficiary survey covering 1,434 families who
benefited from the Post Emergency - Direct Social Support Program (PASD-PE) after the onset of the
COVID-19 emergency. This survey, which only covered one of the many programs supported by the project,
found that most households (70.8 percent) reported food and nutritional consumption as the main use of the
DCT benefits, followed by shelter and house repairs (10.8 percent). While it is plausible to believe that income
support may have had an effect on consumption stabilization, the project had limited evidence to demonstrate
a measurable short-term impact on consumption stabilization.

Overall, the achievement under PDO 1 was modest.




Rating
Modest



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Put in place the building blocks of a social safety net system.

Rationale
The Government of Mozambique aimed to support the poorest and most vulnerable population through a
comprehensive social safety net, which was at the core of its national social protection strategy as outlined in
its National Basic Social Security Strategy for 2016-2024 (2016). The PDO-2 aimed to contribute to the
government's efforts to create a social safety net system by building permanent systems for the
implementation of the strategy. The aim was to create and improve systems, processes, and tools for the
implementation of the National Social Protection Strategy in Mozambique.

The result chain for this Project objective suggested that strengthening the institutional capacity to support the
consolidation of the National Basic Social Security Strategy by building permanent systems and capacity for
the implementation and M&E, the labor-intensive public works would contribute to the government's efforts to
create the building blocks of a social safety net system for poor and vulnerable households in rural and urban
areas in Mozambique.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The Project achieved several major improvements to put in place the building blocks of a social safety net
system. The Project

      reported complaints submission through grievance management system in 35 out of 128 districts
       (27.4 percent).
      managed to put in place the following key parts of a social safety net in Mozambique reflecting
       substantial contribution in building stronger capacity and better planning. Among them,
            o updated and unified the targeting instruments to achieve a higher level of targeting efficiency
              for the successful implementation of PWP. More than 85 percent of DCT payments were
              made on time, exceeding the end target of 70 percent.
            o put in place the MIS (e-INAS) as the building block of a social safety net. It included 97.2
              percent of PWP beneficiaries in the MIS (e-INAS) system.
            o built a multi-channel electronic payment delivery mechanism to reach beneficiaries in a timely
              manner –reflecting the creation of stronger capacity and greater planning to build the safety
              net system. At project completion, 23,078 payments were made for labor intensive PWP
              electronically, exceeding the target of 20,000 beneficiaries.

Outcome

The project achieved its PDO-2 indicator targets which, albeit output-oriented in some cases, were
reasonable measures of what constitutes the building blocks of a social safety net system. By revising the
targeting tool, and fine-tuning territorial targeting for urban areas, the project was successful in facilitating
more effective DCT implementation. The ICR reported that the project, under this PDO, included more than
97 percent of PWP beneficiaries in the MIS (e-INAS) system, including registration and social assessment.
Under the Inclusive Public Works modality (TPI) the project successfully covered its end target of 10,123
public works beneficiaries. Another building block of the social safety net system was to improve the payment
mechanism to make on time payments. The ICR reported that PWP was successful to make 87.2 percent of


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



                            payments on time against a target of 70 percent. Similarly, exceeding the target of 70 percent, DCT made
                            85.3 percent on time. PWP payments were made adequately with the exception of participants that dropped
                            out of the program. At project completion, 99.1 percent of beneficiaries received the full amount of the transfer
                            for Labor-Intensive Public Works, and 87.2 percent of payments were made within the month they were due
                            for Labor-intensive Public Works.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project almost fully achieved its second objective to put in place the building blocks of a social safety net
                            system. However, the project fell short of achieving some key intended targets under the first objective and
                            evidence on the effects of temporary income support on consumption stabilization was limited. Despite this
                            mixed achievement, the aggregation of achievements under both objectives is consistent with a substantial
                            rating for overall efficacy given that is plausible to believe that, in the case of the first objective, income
                            support had some positive effect on consumption stabilization.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   During project appraisal, no traditional cost-benefit analysis was conducted due to difficulties in estimating
   monetary equivalence of benefits from increased and stabilized consumption by households. Instead, the Bank
   carried out an ex-ante simulation during appraisal to identify the potential impact of the project on consumption
   stabilization and poverty of a scaled-up program, based on the government's target for the PASP of 400,000
   households. Simulations indicated the potential of the project in reducing poverty, contingent upon several
   factors, such as effective targeting, and household’s vulnerability to different types of risks (PAD, p20).

   In the absence of an impact evaluation, the ICR sought to collect information via a phone survey. In addition, the
   ICR sought to reach conclusions about benefits also by drawing on evidence from other studies of similar
   programs, including for DCT and COVID-19 response. The ICR (p. 23) reported global evidence to show that
   DCT-like programs in post emergency settings can help promote food security through dietary diversity and can
   also reduce negative coping strategies, such as child labor and dangerous work.

   Transition from manual to digital payments, and the increased capacity of INAS in managing different
   development partners improved efficiency. The ICR reported that delivery of payments included innovations like
   the use of third-party payment agencies contracted by the Government, including both private Payment Service

                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



Providers as well as UN organizations, and the use of digital payments through mobile phones. The ICR (p25)
referred to a study informing that the introduction of automated payments system during project implementation
improved efficiency by reducing the costs of payment delivery, cost of the average transfer, and costs of
withdrawals through a third-party arrangement.

The project however, faced several implementation challenges that adversely affected efficiency. According to
the ICR and the task team, these challenges could have been avoided. The ICR reported that the
implementation of some activities could have been better managed and streamlined to reduce administrative
costs (ICR, p25).. For example, the ICR reported that recurrent changes in project support personnel
significantly deterred implementation pace and progress. The project was extended three times to accommodate
the expanded scope of activities to respond to shocks, crisis, and changes in context. These extensions
provided more time to build capacity but affected staff turnover adversely due to their short notice period. The
task team mentioned that many staff started looking for jobs when their contracts were about to end. It led to
some disruptions in implementation. The team found out about the two more years of extension of the project
due to emergency just six months before the end date. According to the team, more clarity in contract could
have avoided implementation disruption due to staff turnover.

Similarly, the ICR (p25) mentioned that the implementation of registration and interviewing potential beneficiary
households, or benefit payments made by the Offline Payment Application, required mobilization of personnel
from Central INAS office. It increased costs due to a large per diem policy of the Government of Mozambique.
These activities resulted in higher than planned costs in terms of both money and time and could have been
made more efficient by using service providers or relying on local level implementers.

Some other key factors that also undermined efficiency were the delays experienced in the earlier stages of
implementation; and management of procurement contracts, especially with payment service providers as they
required technical support (ICR, p25). During the interview, the task team informed that implementation delays
were driven by three factors. First, changes in the political leadership of the implementing agency. Second, there
were capacity issues related to the management of procurement contracts during AF1. With respect to this, the
task team mentioned that besides turnover of procurement personnel, the payment system was fragmented and
there was multiple, rather than a single focal point for payments responsible for managing payment delivery of
procurement contracts. The team also pointed out that building trust was another issue that took some time and
subsequently, delayed the process. The third factor was related to sectoral referrals. The team mentioned that
referrals were being introduced based on how the sector was performing at that particular time. The task team
mentioned that in a way it was hard to say that it could have been made faster since the political landscape was
very unclear, and the team did not have a strong champion to faciliate the process. The decision to implement
the project without a Project Implementation Unit also caused delays in moving implementation forward. Overall,
the efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



                                                                                  0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High, as the objectives remained consistent with the Bank’s Mozambique
Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-FY15) and with the Government’s poverty reduction strategy. The
objectives were also relevant in addressing emergencies related to droughts, cyclones, and Covid-19 pandemic.
Overall Efficacy is rated substantial, as the project, despite of its modest achievement in PDO 1, achieved or
exceeded most of its outcome targets under PDO 2. Efficiency is rated modest because of insufficient
economic analysis and negative aspects of implementation that reduced project efficiency. The combined
ratings thus, lead to a moderately satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR, the project took several measures to ensure sustainability of the development
outcomes. For example, a single registry of beneficiaries and a functioning MIS (e-INAS) was created, and
different payments modalities were tested. The human resources at INAS were trained by the Bank, in
collaboration with other development partners to implement and monitor the different social protection
programs in Mozambique.

There are, however, some foreseeable risks which can affect sustainability of the project outcomes in
the longer run. For example, lack of consolidated support from different GoM agencies, both vertical and
horizontal, may hinder the sustainability of some project outcomes. Similarly, lack of capacity to manage
budgetary resources to fund the social protection programs and pay INAS staff may also pose hindrance.
The expansion of digital payments requires sustained support from Treasury and other technical agencies.
Finally, continued dialogue between Government and other development partners is important to support a
long-term vision. A complicated relationship with its development partners due to Mozambique’s past fiscal
crisis may pose as a bottleneck unless the dialogue between the Government and other partners is
sustained to build a broader view of the social protection system.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



The operation was at the core of the government’s Productive Social Action Program (PASP) and
constituted a central element of the strategy to reduce rural and urban poverty by contributing to the
government's overall objective of assisting more than 800,000 households through social safety net
interventions (PAD, p-8). The lending instrument was a five-year specific investment loan (SIL) and was
appropriate to enhance government capacity to create and consolidate a social safety net system, scale
up a labor-intensive public works program, and implement activities to enable beneficiaries to access
other economic opportunities to graduate from the program.

The PDOs were aligned with country priorities and World Bank strategies at appraisal while
project design included a plausible results chain. The project was directly aligned with the Pillar II of
the Mozambique Country Partnership Strategy on Vulnerability and Resilience. It aimed to contribute to
the government's efforts to put the PASP into operation by directly contributing to its objectives of
mitigating the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events and reducing vulnerability to
shocks. It was also aligned with government’s objectives to support policy actions on social protection by
including provisions of cash benefits for PWP participation in rural and urban areas, and capacity building
in the result chain through training, studies, and other activities.

The design of the project was adequately coordinated with other development partners. On the
technical side, the Bank had been involved in ongoing policy dialogue with UNICEF and ILO to
harmonize support and technical assistance for development of a management information system, and
a registry for beneficiaries for the National Institute for Social Action (INAS) programs. The Bank also
coordinated with several other development partners to support the Government in identifying and
contracting of a formal payment system to transfer cash benefits of social safety net programs. At the
operational level, the Bank collaborated with the World Food Program to ensure adequate coordination in
the implementation of Productive Social Action Program.

Implementation arrangements clearly defined the roles of three tiers of government. The project
was designed to support the implementation of the Productive Social Action Program by strengthening
the existing three tier administrative arrangements at central, province and local level. The central
government was mainly responsible for setting policies, providing financing and technical support, and
monitoring results, while districts and municipalities were responsible for direct service delivery.

At entry, implementation risks were mostly identified but were not adequately mitigated. The
project being a new intervention under full government responsibility, it identified the need for
considerable effort to enhance capacity at the central level, and to ensure horizontal and vertical
coordination between INAS, other ministries including central agencies, districts and municipalities. The
Bank identified the need for capacity enhancement at the district and municipality level considering their
importance for actual implementation of the public works subprojects. It also identified the need for
substantial support and assistance to Ministry of Women and Social Action and INAS, especially in the
areas of financial management, since they had no previous experience in managing a Bank operation. In
addition, the project identified the need for close and ongoing implementation support and supervision
throughout project implementation to overcome other implementation risks. Despite most of the
implementation risks were identified and deemed adequate to address the current need of capacity to
implement the project as designed at entry, it was not forward looking or sufficiently adequate for
potential future changes. For instance, the Bank somewhat failed to envisage the sufficiency of capacity
of the INAS and other agencies to implement new or more complex activities beyond the design at entry.
The project gradually became more and more complex as it was expanding in scope and new financing
mechanisms were being added to cover new and complex activities. These changes made it difficult for

                                                                                                Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



  the central agency to run the implementation efficiently and became exposed to additional
  implementation risks that Bank did not envision or assessed at entry.

  The ICR (p30), also reported some additional shortcomings in Bank’s assessment of implementer’s
  readiness during preparation stage. The ICR pointed out that lack of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
  per government choice contributed to subsequent slower implementation. Bank’s experience of launching
  similar projects in countries like Ethiopia, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Burundi suggested stronger
  performance when PIUs lead implementation. But rather than having a PIU to coordinate the Project’s
  implementation, the ICR pointed out that government sought additional support from existing Government
  structures that delayed the implementation.

  According to the ICR (p 35), the Bank overestimated INAS and MGCAS capacity to implement project
  activities. INAS’s lack of experience working with the Bank contributed to a slow start, particularly with
  respect to the complex activities under component 2 and monitoring activities. Moreover, the Bank failed
  to correctly anticipate the needed capacity to carry out more complex activities as the project evolved. As
  mentioned above, the task team informed that due to three AFs and restructuring, new and more
  complex project activities were added that placed challenges on these central agencies. The lack of
  adequate personnel, material, and functional capacity at central level to handle these additional and more
  complex activities contributed to a slow pace of implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision inputs and processes were adequate. The ICR reported that regular supervision missions
 were carried out by the Bank throughout the life of the Project. The missions were adequately staffed.
 There were sufficient number of experts in mission teams to provide assistance on social protection
 technical issues and providing training to staff both at central level, district and departments on
 environment, social and fiduciary matters. The Bank also carried out field supervision visits to the areas of
 project intervention during implementation. Supervision focused on social and fiduciary aspects, providing
 training, support to ensure sound financial and procurement management.

 The WB provided adequate support to facilitate implementation. As discussed above, Bank’s
 assessment of INAS capacity was overestimated and fell short to accommodate new and more complex
 additional activities as included during three additional financing. In the absence of a PIU, the
 implementation in the beginning was also slow. Bank trained the human resources at INAS to build skills to
 implement and monitor more complex and additional activities under the SP programs in Mozambique. The
 team used the time gained due to multiple extensions of the project to enhance implementation capacity
 building. The ICR reported that the project team also provided support with specific focus on improving
 implementation of social safeguards. It sought and used specific data from local implementation unit
 reports to monitor the implementation of social safeguards. In collaboration with other development
 partners, Bank also collaborated with other development partners within the framework of the MDTF, to
 create a platform to coordinate technical and financial support to the GoM to build a functioning SP system.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



 The Bank collaborated with the local teams to maintain a regular presence in the country
 throughout the life of the project. It helped the Bank to provide sound supervision to the different
 districts. The support was provided during the pandemic as well. The WB teams also collaborated with the
 government, other development partners and within WB teams to achieve the PDOs. The SP team
 collaborated with the Financial Inclusion and Stability Project (FISP – P166107) team to come up with
 solutions for a functioning system of digital payments for Mozambique. The SP and FISP teams worked
 with INAS and Center for the Development of the Financial Information Systems to address technical
 challenges.

 To comply with the financing of public work programs, the OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment was
 triggered, and an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
 Framework (RPF) were prepared by the borrower. By project completion, INAS had its own GRM, that was
 well designed and was being implemented. The ICR mentioned that all complaints presented were
 resolved before the end of the Project. The GRM, however, was not fully operational and had not yet been
 scaled up to the national level. Only 35 out of 128 districts reported to have operational GRM which were
 established with project implementation.

 Bank performance at supervision, overall, was satisfactory despite some implementation challenges faced
 by the project. The project was implemented by INAS staff without a PIU and there was high turn-over of
 safeguards staff. The absence of PIU also created procurement challenges. Despite these challenges, the
 training provided by the Bank paid off and by Project completion, there was a clear safeguards awareness
 in INAS, and dedicated INAS staff trained on safeguards issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E arrangements were adequately designed at appraisal. According to the PAD (p16), the PASP
 was a part of Government’s poverty reduction strategy (PARP) and was subject to ongoing and close
 monitoring and evaluation. The PARP was expected to be monitored and evaluated through a set of
 instruments contained in the National Planning System that included annual monitoring of activities and
 targets. The M&E mechanisms used a participatory approach that involved the government, civil society,
 and international partners and several forums.

 The PASP management team was expected to monitor project results through a comprehensive
 management information system MIS (e-INAS) developed by INAS. The MIS (e-INAS) aimed to include
 applications for the operation and for monitoring specific aspects of the PASP. Once operational, PASP
 applications and modules were also expected to be integrated into the overall information system that INAS
 was then developing with the support of United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the International

                                                                                                Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



 Labor Organization (ILO). In addition, the overall system was expected to integrate the data of the Basic
 Social Subsidy Program (PSSB), the Direct Social Action Program (PASD), and the PASP.

 The original M&E design included qualitative and quantitative evaluations, comprised of a rigorous impact
 evaluation to assess intermediate and longer-term welfare outcomes; a process evaluation to assess all of
 the processes of the PASP, including targeting, registration, enrollment in the program, verification of the
 beneficiaries, supervision of works, authorization of payments, transfer of benefits to eligible households;
 and a system of grievances.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p33-34) reported significant progress in the development and implementation of a functioning
  M&E system throughout the life of the Project. During implementation, a single registry of beneficiaries
  was built and brought the support of international development partners on this front. The ICR reported
  that the beneficiary registration was conducted under MIS (e-INAS), and monitoring of the project
  interventions were done manually.

  The ICR also reported revisions in Results Framework and adjustments in result indicators to incorporate
  the changes introduced by the three additional financings. Some new indicators were included to monitor
  and assess new and expanded interventions. The definition of some indicators was also adjusted to
  match the PDOs. The Results Framework reflected the new activities and the expanded scope, increased
  coverage expansion and monitor how some specific target sub-groups were reached by the Project’s
  interventions.

  There were however some limitations of the Project M&E implementation. The implementation of the
  M&E arrangements did not carry out all M&E components as planned in the PAD. A process evaluation
  and other assessments were carried out as proposed, but the Project failed to carry out the proposed
  impact evaluation of PWP, and an evaluation of DCT implementation. The ICR (p24) noted that the
  evaluation of social protection programs was not carried out mainly because of recurrent emergencies
  and insufficient initial capacity of the implementing agency to manage evaluation design, contracting and
  implementation. The ICR noted that there was a need to strengthen INAS physical, IT and human
  resource capacity to deliver the planned programs.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the Single Registry of Beneficiaries within MIS (e-INAS) was used as the
  backbone to increase coverage and support the implementation of social protection programs in
  Mozambique. It allowed the project to reach underserved population across the country and during post
  emergency contexts. The implementation of the MIS (e-INAS) and the partial monitoring of the programs
  supported by the Project also allowed a fast response during COVID-19. The GoM, the WB, and the
  development partners used the MIS (e-INAS) data and the existing Single Registry of Beneficiaries, to
  implement the initial COVID-19 response.

  The M&E system was used by the project to continuously guide the adjustment of the project
  development indicators, implementation progress and the progress towards the achievement of the
  PDOs, albeit in a less effective manner than originally planned. The increased capacity of the INAS to

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



  monitor implementation of activities along with the MIS (e-INAS) showed strong interest in examining the
  implementation sequence and identification of possible bottlenecks.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered Safeguard Policy OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment – and was classified under
   category B as significant adverse environmental and social impacts were not expected. However, to ensure
   proper handling of any potential land acquisition and/or loss of assets or access to assets due to project
   related activities, the project triggered Safeguard Policy OP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement.

   The borrower also the prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) since the exact location of all subproject sites and the specific nature
   of all sub-projects were not known during project preparation. The essence of the RPF and ESMF were
   captured in the Credit Agreement and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) with the aim of supporting
   implementation of all projects related safeguards requirements throughout the project lifecycle.

   The ICR mentioned that during the earlier period of implementation, there was more focus on delivering the
   subprojects than on ensuring compliance with the safeguards. The Project’s implementation arrangements
   were not conducive to implementation of the safeguards. In some cases, INAS enhanced its capacity to
   manage the Project and adopted some practices as part of its regular functioning that included safeguards
   activities. Four of their dedicated personnel were assigned for these responsibilities in addition to the
   safeguards specialist hired by the Project.

   However, there was high turn-over of safeguards staff. Despite these challenges, the training provided by
   the Bank paid off and by Project completion, there was a clear safeguards awareness in INAS, their
   dedicated staff trained on safeguards issues, a plan for regular trainings of focal points at delegations and
   districts, and greater compliance with the required environmental licenses. The ICR mentioned that the
   INAS Focal Points were key to implement the project’s safeguards, not for “policing” but for awareness.

   Implementation of activities during COVID-19 response followed the protocols established under the AF3.
   INAS acquired protective masks for both INAS personnel and beneficiaries, provided information campaigns
   about social distancing, established work from home and staggered presence in the office, and ensured
   INAS personnel was vaccinated as vaccines became available.

   The Operations Portal reported that the overall safeguards rating was moderately satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



   The implementation of the procurement activities for the proposed project was managed by INAS through
   its procurement unit. PAD indicated that the full implementation was the responsibility of INAS since it had
   some experience with donor-funded operations, though modest when compared with the needs of the
   project. In addition, INAS was implementing a pilot of the labor-intensive works program at the time of
   appraisal that gave it some firsthand exposure with the Bank's fiduciary requirements. To ensure an
   acceptable project implementation satisfying minimum Bank fiduciary requirements, Bank discussed
   corrective measures and agreed with INAS on the establishment of a permanent procurement function
   within INAS to manage the project; retainment of qualified resources proficient in Bank funded
   procurement to properly implement project activities; and ensuring a clear linkage between project
   objectives and the procurement plan through appropriate support to staff, training and tools in preparing
   and monitoring of the procurement plan; outlining of steps and associated timeframe for Government's own
   process of approval; and, establishment of a contract monitoring system.

   The fiduciary compliance faced several challenges due to several procurement issues. The ICR reported
   that during early implementation period up to AF2, there was no significant procurement activity. From the
   beginning, INAS was supported by an external consultant, hired with Project support to implement the
   procurement activities. The risk rating for procurement was high for a substantial period of the project’s life,
   reflecting the overall risk rating for the country. Large capacity gaps throughout implementation also
   affected procurement activities. Moreover, the lack of a PIU and the rotation of personnel and leadership
   during implementation also undermined procurement activities. The Bank provided training and technical
   assistance to INAS and introduced the online filing and monitoring system to follow up the Project’s
   procurement. The Bank also allowed changes to the procurement rules during the COVID-19 pandemic, to
   expedite procurement, but closely monitored procurement activities during that time.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  M&E arrangements as planned
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Substantial
                                                                                  and implemented were sufficient



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



                                                                                   to assess the achievement of
                                                                                   objectives.
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons restated by
IEG:

        Adoption of a flexible approach in project design with long term vision can pay off to
         establish the building blocks of a safety net system. Despite being relatively complex, Bank’s
         choice of public works program over preferred cash transfer allowed Mozambique and the
         Bank to work together and support the vulnerable population when they were exposed to
         shocks.
        Coordination and communication between Government and other development
         partners is important to support the long-term vision. The ICR noted that sustained
         dialogue with the Government and other partners helped Mozambique to build a broader
         view of the social protection system rather than a fragmented set of interventions.
        Labor-intensive PWP can play a key role for gender empowerment and climate change
         response. The PWP evolved to have greater flexibility to reach more vulnerable households
         and ensured more women participation. With this adaptation of eligibility criteria and
         flexibility, the intervention was more inclusive and more successful to tackle post-emergency
         needs. In the context of climate change response, the ICR (Annex 8) mentioned that PWP
         was also used in sub-activities such as mangrove reforestation, infrastructure repairs, access
         roads rehabilitation to reduce climate change impacts after Idai, Kenneth and Eloise
         cyclones.
        Establishment of PIU in a context of weak institutional capacity and lack of previous
         work experience with WB projects implementation can be more effective and efficient.
         The ICR mentioned that since INAS did not have previous experience in working with WB
         projects, the lack of a PIU was reflected in a slower implementation at INAS, despite the
         additional support provided by technical staff. Drawing a parallel with similar social protection
         projects with PIU in Ethiopia, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Burundi, the ICR stated that
         implementation was stronger when PIUs led implementation with the agency’s regional
         offices.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report is well written albeit a few sections could have been better organized. It is aligned well with project
development objectives. The ICR adequately highlighted a clear linkage between the activities and intended

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Social Safety Net project (P129524)



results. The logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report and results were mostly mutually
reinforcing. The narrative and evidence supported the ICR's conclusions on the project's overall outcome. The
ICR however, arrived at the overall outcome rating incorrectly. Quality of analysis is adequate with occasional
weaknesses. The report is clear and candid. Lessons learnt are adequately based on project experience.
There is internal consistency overall with occasional lapses. The ICR is lengthy, with a main text reaching 40
pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
