     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023145

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146688                                     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Jamaica                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84060,TF-A1633                        31-Jan-2020                                          36,527,897.01

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jul-2014                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             35,000,000.00                                    1,597,815.61

 Revised Commitment                              36,387,466.23                                    1,597,815.61

 Actual                                          36,527,897.01                                    1,527,897.01




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to strengthen public resource management and support
   selected public sector institutions in facilitating a more enabling environment for private sector growth”
   (Financing Agreement, p. 6). This Review will assess achievement of two objectives: (i) strengthen public
   resource management, and (ii) support selected public sector institutions in facilitating a more enabling
   environment for private sector growth. Some outcome indicators and targets were changed at restructurings



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



   in 2017 and 2019 in response to shifts in the project’s activities. The scope of the project was not significantly
   changed, and therefore a split evaluation is not required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Components 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 supported the achievement of Objective 1 and Component 5 supported the
   achievement of Objective 2. Component 6 activities pertained to project management. The details of the
   project components are as follows:

   Component 1: Strengthening the Public Investment Management System (PIMS) (estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$12.80 million; 2017 restructuring: US$8.00 million [US$6.4 million from the Bank and US$1.6
   million from the United Kingdom Department for International Development, DfID]; actual cost: US$4.9
   million, entirely financed by the Bank). This component was to support improvements in public investment
   management. Six priority activities were selected in alignment with the Public Financial Management Action
   Plan and the priorities expressed in a 2013 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment
   (not publicly released): (i) design and implementation of a Public Investment Management Information
   System (PIMIS) to include an information technology platform; (ii) design and implementation of a public
   investment management training program; (iii) legislative review and dissemination to integrate the PIMIS
   with the government's administrative systems; (iv) strengthening of public investment monitoring through
   citizen participation; (v) design and execution of a fund for pre-investment financial and economic analysis
   and post-investment evaluations of the government's public investments; and (vi) technical assistance for
   the implementation of the Public Financial Management Action Plan.

   Component 2: Strengthening the Budget Preparation Process and Results Based Budgeting
   (estimated cost at appraisal: US$3.73 million; 2017 restructuring: US$2.70 million [US$1.66 million from the
   Bank and US$1.04 million from DfID]; actual cost: US$2.1 million, entirely financed by the Bank). This
   component was to support the government's transition from annual expenditure planning to a medium-term
   results-based expenditure framework. Six sets of activities supported the transition: (i) update the budget
   manual; (ii) institutionalize baseline forward estimates; (iii) develop and implement better resource allocation
   procedures, incorporate procurement planning, and link procurement plans to the budget process; set
   medium-term expenditure ceilings for ministries, agencies, and departments (MDAs); improve alignment of
   recurrent budgets with public investment expenditures; and review the budget office’s human resources
   requirements; (iv) build capacity for results-based budgeting; (v) obtain accurate employee numbers and
   compensation costs for budget preparation and execution in select MDAs; and (vi) establish a participatory


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



budget process including citizens, non-governmental organizations, universities, and business
representatives.

Component 3: Adaptive Public Sector Approaches to Promote Fiscal Sustainability (estimated cost at
appraisal: US$9.17 million; 2017 restructuring: US$12.10 million; actual cost: US$13.3 million). This
component was to focus on change management and just-in-time technical assistance (TA). It was to
support the change management process for implementation of the PIMS, the budget preparation
process and results-based budgeting, property tax compliance, and industrial growth through trade
facilitation. The just-in-time TA was to support activities to address public sector reform implementation
gaps through: (i) analysis of the governance and accountability framework; (ii) assistance in achieving
public sector reforms as per the Operations Manual; and (iii) analysis of the government’s trade facilitation
capacity and mechanisms to streamline the process.

Component 4: Strengthening Property Tax Compliance and Administration (dropped) (estimated cost
at appraisal: US$2.80 million; 2017 restructuring: nil; actual cost: nil). This component was to support
improvements in property tax compliance and updates to the fiscal cadaster through five activities: (i)
simplifying property tax payment procedures and expanding payment channels; (ii) designing and
implementing a strategy for property tax compliance and collection of arrears; (iii) improving the land parcel
identification system; (iv) updating the fiscal cadaster; and (v) updating the property tax management
system.

Component 5: Fostering Industrial Growth and Trade Facilitation (estimated cost at appraisal: US$8.43
million; 2017 restructuring: US$5.00 million; actual cost: US$7.6 million). This component was to support
strategic public sector institutions essential to enabling private sector growth. Support for the Jamaica
Customs Agency (JCA) and other border agencies was to foster development and implementation of a
National Quality Infrastructure intended to promote trade facilitation and industrial growth, as well as the
health and public safety of the population. Restructuring of the Bureau of Standards Jamaica (BSJ) was to
enhance trade facilitation and industry growth as well as protect the health and safety of the Jamaican
people through adoption of international good practices promoted by the World Trade Organization.

Component 6: Project Management (estimated cost: US$0.70 million; 2017 restructuring: US$1.13
million; actual cost: US$2.6 million). This component was to support project management: (i) Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) staff costs; (ii) project audits; (iii) fiduciary compliance; (iv) monitoring and
evaluating (M&E) of project activities and outcomes; (v) capacity building activities; and (vi) operating costs.

At the June 2017 restructuring, revisions were made to project activities and budget allocations across
components. Two activities were added to Component 3: (i) support targeted at reducing the number of
unaudited financial statements, and (ii) rationalization of public bodies through their merger, closure, or
integration into line ministries. Component 4 activities (US$2.8 million) that pertained to property tax
compliance and administration, and Component 5 activities on providing technical assistance to JCA
(US$3.43 million) were dropped as part of a reprioritization of reform areas. The budget allocation for
Component 1 was reduced from US$11.2 million to US$8 million, with the difference being allocated to
Component 3b on just-in-time TA, which increased from US$4.1 million to US$7.1 million, and Component 6
on project management, which increased from US$0.7 million to US$1.13 million.

The 2017 restructuring also added a new component to support the Accountant General's Department
(AGD):



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



   Component 7: Modernizing the Accountant General’s Department (2017 restructuring: US$6.0 million;
   actual US$6.0 million). The activities under this component were intended to finance the implementation of
   the AGD’s Fiscal Policy and Management program. Activities featured under this component pertained to
   the management of public sector resources, including assessment, collection, and accounting for revenues,
   and the accounting and financial reporting required in accordance with the provisions of the Financial
   Administration and Audit Act. The implementation of Component 7 activities was to be supported by the
   introduction of scalable disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) over a three-year period: (i) the increased
   percentage of financial and accounting reports produced by the AGD, and (ii) the presentation of sufficient
   expenditures incurred under the agreed eligible expenditures.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing. The project was to be financed by an International Bank for Reconstruction
   and Development (IBRD) loan of US$37.63 million. A DfID Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) grant in
   the amount of US$2.63 million was committed at the 2017 restructuring, with total of US$37.57 million. The
   actual amount disbursed by closing was US$36.5 million. The difference between the planned and actual
   disbursement amounts is explained by US$1.0 million out of the US$2.6 million DfID grant not being client-
   executed and being accounted for in the audit.

   Borrower contribution. No borrower contribution was planned or made.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 7, 2014 and became effective on October 27, 2014. A mid-term
   review was conducted in May 2018. The original closing date was January 31, 2020. The project was
   restructured three times on September 30, 2016, June 30, 2017, and June 28, 2019. The 2016 restructuring
   extended the deadline to enable the government to access funds provided by the DfID grant. The 2017
   restructuring was due to the slow pace of implementation and changes to government priorities, which led
   to activities related to property tax and customs being substituted with a new component intended to
   modernize the AGD. The 2019 restructuring delayed the closing date primarily to procure goods and
   services required to complete some activities and make adjustments to some indicators. The project closed
   on December 31, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, the Jamaican economy was navigating a period characterized by weak
growth and high debt, which placed the country at high risk of balance of payments, banking, and
fiscal crises. The government engaged in a macro-fiscal adjustment process known as the Medium-Term
Economic Programme as part of its arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) under the
Extended Fund Facility. The Programme’s structural reforms included a second comprehensive debt
exchange, a multi-year wage agreement with trade unions, and a new tax package.

There were a number of challenges to implementing the government's reforms which included: (i)
uncoordinated spending by different ministries, agencies, and public entities; (ii) lack of information on the
impact of the reform program on the poor; (iii) impediments to private sector growth due to trade barriers

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



               created by the Bureau of Standards of Jamaica and the Jamaica Customs Administration’s business
               processes and procedures and (iv) poor governance in the budget preparation process, including, through
               results-based budgeting, and property tax compliance and administration, which adversely affected the
               development of institutions and the country's economic performance. These challenges largely stemmed
               from weak administrative processes, limited technical and analytical capacity, and underused information
               communication technology (ICT) in Jamaican public institutions. Government programs were not well
               coordinated, and the upstream process for public investments (i.e., pre-appraisal, appraisal, independent
               review, and project selection) was weak, undermining the delivery of strategic, efficient, effective,
               sustainable, and resilient public investment. Financial management and reporting were also poor.
               According to the ICR (p. 5), the private sector considered public institutions and the regulatory framework
               as impediments to growth.

               The objectives of the project were aligned with this context and the World Bank supported Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS). The project addressed challenges to implementing the government’s reform
               programme through support to public financial management, operationalization of fiscal rules to support
               fiscal discipline, and establishment of systems to make public institutions more accountable. The project
               also supported the first two of three thematic areas of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) with
               Jamaica for FY2014-2017: (i) public sector modernization, and (ii) an enabling environment for private
               sector growth. The Performance and Learning Review of the CPS, conducted in 2017, retained these
               thematic areas and extended the CPS period to FY2019. The FY2022 Systematic Country Diagnostic
               identified macro-fiscal stability and governance as key cross-cutting issues essential to achieving high-level
               outcomes, and strengthening the business environment as a key pathway toward higher, inclusive, and
               sustainable growth.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen public resource management

                             Rationale
                             The causal links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical. The achievement of
                             Objective 1 was supported by activities related to the development of the PIMIS, training of public sector
                             employees on its use, and funding of ex-ante and ex-post evaluations of public investment projects. These
                             activities were expected to result in an up-to-date PIMIS being used for decision making, monitoring, and
                             evaluation, and increased institutional capacity, leading to improved efficiency in the selection and the
                             implementation of public investment projects. In the long term, this would contribute to containing the cost of
                             public investment, while enhancing the societal returns of public investment projects and programs.


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



Outputs and Intermediate Outcomes

Public investment management: Public investment management was enhanced through the passing of
new regulations, capacity building of staff, and the adoption of new ICT platforms. The Cabinet approved
PIMS guidelines in 2016. Introduction of the PIMIS allowed all Capital A (government-funded) and Capital B
(multilateral and bilateral) public investment projects regardless of the source of financing to be reflected in a
centralized system and to be up-to-date. MDAs are required to submit their departmental objectives, policies,
strategic outcomes (i.e., by demonstrating how particular programs and activities are aligned with the
strategic outcomes to the countries’ long-term development plan), and performance targets, in line with their
respective business plans, to the Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOFPS). The selection of
investment project proposals, which were previously approved based on a one-page summary of project
concept, would now adhere to PIMS Operational Guidelines. The project supported institutionalization of
a Public Investment Appraisal Branch within MOFPS, and a fund was established for conducting economic
and financial analysis of investment projects at appraisal and at closing. A Public Investment Management
Secretariat (PIMSEC) was established, providing recommendations on project proposals to the Public
Investment Management Committee (PIMC), a Cabinet subcommittee, based on the guidelines. PIMSEC also
directly engages with MDAs to improve the quality of their project proposals and to ensure that they remain
aligned with MOFPS objectives. The PIMC, which convened its first meeting in May 2015, is mandated to
screen all public investment proposals according to the Financial Administration and Audit Act and is
empowered to reject project proposals that do not meet the standards established through the PIMS
Operational Guidelines. The project team indicated that between April and November 2020, 7 out of 7 project
concepts were approved by the PIMC, while 5 out of 6 project proposals were approved by the PIMC given
that one project proposal was rejected. The project also initiated the publication of an annual Public
Investment Performance Report, which provides a review of major public investment projects.

Budget planning: The project enforced fiscal discipline and enhanced the strategic allocation of resources
through the introduction of results-based metrics. Prior to implementation of the reforms, MDAs were not
required to consider the impact of current investment decisions on future budgets. The reforms supported
through the project made it a requirement for MDAs to reflect all Capital A and Capital B investment projects
in their Public Sector Investment Programs, and to forecast operations and maintenance costs of these
projects over a five-year period. These were published in the Public Investment Performance Report (PIPR)
featured in the Public Sector Investment Plan for fiscal years 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, and subsequently
published annually as a stand-alone document throughout fiscal years 2017/2018 to 2019/2020. In addition,
prior to the project, there was no clarity on what constitutes a proper government program and to judge why
the program was judged to be necessary for meeting the country’s national development priorities. The TA
provided through the project supported the MDAs in defining proper programs based on international good
practices. A medium-term results-based budgeting system was adopted to better align the MOFPS’ objectives
with its budget.

Rationalization and streamlining of public institutions: MOFPS underwent a reorganization and merger of
selected divisions to make internal processes more efficient, improve analyses and fiscal policy formulation,
and strengthen accountability. Some achievements reported by the project team include: (i) the percentage of
appeals concluded in 180 days, which rose from 1 percent in FY2017-18 to 25.6 percent in FY2019-20; (ii)
the taxpayer satisfaction survey score, which rose from 57 percent in FY2017-18 to 80 percent in FY2019-20;
(iii) the Revenue Authority satisfaction score, which rose from 75 percent in FY2017-18 to 82 percent in
FY2019-20; and (iv) the value of tax in abeyance falling from US$3.7 billion in FY2017-18 to US$1.93 billion
in FY2019-20. Furthermore, the project team reported financial savings from the merger and reorganization of
selected divisions, with the government reporting savings of: (i) US$13.1 million from the merger of the Public

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



Debt Units at the Ministry of Finance and the Accountant General’s Department; (ii) US$11.6 million from the
transfer of the Internal Audit Unit of the Accountant General department to the Ministry of Finance and the
Public Service; and (iii) US$26.0 million from the Financial Systems Unit subsumed into the Accounting and
Financial Policy Branch. The project supported the introduction of new shared services platforms to reduce
transaction time in human resource administration and legal case management. The adoption of the ICT
Authority Act of 2019 provided a whole-of-government ICT governance framework, and a new ICT Authority
was established to support interoperability, centralization of data centers, and streamlining of ICT investments
across MDAs.

Treasury management: Project activities supported the introduction of basic Treasury management
functions. Prior to the implementation of the project, the AGD did not have information on the number of cash
accounts held by MDAs, the government’s consolidated cash position, or expected cash inflows from different
sources. Furthermore, the process of reconciling government accounts was slow in the absence of
appropriate information systems. While the primary objective of the project was to improve the Accountant
General’s Department financial and accounting reports, the project also supported the consolidation of bank
accounts under a Treasury Single Account through a phased approach. Project activities supported the
establishment of a Government Accounting and Reporting Division within the AGD, the implementation of a
web-based Government Financial Management System, and a Revenue Management Module to improve its
financial reporting capabilities and allowing policymakers to have near real-time information on budget
execution. The project team also reported that of the 3,100 bank accounts which were identified as being
outside of the Treasury Single Account, of which, 2,100 were school accounts, the Accountant General’s
Department successfully closed 632 dormant and inactive accounts. Furthermore, the project team reported
that the Accountant General’s Department conducted a legislative review of the basis on which the funds of
varies government entities may remain outside of the Treasury Single Account and determine what
impediments exist to bringing the funds of various government entities within the Treasury Single Account
structure. As a result of these initiatives, the government was able to reconcile expenditure accounts soon
after the end of the fiscal year and no longer needed to rely on estimates, as was the case previously.

Outcomes

The project led to the adoption of guidelines on how projects should be prepared and evaluated, and
directives for project implementation and monitoring being integrated into the PIMS, which includes the
monitoring process, causal analysis, results mapping, M&E planning, data collection and analysis, ex-post
evaluation, performance monitoring, and in-progress evaluation. The PIMC screened all projects proposed by
MDAs to ensure that they were consistent with the guidelines and meet the ministry’s objectives and cost
estimates based on accepted norms for estimating the cost of a project (Public Investment Performance
Report 2019/2020). Further, the PIPR, which is published annually according to the requirement under the
Financial Administration and Audit Act, reviews the performance of projects and programs, with the FY19/20
report, for example, featuring a review of 22 projects, including all those with a cost above J$1 billion. While a
fund to support the economic and financial analysis of projects at the appraisal and the evaluation stages was
not established, the project did provide funding to support TA in this area to produce full project proposals.

The ICR reports a high level of compliance with standard procedures and rules for public investment project
implementation, meeting the target (according to PEFA indicator 11.4.6, a high level of compliance implies
the application of established procedures). The PEFA expert hired to review the performance of this indicator
also found that project implementation units have been using the guidelines to prepare and to manage their
projects since 2016. Notwithstanding this achievement, the ICR reports that end-to-end project management
through the PIMIS represented only three percent of total project financing executed in the last 12 months,

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



largely because the development and the rollout of the PIMIS to MDAs was not completed before loan
closure. The project team clarified that the government developed a simple database to record and monitor
the implementation progress of all public investment projects, and that although its functionality was more
limited than what was envisaged for the PIMIS, it did allow information to be recorded in a single platform and
facilitated reporting.

With regard to budget planning, the main outcome consisted of programs in the budget having been
properly vetted to ensure that programs identified by MDAs are consistent with international good practices
and with their mandates and progress toward agreed national outcomes. This outcome was measured
through the share of MDAs preparing their budgets according to updated program definitions, which
increased from zero to 100 percent by project closure. The ICR states that information on the implementation
of major public investment projects (a "major" project defined as (i) total investment cost of a project
amounting to one percent or more of the total annual public expenditure, and (ii) a project being among the
largest ten projects by total investment cost for each of the five largest central government units, measured by
the units’ investment project expenditure) is published in budget documents or other reports annually,
meeting the target. Budget documents submitted to Parliament include estimates on the current portfolio of
public investment projects (i.e., spending to date, as well as projected amounts). The government has
developed an online system—an investment map—to allow citizens to access information on projects
implemented across the country (see https://publicinvestmentmap.gov.jm/#/proyectos). The task team
reported that while the application was developed by the Inter-American Development Bank, this project
financed the consolidation of all projects into a single database for internal monitoring.

With regards to the rationalization and the streamlining of public institutions, the project contributed
to rationalizing 44 out of a targeted 58 quasi-autonomous public bodies through mergers, divestments,
closures, and reintegration of some bodies into parent ministries. The ICR reports estimated fiscal savings of
J$3.7 billion (US$23.9 million) related to the rationalization of spending across 44 public bodies, of
which J$1.2 billion was related to reduced budget allocations, while the remainder consisted of savings linked
to the disposal of physical properties and other assets. The reorganization of the MOFPS to make internal
processes more efficient and to improve analytical functions and fiscal policy formulation allowed, among
other things, a significant reduction in the turnaround time for tax appeals by the Revenue Appeals Division,
increasing the percentage of appeals completed within 180 days from one percent in 2017/18 to 90 percent at
project closure. Further, the adoption of new shared services platforms allowed a reduction in transaction time
in human resource management and legal case management.

With regard to Treasury management, the project supported the development of an improved cash
forecasting model for detailed revenue and expenditure items covered by the Treasury Single Account to
generate daily cash forecast and balances. The project team clarified that accounts located outside of the
Treasury Single Account are not considered in cash forecasting, and that the Accountant General’s
Department cannot rely on funds in the accounts located outside of the TSA to meet the government’s
financial obligations. Indeed, funds from these accounts must first be transferred to the TSA, which would
allow the funds to be included in cash forecasting at that time. The project team also added that the cash
forecast variance was within its target of +/- 5 percentage points, with the exception of FY2020/21 which
surpassed the target due to the conservative forecasts made around the COVID-19 pandemic. The number of
unaudited annual financial statements of public sector entities declined from 163 at baseline to 19 in 2021,
exceeding the target of 33, with 14 additional statements audited by March 2022. Further, the Auditor
General’s Department completed backlogged external audits for 33 entities dating back to 2004, which
improved accountability.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support selected public sector institutions in facilitating a more enabling environment for private sector growth

Rationale
The causal links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical. The achievement of
Objective 2 was supported by activities related to quality assurance services being offered by BSJ to support
Jamaican firms’ compliance with international standards, allowing them to improve access to international
markets, the advanced stage of the Jamaica National Agency for Accreditation (JANAAC) certification with
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and the ISO 9001 certification of 18 MDAs.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The project supported BSJ through an infrastructure upgrade of its facilities, the acquisition of state-of-the-art
laboratory equipment, reconfiguration of its business model, and capacity building of staff to offer testing,
calibration and other metrology services. A National Enquiry Point was established at BSJ in accordance with
the World Trade Organization (WTO) Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement, providing information and
documentation on Jamaica's technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures.
Furthermore, Jamaican exporters can obtain information from other members’ enquiry points on foreign
regulations and standards for products in which they have a trade interest. The JANAAC is now at an
advanced stage for receiving full certification under the United States Food and Drug Administration for
products produced by Jamaican firms. Once obtained, JANAAC would be the only certified third-party
accreditation body across the Caribbean region to conduct food safety testing assessments and accreditation
for food products entering the United States.

Outcomes

The ICR reports that the number of quality assurance services offered by BSJ to allow Jamaican firms to
meet international standards for their export products (including, tests on food products, building materials,
and concrete composites, calibration of strength testing devices) increased by 723 percent over the project's
lifetime, far exceeding the target of an increase of 170 percent, but the ICR fails to substantiate this measure
with evidence on the need for these services or the improvement in the quality of export products through the
delivery of these services. This has resulted in many products no longer requiring re-testing and re-
certification at ports of entry, enabling Jamaica to better compete in export markets. The National Compliance
and Regulatory Authority has taken over regulatory functions previously assumed by BSJ, with inspections at
ports of entry decreased from 100 percent at baseline to 33 percent at project closure, significantly exceeding
the target of a reduction to 70 percent. The ICR argues that these improvements contributed to an increase
in Jamaica’s exports from J$278 billion (31.3 percent of gross domestic product, GDP) in 2014 to J$317
billion in 2020 (37.9 percent of GDP). Further, 18 MDAs have become ISO 9001 certified as a result of
Jamaica’s new National Quality Policy, including the National Export-Import Bank of Jamaica, Companies
Office of Jamaica, Jamaica Intellectual Property Office, National Environment and Planning Agency, Tax


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



                            Administration Jamaica - Constant Spring Revenue Services Centre, and the Urban Development
                            Corporation.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The improvements made to the institutional and policy framework guiding public investment planning and
                            management (i.e., the PIMS) constituted a critical step along the results chain towards strengthening public
                            resource management. While the adoption of the PIMIS could have further supported achievement along the
                            results chain, the fact that the Government of Jamaica continued to rely on another IT tool to monitor project
                            implementation until the PIMIS would be adopted was considered to be adequate in the limited time frame
                            offered by the project. Other public financial management reforms on treasury management and the
                            rationalization and streamlining of public institutions were also deemed to be key for substantial achievement
                            of the objective to strengthen public resource management. The activities featured under Objective 2 were
                            also viewed as facilitating a more enabling environment for private sector growth by aiming to improve
                            compliance of Jamaican firms' export products with international standards.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   There was no economic analysis at appraisal or in the ICR. The ICR (pp. 15-16) notes that the project's benefits
   are difficult to quantify in monetary terms or attribute exclusively to the project. The IEG does not consider this to
   be a plausible explanation given that the benefits related to the streamlining of government departments and the
   provision of better services to businesses could have been measured against the costs of these activities in an
   economic analysis.

   Also, while the ICR reports implementation efficiencies stemming from the complementarity of ongoing initiatives
   and close coordination with government and development partners, the arguments provided are weak, the
   evidence is poor and some of the content is not relevant.

   Early implementation delays, were incurred by a government decision to use RETF resources before IBRD loan
   proceeds. These delays, which ultimately led to the government requesting and receiving an extension of three
   months on the RETF, was due to delays in internal processes within the government, and the snap elections in
   February which led to a change in administration The government was inclined to use the technical assistance
   provided through the grant resources before drawing down on loan proceeds due to fiscal prudence knowing

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



that the DfID grant would expire well before the IBRD loan. There were also delays related to the procurement of
TA and advisory services for institutional strengthening and public resource management, with each activity
requiring customized terms of reference (see Section 10b). This led to a significant volume of procurement
activity and related coordination and contract management challenges that were not well anticipated. These
challenges were compounded by the requirement that all procurement activities comply with both the Bank's and
the government’s procurement procedures. Project implementation accelerated following action on
recommendations made at the mid-term review, including strengthening of the PIU and adoption of streamlined
procurement regulations (ICR, p. 10).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was substantially relevant to country context and to government and Bank-supported strategies.
Efficacy was Substantial, given evidence that the project's interventions made important contributions toward
strengthening public resource management and improving the environment for private sector growth. Efficiency
is rated Modest due to the lack of analysis or efforts to demonstrate why some reforms addressed critical
constraints. These ratings lead to an overall Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory, indicating moderate
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 23) highlights a number of risks to sustaining the development outcomes sought by the project,
but none of these constitute actual risks, but suggest that the project lacked impact. One of the risks to
sustaining development outcomes relates to the risk of a change in administration which could lead to a
reversal of measures implemented through this project, which would eliminate some of the gains achieved

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



through this project. A second risk pertains to having adequately trained and sufficient public servants who
can carry the roles and the functions related to public investment management, budget planning and
Treasury management. Finally, the rationalization and the streamlining of public institutions could be
reversed through a number of factors, including, the change in administration, the need to deliver better
public services, etc.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's design was well aligned with Jamaica's public sector transformation agenda to restore fiscal
  sustainability, as well as the World Bank's development priorities as identified in the CPS. Project design
  relied on lessons learned from earlier operations in Jamaica and across the region, as well as
  IEG's Public Sector Reform: What Works and Why? An IEG evaluation of World Bank Support.
  The project was also aligned with the World Bank’s Approach to Public Sector Management 2011-2020:
  “Better Results from Public Sector Institutions”. The approach recommends applying selectivity criteria to
  respond to clients’ needs and to tailor interventions to a project's specific political and institutional context
  (as opposed to applying generic best practices). The task team therefore adjusted the sequencing of
  reforms to the specific context of the country and ensured that political incentives were in place to
  improving public sector performance.

  Some of the planned activities, however, were not well understood at the design stage. At the start of
  project implementation, the Bank did not have the right technical expert to provide advice on what PIMIS
  could be offered and the cost of generating it. A needs assessment was conducted which suggested that
  a complicated custom-made software was required, with the scope of functions expected to be in the
  PIMIS being larger than what was generally offered in the market. As a result, the request for proposals
  did not attract interest among credible vendors. This ultimately led to a failed procurement process, which
  forced the Bank and the PIU to revise the scope of the terms of reference. Technical experts who later
  reviewed the needs assessment suggested instead that an off-the-shelf product, which can be adapted to
  the needs of the government, be used. The ICR further adds that "similarly, for Component 4 the
  institutions in charge of property tax were not sufficiently engaged in the project preparation process to
  reflect accurately the scope and the nature of the challenges faced. The resources needed for project
  management under Component 6 were under-estimated and did not take adequate account of the
  intensity of TA procurements and the supervision required of so many discrete TA activities, causing the
  PIU to be under-resourced" (ICR, p. 22). The Results Framework was poorly formulated and did not allow
  for the measurement of outcomes, with several PDO-level and intermediate results indicators lacking
  clarity, being too broadly based or too complex, or lacking sufficient details in their calculation method.
  Finally, the efficiency could have been estimated for some of the project components.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                        Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 14 implementation support missions, including during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
 ICR notes that the relocation to Jamaica of the TTL who supported the second project restructuring
 significantly enhanced the client relationship and senior management's support to the project.

 The ICR also notes that "the Bank team was proactive in restructuring the project and adjusting activities
 under the project components. The project was restructured three times to extend trust fund funding,
 realign components and their budgets, and extend the project end date. The team overcame deficiencies in
 the original project design and costing of activities by proactively restructuring the project and identifying
 new activities better aligned to client needs and capacities." (ICR, p. 22)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework had shortcomings, with several PDO-level and intermediate results indicators lacking
 clarity, being too broadly based or too complex, or lacking sufficient details in their calculation method.
 Arrangements for data collection were not well specified, and calculation of the indicators was
 "cumbersome" in many cases (ICR, p. 20). The IEG disagrees with the ICR statement suggesting that the
 second project restructuring incorporated revisions for the majority of the indicators to make them more
 measurable. The IEG finds that many indicators featured in the Program Document which could measure
 outcomes were marked for deletion during the second restructuring. This included: (i) supporting trade
 facilitation by integrating clearance processes of selected border agencies, resulting in a transparent, cost
 efficient and faster international trade environment as measured by LPI-C; (ii) quarterly public investment
 project monitoring reports are automatically produced by the updated and centralized public investment
 database; and (iii) percent deviation between medium-term expenditure framework projections and annual
 budget. The PDO level indicator on the percentage of MDAs with budgets that are costed and associated
 with the results of the programs outlines in the business plans of MDAs was also substituted by the
 percentage of MDAs that prepare their budgets according to the updated program definitions.

 The IEG shortcomings in the initial M&E design to poor design at quality-at-entry, which did not adequately
 consider the introduction of information systems which would be required at the implementation stage. The
 initial project design aimed to develop a highly customized PIMIS that was expected to be fully operational
 during the project's third year, but this system was not fully deployed by the project's closing date, despite
 project extensions. It is evident that the Bank overestimated the capacity of counterparts in developing an
 overly complex operation.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)




b. M&E Implementation
  The second project restructuring led to several PDO level indicators and intermediate results indicators
  being modified or removed from the Results Framework, given challenges in their measurement, with a
  few indicators being added. Following task team recommendations, the PIU underwent capacity
  strengthening to enable increases in the frequency and quality of data being collected. A newly
  hired M&E specialist was tasked to work with all component leads and implementing agencies to collect
  data in a timely manner. The PIU relied on management software (Monday.com) to share data
  remotely and also conducted its own field visits. As part of supervision missions, the task team met with
  component leads and implementing agencies as needed, providing the PIU with an opportunity to collect
  data. The introduction of a DLI under Component 4 as part of a project restructuring provided an
  incentive for the PIU to adopt advanced project management and M&E tools, and to engage a fully
  trained M&E specialist to support analysis and reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The mid-term review, which took place following the project's second restructuring, led to the adoption of
  a road map that identified, among other things, the reinforcement in the PIU of M&E as a top priority, in
  part through the recruitment of key experts. From that point forward, M&E tools were used effectively by
  the PIU to monitor project progress and to provide updates to the Bank team as input for Implementation
  Status and Results Reports. Verification protocols facilitated efficient disbursements and maintained
  momentum toward achievement of DLI targets. M&E data were also used to identify needed changes in
  budget allocations across components and to modify components.

  Based on significant improvements in M&E following the mid-term review, project M&E is rated
  Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified Environmental Assessment category C, and it did not trigger any of the Bank's
   safeguards policies.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management was consistently rated Satisfactory during project implementation. Interim Financial
   Reports experienced challenges with timeliness and accuracy at times during the project's first two years,
   but there was significant improvement thereafter. Implementation of a computerized accounting system in
   April 2020 contributed to further improvements in reconciliations and reporting, as well as payment
   processing and electronic funds transfers. AGD carried out timely project audits from 2016-2018 that
   included unqualified opinions. In May 2018, after it was decided that the project would finance capacity-
   building for AGD, it was decided to avoid conflicts of interest by engaging a private auditor for the
   remainder of the project's lifetime. All audited statements for the remainder of the project had unqualified
   opinions.

   Project procurement was rated Satisfactory. Required compliance with both the Bank's and the
   government's procurement policies slowed initial progress. At the mid-term review, the government
   authorized the project to use only Bank processes for Bank-financed procurements, substantially
   shortening procurement timelines and accelerating project implementation. Given that this was not the first
   project in Jamaica, the IEG finds that this should have been agreed from the start of the project. Some key
   contracts, including for the PIMIS, were not fully executed by the project's closing date. Pending activities
   and deliverables executed after closing are being financed by government funds. A Procurement Post
   Review carried out in November 2021 found reviewed contracts to be in line with the Bank's procurement
   regulations, with only a few minor inconsistencies identified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)




This Review concurs with the key lessons identified in the ICR (pp. 23-24), which included:

     1. A well-resourced PIU is essential for project performance and efficiency. This project
        incurred significant initial procurement and contracting delays due to poorly defined terms of
        reference for the PIMIS, weak coordination across project activities, and M&E shortcomings.
        An adequately staffed PIU during the initial stages of project implementation can help avoid
        these kinds of hurdles; streamlining can take place once project implementation is under way
        and PIU procedures and systems are well established.
     2. Awareness of information technology software application market offerings is essential prior
        to the start of a tendering process. The ICR reports that the first PIMIS procurement failed in
        part due to the government's lack of understanding about market offerings and what a
        commercial-off-the-shelf system can potentially offer. This issue was addressed during the
        second procurement attempt, where knowledge exchanges of the technical staff at the PIU
        allowed for a successful process. Similar projects would benefit from market consultations
        regarding the process of system design prior to the start of the procurement process.

In addition to these lessons, the IEG finds that it is critical that the Bank avoid over ambitiousness.
Furthermore, Bank should formulate a Results Framework with clearly defined indicators which allow
for the measurement of outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, candid, and adherent to guidelines. Its narrative explains issues with project preparation and
performance in a coherent, organized manner. Its data sources are carefully referenced, and its analysis is
sound. Its discussion of the shortcomings with the project's indicators is particularly useful. Its lessons are well
structured and should prove useful for other projects in the country and in the sector.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
JM Strategic Public Sect Transformation (P146688)




                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
