     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023110

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P168926                                     Essential Health Services Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 South Sudan                                 Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4270,IDA-D4280,IDA-D7670               31-Dec-2021                                        108,748,975.38

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Feb-2019                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               105,400,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                                109,448,955.69                                           0.00

 Actual                                            108,748,975.38                                           0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Basab Dasgupta              Salim J. Habayeb               Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                            Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were defined by the Financing Agreements of February 28, 2019, between IDA,
   the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and UNICEF for the benefit of the people of the
   Republic of South Sudan as follows: to increase access to an essential package of health services in the
   Republic of South Sudan, with a particular focus on the former states of Upper Nile and Jonglei.

   The objectives were revised by adding a contingent public health emergency response on January 22, 2021,
   at which time 87 percent of the proceeds were disbursed. The revised objectives were stated as follows: to

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



   increase access to an essential package of health services and respond to health emergencies in the
   Republic of South Sudan, with a particular focus on the former states of Upper Nile and Jonglei.

   There was no need for a split evaluation, as the Additional Financing just expanded the scope of the project,
   and there were no mixed achievements.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Feb-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the Financing Agreement (Provision of Essential Health Services Project), there were four
   components of this project.

   Component 1: Delivery of Essential Health Services (estimated US$93.0 million, actual US$84.3
   million): This component aimed to deliver essential health services to the populations of Upper Nile and
   Jonglei states as well as other vulnerable communities affected by conflict and violence. This component
   aimed to support the delivery of services at primary care facilities and strategically identified secondary
   hospitals, complemented with community outreach and mobile health services. The component aimed to
   increase and expand equitable coverage and access, especially for remote or hard to reach communities
   with a total population of approximately 1.8 million living in these two States. It included about 85,000
   pregnant women; 82,000 children under one; and 382,000 children under five years of age (National
   Bureau of Statistics, 2015).

   Component 1 was comprised of two subcomponents. Sub-component 1.1 covered delivery of high impact
   essential health services in the former Upper Nile and Jonglei states (US$61 million). It aimed to deliver
   services in the areas of (i) child health, (ii) maternal and neonatal health, (iv) basic and comprehensive
   emergency obstetric and newborn care; and (iv) sexual and gender-based violence. This sub-component
   also aimed to provide goods, training, and technical assistance to enhance (i) emergency preparedness
   and response, (ii) disease surveillance and early response, (iii) coordinated community-level surveillance
   systems, and to establish (iv) an early warning system for infectious disease trends prediction.

   Sub-component 1.2 covered delivery of essential health services to highly vulnerable and conflict-affected
   populations (US$32 million equivalent) at two levels. At the primary care and community level, this
   subcomponent aimed to provide services in the areas of (i) curative care for frequent diseases and injuries;
   (ii) women wellness care, (iii) child preventive care, including vaccinations; and (iv) mental health and
   psychological support. At the secondary care level, this component also aimed to provide (i) outpatient and


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



  emergency services; (ii) surgical and non-surgical services; (iii) clinical support services; and (iv) non-
  clinical support services.

  Component 2: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (estimated US$4.0 million, actual US$2.6 million):
  This component was co-financed with the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO)
  and Health Pool Fund (HPF3). It aimed to support the establishment of a national, unified monitoring
  approach, and a third-party independent monitoring of accessible project areas to ensure the generation of
  credible health service delivery data. This component was also expected to ensure that independent and
  credible data on health service delivery were gathered to enable the World Bank, Government, and
  development partners to have a clear line of sight that resources were reaching the intended beneficiaries
  and potential harm was minimized.

  Component 3: Emergency Preparedness and Response (estimated US$3.0 million, actual US$13.9
  million): This component was comprised of two subcomponents. Sub-component 3.1 was implemented by
  UNICEF to provide support for the national Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) Preparedness and Response Plan
  through provision of required training, technical assistance, and goods. Sub-component 3.2 was
  implemented by International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to support the immediate response to an
  eligible crisis or emergency, as needed.

  Component 4: Repayment of Project Preparation Advances (estimated US$5.4 million, actual US$4.4
  million): This component aimed to the repayment of project preparation advances made by the Association
  to the Republic of South Sudan (under Preparation Advance Numbers Q9090, Q9320 and Q9460) for the
  Institutional Development and Capacity Building Project, Energy Sector Technical Assistance Project and
  the Agricultural Development and Food Security Project respectively.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing: The original cost at appraisal was estimated at US$105.4 million, financed by an IDA
  grant, out of which, US$73.4 million were to be administered by UNICEF, and US$32 million by the
  International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). No direct financial contributions from the government
  were planned or provided. In 2021, an additional funding, to the amount of US$5 million was approved by
  the Board to provide additional financing for parts 1.1, 2 and 3.1 of the Original Project and to amend
  specific provisions of the Original Financing Agreement. The actual cost was US$108.7 million.

  There were several cross-component readjustments and approval of additional funding. Component 3 was
  comprised of two sub-components where sub-component 3.2 (Contingent Emergency Response
  Component, CERC) was a zero-cost mechanism that allowed for the rapid reallocation of funds from other
  project components in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or health outbreak, or crisis likely to
  imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact. The first CERC activation was on
  September 9, 2019, to reallocate US$7.9 million from Component 1 to Subcomponent 3.2 to support EVD
  preparedness activities. The second CERC activation was on April 6, 2020, to reallocate US$5.0 million
  from Component 1 to Subcomponent 3.2 and reprogram US$2.6 million remaining from the previously
  triggered CERC for EVD preparedness towards the COVID-19 response (total of US$7.6 million). The
  CERC was activated to support the National COVID-19 Preparedness and Response Plan in coordination
  with other development partners (project paper, p8).




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



                       Dates: The Provision of Essential Health Services Project (PEHSP) was approved on February 27, 2019,
                       and became effective on March 11, 2019. A Mid-Term Review was undertaken on December 2, 2020. The
                       project closed on December 31, 2021, as originally planned.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Investing in South Sudan’s health sector had the potential for large benefits that fitted well into the country’s
context. According to World Bank Country Engagement Note (2021), South Sudan remained one of the
poorest countries in the world with an estimated 80 percent people living in poverty in 2020, and more than
half of the population needed humanitarian assistance, particularly in conflict-prone pockets of Jonglei and
Upper Nile. South Sudan had the world’s highest maternal mortality ratios, weak disease surveillance
systems for outbreaks, and epidemics. Effective service delivery for a fragile, conflict and violence affected
country like South Sudan thus remained an important challenge. Several states, including those in the
former states of Upper Nile and Jonglei, were in active conflict and experienced periodic flare-ups of
violence, resulting in health systems severely burdened by acute surges in trauma and injuries, and by
supply disruptions (PAD, p 14).

The project objectives were highly relevant to the health needs of South Sudan and fitted squarely
within the government’s health sector reform agenda. The PDO-1 was directly aligned with South
Sudan’s 2016-2026 National Health Policy, the 2017-2022 National Health Sector Strategic Plan, and the
2018-2021 National Development Strategy. PDO-2 fitted with the World Bank’s COVID-19 Strategic
Preparedness and Response Program (SPRP) which was approved on April 2, 2020. Bank’s immediate
adjustments to the portfolio to respond to the emerging needs was also timely during COVID-19 pandemic
to protect human capital and household welfare from heavy economic toll.

The PDOs were in full alignment with the FY 21-23 Country Engagement Note (CEN). Among three
focus areas of the World Bank’s current CEN for FY21-FY23: (1) Laying the ground for institutional building;
(2) Building resilience and livelihood opportunities; and (3) Providing continuous support to basic service
delivery, PEHSP, or ‘the Provision of Essential Health Services Project’, was one of the only three active
projects in South Sudan’s portfolio and the only health project at the time of the CEN that was in full
alignment with Focus Area 3. It tackled the need for high-impact, immediate response and early recovery
health interventions in areas significantly affected by conflict. It provided broad support to primary
healthcare centers and secondary care hospitals to the general population of Upper Nile and Jonglei states.

The Project PDOs were also in full alignment with the 2020-25 World Bank Strategy for fragility,
conflict and violence (FCV). The PDOs directly addressed two of the four strategy pillars, “Remaining
engaged during conflicts and crisis situations” (Pillar 1), and “Mitigating the spillovers of FCV” (Pillar 2).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase access to an essential package of health services in the Republic of South Sudan, with a particular
               focus on the former states of Upper Nile and Jonglei.

               Rationale
               According to the PAD, accessibility to provide health services in areas acutely affected by the crisis remained
               a significant challenge in South Sudan. Only a few actors in the country had been able to find ways to allow
               them to cross boundaries between Government and opposition-held areas to deliver services (PAD, p27).

               Given this background, and with the critical assumptions of minimal disruption due to conflict, flooding, and
               sufficient health infrastructure, the causal chain in the theory of change stated that the delivery of an
               essential package of health services to targeted beneficiaries through trained healthcare cadres would result
               in improved quality and availability of health services, followed by an uptake in the use of better-quality health
               services in the short and medium terms. It also stated that over the longer term, better coverage of higher
               quality health services would expectedly lead to improved health outcomes among the beneficiary
               populations (PAD, p33).

               Outputs:

               The PEHSP achieved major improvements in availability and uptake of essential health services, and
               functionality of health facilities. Over the course of implementation, the project -

                     Delivered essential health services, such as, basic nutrition services to women and children,
                      immunization vaccines to children through third-party implementing agencies UNICEF and ICRC.
                     Provided curative consultations to children under 5 years of age.
                     Increased the number of qualified health facility staff through recruitment, capacity building, and
                      training. Collectively, a total of 8,551 health facility staff, and 1,743 Boma Health Worker (BHWs) were
                      trained and deployed to 170 bomas to provide curative, preventive, and promotional services.
                     Trained traditional birth attendants to facilitate safe and clean deliveries, assessing newborn health,
                      identifying, and referring complex pregnancy cases, providing counselling on good health practices
                      and promotion of health services in clinics and hospitals.
                     Supplied and equipped health facilities with pharmaceuticals, equipment, and essential health
                      commodities. The ICR reported that 147 health facilities had essential medicines available, and 128
                      health facilities were providing an essential package of health services.

               Outcomes:

               The PEHSP mostly achieved its targets and surpassed in availability of essential health services. The results
               were understandably output-oriented in view of the short implementation period in a challenging FCV
               situation.


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Essential Health Services Project (P168926)




      Over the course of implementation, the project delivered essential health services to 958,873 people
         against a target of 300,000.

According to the ICR, PDO-1 was a composite indicator, comprised of (1) Number of children immunized; (2)
Number of women and children who have received basic nutrition services; and (3) Number of deliveries
attended by skilled health personnel. The ICR reported that the project provided

        Basic nutrition services to 412,982 women and children that surpassed its target of 200,000.
        Immunization vaccines to 510,953 children that surpassed its target of 75,000.
        34,938 deliveries were attended by skilled health personnel against its target of 25,000, and
        2,132,896 curative consultations were provided for under 5 children.
        Multiple visits to 73,748 pregnant women against a target of 40,000.
        Post-natal care to 21,452 newborn children within 2 days of childbirth.
        Clinical management of rape services to 98 percent of gender-based survivors presenting at health
         facilities

While most of the PDO indicators from the RF (Table 1) highlighted achievements of their target values, two
PDO indicators achieved less than 75 percent of their corresponding end targets:

      PDO1.3: Only 147 of health facilities against a target of 200 had essential medicines available,
       suggesting 74 percent achievement of the end target, and
      PDO1.4: only 128 health facilities, against an end target of 200, achieved their target of providing at
       least 75% of the essential package of health services. In other words, the achievement was only at 64
       percent.

Despite the lack of full achievement of the end targets of two outcome indicators, progress in increasing
access to essential health services was notable and the overall achievement was substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Respond to health emergencies in the Republic of South Sudan, with a particular focus on the former states
of Upper Nile and Jonglei.

Rationale
The theory of change held that training in disease surveillance and response, risk communication, and
provision of supplies for infection control, water, sanitation and hygiene would contribute to facilitating
preparedness and response to health emergencies.

Outputs and intermediate results:



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



                            The project resulted in important improvements in the availability of the following health emergency outputs
                            with particular focus on the former states of Upper Nile and Jonglei. Over the course of implementation, the
                            project:

                                    Trained 10 rapid response teams on investigation of alerts and immediate outbreak response.
                                    Provided in service training to 8,551 health care workers, far exceeding the target of 400 workers.
                                    Trained 1,743 community health workers to implement integrated community case management.
                                    Established 100 percent of bomas with health committees against a target of 85 percent.
                                    Provided measles vaccination to 147,379 children under one year against a target of 75,000.
                                    Reached to 500,000 people by the awareness campaigns and risk communication activities related to
                                     COVID-19. This was a new indicator.

                            Outcomes:

                            Outcomes were output-oriented and sought to reflect on the stated objective to respond to health
                            emergencies in the Republic of South Sudan, with a particular focus on the former states of Upper Nile and
                            Jonglei. In that context, the proportion of disease outbreaks that were detected and responded to within 72
                            hours of confirmation increased from a baseline of 15 percent to 100 percent, exceeding the target of 50
                            percent. The outbreaks included 9 measles outbreaks and one vaccine-derived polio outbreak. While the
                            project had noteworthy contributions and achievements in responding to health emergencies, there was
                            insufficient information on overall systemic capacities and readiness aspects, including human resources and
                            laboratory capacities, that facilitate effective responses to health emergencies. Therefore, the objective was
                            assessed as almost fully achieved, and rated as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project almost fully achieved its two objectives to increase access to an essential package of health
                            services and to respond to health emergencies. The aggregation of both achievements indicated a
                            Substantial rating for overall efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



The PAD’s economic analysis carried out a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) and a cost-benefit analysis (CBA).
Both CEA and CBA provided information on the costs and consequences of investments. The cost-effectiveness
analysis methodology considered benefits expressed in non-monetary terms of effectiveness (viz., lives saved
because of the supported interventions) and costs of the interventions for all four components of the project
expressed in monetary terms. Cost benefit analysis on the other hand, included all outcomes and costs
measured in monetary units. Both CEA and CBA showed that the project would be cost-effective. In terms of
monetary value, the CBA suggested net yearly benefits to be between 95.8-96 million USD, with benefit-cost
ratio between 2.5 and 2.6 at 2 to 4 percent discount rates (PAD, p91-92). It suggested that the benefits from the
project would be 2.5 to 2.6 USD for every dollar spent in the project.

The ICR undertook an ex-post cost-benefit analysis to estimate the project’s economic return on investment on
both the initial IDA grant and the AF, and similarly found the benefits of the project outweighed the costs. All
benefits and costs were assumed to result from the project, since the project was the primary source of
financing in the Jonglei and Upper Nile states. The estimated NPV to the amount of US$687.6 million with a
corresponding IRR of 13.95 percent, and 7.96 BCR at project closing with a 5 percent discount rate, suggested
that for every dollar invested, the project yielded a significant economic return. Additionally, investing in South
Sudan’s health sector has long-term development benefits which was not quantifiable in the economic analysis
due to the absence of a functional health system, extended periods of conflict, and longstanding challenges in
accessing health services (ICR, p20).

There were implementation aspects that contributed to efficiency as well. The implementing agencies, UNICEF
and ICRC, showed high level of readiness in an extremely difficult fragile and conflict prone environment, with
periodic political instability, heavy seasonal flooding, inadequate infrastructure and human resource capacity.
They worked efficiently even during two suspensions of services due to security incidents, and severe
restrictions of movement and ability to operate as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, p 21).

There were, however, some understandable shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation given the difficult
FCV situation. Barring delays in implementation due to restriction in mobility during pandemic, disruption in
supply chain and limited transport infrastructure, and high staff turnover in the UNICEF Implementing
Partner teams, resulted in low reporting rates, stock management issues, and service delivery challenges. This
inefficiency was reflected in the under achievements in the number of health facilities with essential medicines
available, and in the number of health facilities providing at least 75% of the essential package of health
services.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                13.95
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High, as the objectives remained fully consistent with the Bank’s South Sudan
CEN FY18-19 endorsed by the Board in January 2018 and with the World Bank Strategy for FCV (2020-25).
Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the project almost fully achieved its objectives. Efficiency is also rated
Substantial with favorable cost-effectiveness, but with moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of
implementation. The overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory, indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the
project’s overall preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Among the foreseeable risks, the ICR pointed out that the risk to the development outcome remained high
with PEHSP’s closure on December 31, 2021. The main risk is related to a continued FCV situation. The lack
of other large-scale donor or Government financing to support the provision of life-saving health services in
Jonglei and Upper Nile may diminish the sustainability of outcomes that have already been achieved.

The ICR (p37) mentioned that PEHSP was not designed as a long-term development project. Rather,
PEHSP was processed as an emergency operation to bridge urgent population health needs in the short-to-
medium term in Jonglei and Upper Nile states. Because of third-party implementation modality, capacity
building and institutional strengthening efforts just focused on NGO/ INGO IPs, health service providers,
state officials, and CHDs- rather than on central Government. As a result, the existing roles of the MoH and
PEHSP’s implementation arrangements did not facilitate the transition to Government-led implementation.
Weak fiduciary and management capacity of the government were other issues that might handicap the
government to fully lead and manage health operations.

In the context of macro-economic risks, fiscal capacity is another factor that can affect development
outcomes.

Among other risks, The ICR highlighted the lack of additional consideration of mitigation measures to de-
escalate community tension during suspensions of project activities and consequent IP reputational risks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  Key lessons from the South Sudan Country Engagement Note (CEN, FY18-19) from across the portfolio
  were adequately considered in the proposed operation. A need for flexibility, both at the strategic and
  operational level, was recognized in order to increase speed in delivery of services, accountability, citizen
  engagement, and strategic partnerships- given the enormity of needs, the geographical scope and limited
  resources.

  At entry, implementation risks were adequately identified, including supply, and capacity constraints
  based on lessons learned from previous projects in the country. The project incorporated appropriate
  mitigative measures to avoid such challenges. The project incorporated lessons learned from the Health
  Rapid Results Project (HRRP) that indicated reduced coverage due to upsurge in instability and violence,
  inability to monitor and verify results in the majority of the two states. The proposed project was
  processed under procedures specified under the World Bank Policy and Directive for Investment Project
  Financing (IPF, Chapter 12) to respond quickly to critical needs in two of the most conflict-affected states
  in South Sudan. The PAD (p37) informed that both ICRC and UNICEF were expected to focus on rural
  populations and hard-to-access areas where vulnerability was acute, allowing the project to target some
  of the most vulnerable populations in South Sudan. Both ICRC and UNICEF were also expected to adopt
  adaptive strategies to deliver context-specific essential services despite having similar health packages.

  The project also proposed to invest in building capacities of health service providers and managers at the
  operational level to contribute to a stronger and resilient health system in the country. Under Component
  1 the project created a strong focus on building capacity of decentralized service delivery platforms and
  the health system at community, health facility and county level through trainings in clinical protocols and
  guidelines, Health Management Information System (HMIS) data management, supervision skills, supply
  chain management; planning and coordination skills of county health department teams; and national
  information and monitoring systems (PAD, p22).

  At entry, there was significant fiduciary risks within the country environment which could impact the
  Financial Management (FM) arrangements of the project. These included challenges of insecurity that
  could impede access to the intended beneficiaries and the weak institutional capacity of the Government
  which could adversely affect service delivery and raise the risk of non-transparent stewardship of funds.
  To mitigate these risks, the implementation modality involving UNICEF and ICRC responded to the
  heightened fiduciary risks and lessons learnt during the implementation of Health Rapid Results Project
  (HRRP). This included monitoring of incidences of ineligible expenditures, and challenges of monitoring,
  verification and supervision of health service delivery in the two former states of Upper Nile and Jonglei
  due to insecurity.

  Capacity constraints of the Government to effectively manage and implement operations was recognized
  and a revitalization of the World Bank’s engagement was done through a new operation. It provided
  financing directly to UNICEF to carry out operations for the benefit of the people in South Sudan. Lessons
  from the Health Rapid Results Project (HRRP) provided key lessons and experiences that have oriented
  the decision to change implementation arrangements where partner agencies become direct Recipients
  of IDA. The proposed engagement with ICRC and UNICEF in South Sudan through this operation was to
  ensure a broader collaboration effort between the World Bank and partners in fragile states and conflict
  affected settings. It was also expected to ensure maintenance of key health infrastructure and human




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



  resource capacity and continue to preserve a level of service delivery that the Government could pick up
  at a future date.

  There were however some limitations. The two-year implementation timeline was ambitious because
  heavy supply-side interventions required sufficient processing time, particularly under macroeconomic,
  and natural risks which were beyond the control of the project. Given IDA resource constraints and the
  unpredictable setting and urgent health needs in South Sudan, the planned activities under the proposed
  operation had an estimated budget for 24 months. An additional nine months was however, added to the
  project duration to allow for flexibility to adjust strategies and timelines given the unpredictable
  environment. It also aimed to allow for the financial closure undertaken by the partner organizations.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision inputs and processes were adequate. World Bank team closely coordinated with both
 UNICEF and ICRC to resolve PEHSP-related concerns and tackle difficult issues. The Bank conducted
 quarterly and biannual reviews, through emails, and virtual missions to facilitate the regular exchange of
 information. To ensure continuous monitoring and technical support during COVID pandemic, the Bank
 also communicated regularly with UNICEF, and ICRC.

 The World Bank made strategic decision to procure drugs in advance during the Health Rapid
 Results Project to PEHSP transition period. Its proactivity in triggering the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD)
 and COVID-19 CERCs also allowed the project to rapidly reallocate funding to respond to emerging health
 needs in Jonglei and Upper Nile. The Bank also conducted PEHSP implementation support missions at
 least annually with both UNICEF and ICRC.

 There were however some procurement glitches. Two procurement risks identified during project
 preparation did materialize during implementation. First, delays in delivery and distribution of basic
 medicines and pharmaceutical items occurred for tranche two and tranche three due to global supply chain
 disruptions, COVID-19 restrictions, and lack of project funds. Second, delayed submission of third-party
 monitoring (TPM) reports hindered its oversight function. The ICR also highlighted that limited opportunities
 for project supervision due to conflict and violence restricted World Bank staff to conduct field supervision
 visits outside of Juba during the lifetime of the project. It also caused delayed third-party monitoring (TPM)
 verification visits and its report submission to the World Bank and subsequently, limited the scope of real-
 time monitoring of service delivery progress. However, the above issues, largely related to FCV, were not
 directly attributable to Task Team performance.

 Environmental safeguards were satisfactory in both UNICEF and ICRC components throughout
 PEHSP’s implementation. ICRC-operated health facilities followed ICRC’s ‘infection prevention and control’
 (IPC), ‘water, sanitation and hygiene’ (WASH), and ‘medical waste management’ (MWM) service standards
 that commensurate with World Bank safeguards policies. UNICEF implementation through INGO and NGO
 implementing partners using governmental health facilities however, needed to be brought up to World
 Bank standards for IPC, WASH, and MWM.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



 Social safeguards were also satisfactory in both UNICEF and ICRC components throughout PEHSP’s
 implementation. Both ICRC and UNICEF prepared social assessment and related social development
 plans and conducted community consultations to identify related risks. Outreach activities were also
 conducted with the integration of local Government for sustainability. Both ICRC and UNICEF’s grievance
 redress mechanism (GRM) was confirmed to be functional by the task team during the October 2019
 mission, albeit UNICEF needed to further strengthen its GRM system.

 Similar to social and environmental safeguard supervision, financial Management (FM) was also
 satisfactory in both UNICEF and ICRC components throughout PEHSP’s implementation. PEHSP’s third-
 party implementation modality was a direct response to fiduciary weaknesses during Health Rapid Results
 Project’s implementation.

 In alignment with the lessons learnt from HRRP, the regular presence of PESHP TTLs in a
 neighboring country strengthened communications with the CMU, implementing partners, and the
 Government. Given South Sudan’s high-risk environment, the proximity of the TTLs to the ground allowed
 fluidity to follow-up and resolve day-to-day implementation issues even during COVID-19.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was sound. Given the stated objectives, it was designed to collect comprehensive,
 information on availability of health services at health facilities in the targeted geographic areas in South
 Sudan. The objective indicators were clear and measurable and encompassed all outcomes of the PDO
 statement. The result framework (RF) indicators were well-selected to reflect progress towards PDO
 achievements and were able to accurately capture the challenges with pharmaceutical stockouts and
 supply chain management (captured through PDO1.3). These PDO indicators were also able to capture the
 improvements in health facility M&E capacity. The intermediate results indicators were adequate to capture
 the contribution of the project’s components and outputs toward achieving PDO-level outcomes.

 The monitoring system aimed to track reported service availability and additional data elements on health
 service performance from each health facility being monitored to enable the system to compute the
 essential set of indicators. The performance monitoring methodology also aimed to include citizen
 engagement mechanisms, customized to capture key domains on satisfaction and perceived quality of
 care, to capture community feedback on service delivery. The National ‘Lot Quality Assurance Sampling’
 surveys were expected to produce information that could be rapidly interpreted and used to identify relative
 achievements in coverage rates for key health services.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



 In terms of sources of regular data, all health interventions supported by the project aimed to use the
 ‘health management information system’ (HMIS/DHIS2) in conjunction with data and information provided
 by implementing partners. Data from health facilities in the project’s targeted areas were proposed to be
 closely monitored by partner organizations, along with corrective actions identified and undertaken. The
 data for monitoring were expected to come from: (i) HMIS/DHIS2; (ii) a standardized Supervisory
 Tool/Checklist to assess and monitor quality of care; and (iii) internal monitoring, auditing and verification
 mechanisms of UNICEF and ICRC and implementing partners, sub-contracted by UNICEF.

 The result framework, however, had few minor design weaknesses. The PAD noted the mixed feelings on
 reliability for some indicators at the time of project appraisal. No formal baseline was conducted for this
 project which is quite common for projects in FCV prone areas. Periodic conflict and lack of updated
 census data on population had impacted the validity of PEHSP baseline values and set targets. In the
 absence of baseline, some of the targets were rolled over from the previous ‘Health Rapid Results Project’
 which were too low in context of the anticipated 3.5 million beneficiaries. The interview conducted with the
 Task Team informed that due to lack of reliable baseline values, benchmark target values of some of the
 indicators were adopted from WHO and other organizations’ target values as well. Another design
 weakness was the set target values of some indicators in absolute terms. For example, targets for
 indicators like “Number of health facilities with essential medicines available” and “Number of health
 facilities providing at least 75 percent of the essential package of health services”, were set in absolute
 numbers, and didn’t factor in changes in the number of health facilities supported. Consequently, non-
 reporting or suspended health facilities were counted as non-achievement.



b. M&E Implementation
  Both UNICEF and ICRC were attentive to the quality of data to ensure effective M&E implementation.
  UNICEF and ICRC data collection contributed to biannual ‘Implementation Status and Results Report’
  (ISR), reporting on the RF indicators throughout project implementation. These indicators were presented
  in a consistent and clear manner in each reporting cycle. The ability to further disaggregate the data and
  the consistently frequent reporting facilitated project supervision, especially given the delays in the
  submission of TPM reports and allowed UNICEF to identify capacity gaps and design targeted responses
  to address them. In addition, the ICR mentioned that UNICEF field staff conducted data quality audits and
  verified data submitted in source documents, IP reports submitted to UNICEF, and DHIS2 data as part of
  its supervision visits to 20 percent of health facilities each quarter. ICRC conducted monthly supportive
  supervision visits. To ensure independence and credibility of data generated, PEHSP also engaged
  ‘Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine’ (LSTM) as the third-party monitoring agency for all UNICEF-
  supported counties in Jonglei and Upper Nile, and WHO for the coordination of the Health Service
  Functionality dashboard. LSTM was responsible for conducting quarterly field verification visits as well as
  leading the national Lot Quality Assurance Sampling Survey to assess national coverage of key health
  services.

  The ICR reported some challenges as well which were faced during M&E implementation. For example,
  submissions of data and reports were reported to be a challenge by limited network connectivity, long
  travel distances, and the remoteness of some health facilities. Similarly, data from health facilities were
  completely lost sometimes due to seasonal floods. During implementation, the LSTM also faced
  implementation challenges like delayed data verification, sampling methodology and health facility
  replacement protocol that were skewed towards more easily accessible health facilities, and lack of data


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



  on ethnic groups of beneficiaries (ICR, Annex 7). The challenges were however mitigated by using
  innovative remote and georeferenced monitoring technologies.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project’s monitoring arrangements produced a rich array of data and were used in various ways to
  guide implementation progress. The ICR reported that the RF data collected were used for planning of
  pharmaceutical procurement and quantity adjustments for health facilities orders, with UNICEF/ IPs
  providing supportive supervision and improvement plans to address identified gaps. The RF data also
  fed into routine reporting of PEHSP’s implementation progress.

  PEHSP’s clear and overlapping monitoring arrangements were aligned to the ‘Health Pool Fund’ (HPF3)
  monitoring arrangements and have potential to help future projects in South Sudan. It, however, requires
  appropriate efforts to improve knowledge management and M&E capacity within the MoH and that are
  needed to complement monitoring arrangements developed under PEHSP, as data are currently not in
  an organized and usable manner within the MoH.

  A rating of Substantial is assigned because there were moderate shortcomings in the M&E system’s
  design, implementation, or utilization. The M&E system as designed and implemented was, adequately
  sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered Environmental Assessment OP 4.01 Category B in view of risks related to medical
   waste, workers and community safety, and minor rehabilitation works in health facilities. Two Environmental
   and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF) were prepared, each with medical waste management
   details. In the context of social impacts from proposed project activities, the project aimed to scale up
   attention and efforts to improve access to services for sexual and gender-based violence victims. ‘Clinical
   Management of Rape’ (CMR) and basic psycho-social support services were included in the essential
   package of health services offered at health facilities supported by the project. Since no land acquisition
   was expected, OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was not triggered.

   The ICR (p33) mentioned that both ICRC and UNICEF prepared social assessment (SA) and related social
   development plans. They also conducted community consultations to identify related risks and mitigation
   measures. Both SAs, as the ICR pointed out, were disclosed in-country on December 11, 2018, and
   December 13, 2018, respectively. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and SA
   for the UNICEF component was revised to include the Security and Significant Event Management
   Framework (SSEMF) and was redisclosed on September 25, 2020. The overall safeguards rating was
   recoded as satisfactory in the Operations Portal.



                                                                                                Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The fiduciary compliance was adequate. The ICR (p34) informed that audits conducted on UNICEF and
   ICRC project accounting and financial reporting documents expressed an unqualified (clean) opinion. It
   also informed that UNICEF’s FM arrangements were well-aligned with requirements under the World Bank
   Policy and Bank Directive (formerly OP/BP 10.0) on investment project financing. Financial Management
   arrangements were based on the FM Framework Agreement with UNICEF which allowed UNICEF to use
   its own rules and procedures. Fiduciary oversight of IPs followed the Harmonized Approach to Cash
   Transfers, or HACT framework with programmatic visits, spot checks, and audits. Following Agreements
   during negotiation, additional staff were deployed by UNICEF to support project accounting and financial
   reporting. The United Nations Board of Auditors found UNICEF’s financial performance and cash flows for
   the audited years 2019 and 2020 fairly represented all material respects. The audits expressed an
   unqualified opinion on consolidated ICRC financial statements and that they represent a true and fair view
   of the financial performance and cashflows of ICRC. The Agreement Upon Procedures (AUP) report
   confirmed compliance in project expenditures incurred with specific expenditure line items agreed with the
   World Bank, accuracy in the forex rates applied, and consistency of the quarterly interim financial reports
   (IFRs) with the underlying records and supporting documentation.

   Procurement: The implementation of procurement activities under UNICEF and performance of
   Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA) were rated Satisfactory throughout PEHSP’s implementation
   (ICR, p34). UNICEF followed the original design and used their own procurement arrangements under
   World Bank’s Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA) guidelines. For ICRC, World Bank
   procurement procedure and policy was not applicable as PEHSP only financed ICRC staff, utilities and
   operational costs associated with project activities in South Sudan. UNICEF’s APA had a satisfactory
   procurement performance during implementation, with timely contracting of key procurement activities
   including all IPs, a third-party monitoring firm and procurement and distributions of all three tranches of
   essential commodities and drugs to health facilities. Two procurement risks identified during project
   preparation— delays in delivery and distribution of basic medicines and pharmaceutical items, and delayed
   submission of TPM reports however, occurred during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Not reported.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified the following lessons learnt at project completion.

        Collaboration across the humanitarian-development partners based on their respective
           comparative advantage can lead to greater success. PEHSP benefitted by operating through
           two large-scale institutional partnerships established with UNICEF and ICRC.
          Emergency response measures built-in the initial project design are useful to address future
           emergencies. The project benefitted from flexibility to scale project resource allocations
           based on the size of the emergency.
          Short project duration may not be sufficient for sustaining long-term impact. PEHSP was
           designed specifically to provide interim support to Jonglei and Upper Nile after the closure of
           HRRP. The short period of two years was not sufficient for expecting a long-term impact.
          Close implementation support through intensified field supervision and capacity building
           efforts helps when operating in conflict affected FCV environments.
          An Implementing Partner selection process conducted with transparency, objective selection
           criteria, and active participation of all stakeholders helped maximize project buy-in.
          Proactive communication and engagement with communities are crucial for creating local
           ownership and buy-in for health services.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report adequately highlights how activities were linked to intended results. There is adequate internal
consistency. The logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report and results are mutually
reinforcing. Quality of analysis is high. There has been sufficient evidence to support the TOC, summarizing
of salient points and clear linking of evidence to PDOs. Quality of evidence is sufficient. The ICR presents a
set of proximal results that is sufficient to support the achievements reported in a short period of time in an FCV
situation. However, additional qualitative information to supplement quantitative achievements (or lack thereof)
could have enriched the report more. Lessons learnt are adequately based on implementation experience

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Essential Health Services Project (P168926)



and analysis. They appropriately respond to the specific experiences and findings for the project. The ICR is
clear, and candid. The ICR is aligned well to project development objectives. The narrative and evidence
supported the ICR's conclusions on the project's overall outcome. The ICR is however, lengthy, with a main
text reaching 43 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
