     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023263

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P147705                                     SME Competitiveness Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kazakhstan                                  Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84770                                  30-Jun-2020                                         11,186,989.07

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Mar-2015                                 28-Feb-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             18,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         11,186,989.07                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz            Ebru Karamete                  Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both Schedule 1 of the Loan Agreement (p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (p.8), the
   project objective was “to enhance the competitiveness and capacity of targeted small and medium sized
   enterprises in the Borrower’s territory.” The Borrower is defined as the Republic of Kazakhstan.

   This review will assess the project outcome based on the objective parsed as follows:



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



   Objective 1: To enhance the competitiveness of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the
   Borrower’s territory,

   Objective 2: To enhance the capacity of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the Borrower’s
   territory.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Dec-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   1.SME Capacity Building Program (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 15 million; Estimated Cost After
   Restructuring: US$ US$ 3.8 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 0.5 million)

   This component was to strengthen and expand existing small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
   advisory programs in Kazakhstan by enhancing their quality, introducing international best practice, and
   increasing awareness for these programs in the country. Main activities under this component included
   support to the Ministry of National Economy (MNE) and National Chamber of Entrepreneurs (NCE) on
   strategy development, reporting, monitoring and evaluation of non-financial support (NFS) programs,
   establishment of master trainers’ network, as well as by using train-of-trainers approach to build capacity of
   SME advisors and consultants in the country. Additionally, a comprehensive awareness campaign on NFS
   programs was to be implemented.

   2. SME Linkages in Competitive Sectors (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 20 million; Estimated Cost
   After Restructuring: US$ 13.2 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 8.9 million)

   This component was to contribute to linking and integrating Kazakhstani SMEs with the existing and
   emerging competitive sectors in the country. This was to be achieved through activities under three sub-
   components:

   2.1 Supplier Development Program: This sub-component was to improve the overall competitiveness of
   individual SMEs in competitive sectors in Kazakhstan through a Supplier Development Program (SDP). The
   project was to provide training and capacity building tools and methodologies to implement SDP for all
   relevant public and private stakeholders. A Supplier Development Office (SDO) was to be established with a
   mandate to increase market linkages of SMEs with local and multinational corporations. Competitively
   selected SMEs were to be trained to increase their managerial and technical capabilities for accreditation as

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



suppliers of large corporations. SMEs’ costs for obtaining international certification of their products,
processes, and managerial practices were to be partially covered through this sub-component. The
implementation of pilot SDPs in selected sectors followed by scaled up SDP based on learnings from pilots
were foreseen.

2.2 Competitive Sectors (territorial clusters): This sub-component was to support SMEs in non-
extractive sectors for increasing their market linkages in sectors that were not yet globally competitive but
which had potential for growth in Kazakhstan. Within the scope of this sub-component training and
implementation support to specialists of Kazakhstan Industrial Development Institute (KIDI) who would be
implementing cluster development program was to be provided. In addition, support was to be provided to
the implementation of the cluster program in prioritized six clusters across three regions (approximately 2
clusters per region), over a period of five years. The activities to be performed under this component were
to be informed by previous work that the Bank had done with KIDI under Joint Economic Research Program
(JERP).

2.3 Factoring Strategic Assessment: Through this sub-component, a detailed strategic assessment for
development of factoring and reverse-factoring in Kazakhstan was to be developed with aim to address
challenges such as lack of credit from suppliers, lack of certainty of trade and lack of collateral to receive
loans encountered by the SMEs in various supply chains in Kazakhstan. Taking the international practices
as well as relevant legislation in Kazakhstan into account, a detailed design of an online platform was to be
prepared.

3. Impact Evaluations & Monitoring (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 8 million; Estimated Cost After
Restructuring: US$ 2.7 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 2.2 million)

This component was to create a sustainable M&E structure which would shape new SME policies with
better priorities. Several government agencies (i.e., MNE, Economic Research Institute, NCE) were to be
supported for institutional integration of the evaluation of public policies. Following activities were to be
implemented: institutionalizing evidence-based policy formulation, designing a framework and a government
institution for the M&E of policies supporting SMEs, establishing a sustainable third-party monitoring
mechanism that would increase transparency and participation of the private sector in SME policy design.
Lastly, development of an outputs and outcomes “Dashboard” that integrates results from all related
activities to regularly inform policy makers to reshape the design of existing SME support instruments was
to be established.

4. Project Management (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 3 million, Estimated Cost After Restructuring:
US$ 1.5 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 0.9 million).

This component was to finance project implementation unit (PIU) staff, consultant services as well as
operational costs.

Revised Components: Component 1 was scaled-down from US$15 million to US$ 3.8 million (First
Restructuring). Number of trainers was reduced from 750 to 150 due to a detailed study conducted by the
consultant team and was verified by NME and NCE. This change was also associated with the cancellation
of line of credit (LoC) which was foreseen at the appraisal stage but was cancelled due to financial and
economic developments in Kazakhstan and in the region. Scale of awareness raising campaign was
reduced as this activity was already implemented through state budget. Component 2 was revised (First
Restructuring). The second phase of SDP program under component 2.1 was cancelled as limited time was


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



  left for implementation (ICR, p.16). Component 2.2 was scaled down due to savings achieved from
  consulting contracts. Activity for the establishment of SME Dashboard was cancelled under Component 3.1
  as it was already implemented by NCE Atameken and some other state economic enterprises under “Digital
  Kazakhstan” state program. Project funds for the establishment of third-party monitoring mechanism were
  no longer needed under Component 3.3 as it was established by NCE Atameken with its own resources.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost estimated at appraisal was US$ 46 million. The total estimated cost was
  revised down to US$ 21.2 million at the First Restructuring cancelling remaining funds. The relevant
  amounts were cancelled as a result of changing priorities of the Government of Kazakhstan (GOK),
  implementation difficulties, and conditions imposed by COVID-19. The actual cost at closing was US$12.5
  million.

  Financing: The project was financed through an IBRD loan. The Bank’s financing estimated at appraisal
  was US$ 40 million and it was revised down to US$ 18 million at First Restructuring. At project closing
  actual disbursements from the IBRD loan was US$ 11.20 million.

  Borrower’s Contribution: At appraisal the Borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$ 6 million. At
  project closing, it was US$ 1.33 million.

  Restructurings:

  The project had two Level 2 restructurings:

  Restructuring 1-December 28, 2018

  Project experienced significant implementation delays (actual disbursement rate of 7% in 3.5 years
  following the Board approval in March 2015 and 2.5 years after effectiveness in February 2016,
  (Restructuring Paper, p.5). The issues leading to implementation problems were delayed allocation of
  counterpart financing; lack of clarity of the counterpart agencies’ roles, as well as the potential conflict of
  interest from overlaps in the roles of implementing agencies, complicated and time-consuming government
  consultation and authorization processes. The Bank undertook a Quality Enhancement Review (QER) of
  the project in March 2018, followed by the mid-term review (MTR) in May 2018. From the recommended
  options offered by the QER, the GOK preferred the partial loan cancelation and extension of the project
  closing date (ICR, p.15).

  Overall, total Bank financing was reduced from US$ 40 million to US$ 18 million due to reasons explained in
  paragraph “Revised Components” and implementation period was extended by seven months to February
  28, 2021 to enable completion of remaining activities. Component 1 was scaled-down by US$ 8.6 million.
  The funding for Component 2 was reduced by US$ 6.6 million and the financing for Component 3 was
  reduced by US$ 5.0 million. Accordingly, the results framework was revised. One of the PDO indicators (the
  number of cluster competitiveness action plans for which implementation has begun) was raised from four
  to six, reflecting the expanded commitment of the GOK. Two intermediate results indicators were dropped in
  accordance with the cancelled activities under Component 3. Seven intermediate indicators were modified.
  Two of seven modified targets were made more ambitious reflecting on the extended implementation



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



   period, while in the other five cases new targets became either less demanding or more conservative due
   down scaling of Components 1 and 2.

   Restructuring 2-February 22, 2021

   Due to adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the implementation period of the project was extended
   by 12 months to February 28, 2022. Two of the intermediate results indicators were revised: The target for
   number of government and associated professionals/staff receiving capacity building through trainings,
   workshops, study visits, etc. was increased to reflect actual project implementation. The target for number
   of direct project beneficiaries was decreased to reflect on gathering and travel restrictions imposed by
   COVID-19.

   Dates: The project was approved on August 2, 2015 and became effective on February 26, 2016. The
   original closing date was June 30, 2020, but it was extended by 18 months in two restructurings. The project
   closed on February 28, 2022.

   Reason to undertake a split assessment of the project outcome: Although the PDO was not revised,
   the scope of the project was narrowed significantly. The target value of one of the three key outcome
   indicators (number of Cluster Competitiveness Action Plans for which implementation has begun) was
   revised and two intermediate results indicators were dropped. According to Bank Guidance (December 9,
   2021) these changes particularly the change in the project scope require a split assessment of the project
   outcome.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: The project objectives were highly aligned with the GoK’s priorities at appraisal and
project closing. In January 2014, the President of Kazakhstan set out strategic directions that included
innovative industrialization, regional development, and small and medium sized enterprise development.
The President’s vision also included increasing the share of non-oil products in Kazakhstan’s export basket
to 70% and increasing SMEs contribution to GDP from then current 20% to 50%. Furthermore,
Kazakhstan’s Business Road Map 2020 and its Partnership Framework Arrangement launched with the IFIs
both address policy improvements that would contribute productivity growth and job creation. Improving the
business environment, enhancing domestic firms’ capacities to export and innovate, and creating linkages
between SMEs and larger companies in global value chains were also part of the Framework. The project’s
objectives are outcome oriented and address the outcomes highlighted by the president and the country’s
strategic documents. The project’s Components 1 and 3 support strengthening professional and managerial
skills of the SMEs, and access to finance. This would contribute to SMEs sector development and
accordingly improving the economy’s ability to create new and better jobs. Similarly, building linkages with
SMEs and large buyers (Component 2) would help Kazakh SMEs to access markets and emerging areas of
the economy. At program scale, the project through Component 2.1 was complementary to the ongoing
Competitive Industries and Innovation Program Technical Assistance grant, which aimed to build capacity
of the KIDI and other stakeholders for cluster development. Through Component 2.2, the project was to



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



               provide support on the implementation of a cluster development program under “State Program for
               Accelerated Industrial-Innovation Development 2015-2019 (SPAIID 2).

               Bank Strategy: The SMEs in Kazakhstan have the potential to contribute to advancing shared prosperity,
               economic diversification and private sector competitiveness. In order to play this role, the professional and
               managerial skills of the SMEs in the country as well as their conditions to access investment financing need
               to be improved. The project addresses this need and at appraisal its objectives were highly relevant to the
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY12-FY17 on improving competitiveness and fostering job
               creation (Area of Engagement 1) which aimed to support progress towards four country development goals,
               namely: achieving competitiveness through macro-stability and international integration; bolstering human
               capital; boosting employment in agriculture; and developing infrastructure connectivity to reduce economic
               distance. The project’s activities for increasing the capacities of SMEs through trainings, certification and
               accrediting SMEs to become suppliers to large local and international companies and initiating a factoring
               scheme to increase access to finance contribute to goals mentioned in the strategy. At project closing, the
               project remains aligned with the current priorities of Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY20-25.
               Under the CPF’s first focus area “promoting inclusive growth” one of the objectives was identified as
               strengthening the environment for private sector development (CPF, p.33). The project’s objectives
               emphasizing support to SME competitiveness, linking and integrating SMEs in existing and emerging
               competitive sectors and supply chains contribute to the focus area and its objectives.

               Previous Sector Experience: The Bank’s assessment of industrial policy implementation in Kazakhstan
               (2015) indicated clustering as an essential part of the strategy to improve overall economic
               competitiveness. The assessment also concluded that the practical policy instruments for cluster support
               should be modernized. The project’s objectives are highly relevant to the results of the assessment and
               development status of Kazakhstan. Joint Economic Research Program (JERP), completed by the Bank
               jointly with government counterparts, contributed to the design and implementation of the project. More
               specifically, sectoral analysis undertaken jointly with KIDI helped to identify sectors for future cluster support
               initiatives. In addition, while designing the project the Bank took into account experiences from SDPs in the
               UK, Czech Republic, Ireland and other countries; experience in developing supply chain financing schemes
               in Peru, Mexico and other relevant countries. The project design also benefitted from IEG’s Evaluation of
               Support to Small Businesses (2013) which included aspects such as the development of sustainable supply
               of services by increased capacities of service providers. The project’s capacity building program
               (Component 1) was designed to make use of the content and methodology of IFC’s Business Edge
               program which has been a successful tool globally. Some outputs of Fostering Productive Innovation
               Project (FPIP) were used in the course of preparing the draft SME Development Concept (Component 3),
               In addition, experience from FPIP to build the capacity of beneficiary SMEs was later incorporated in
               training and coaching programs of the project.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Objective 1: To enhance the competitiveness of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the
Borrower’s territory.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The casual links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were sound in general, but one key
element (i.e., credit line was missing). The project included activities such as training and capacity building
support to public and private stakeholders for the implementation of SDP and the cluster development
program, providing training to SDO staff, selection of sectors for pilot SDP, technical studies for identification
of priority regions and clusters in potentially competitive sectors, and assessment of supply chain financing
program. These activities were expected to result in the following outputs: Design and implementation of the
first SDP in the country, established SDO, a fully functioning third party monitoring system established and
lastly a “Dashboard” that integrates results from all related activities to regularly inform policy makers to
reshape the design of existing SME support instruments. These outputs would lead to SMEs participating
in the SDP programs, taking part in the supply chains, and increasing their sales to large national and
international companies thus increasing their competitiveness. Also closely monitored and evaluated
programs would contribute to improved policies for increasing competitiveness of the SMEs. In the long-term,
this was to help the development of the SME sector in the country and increase SMEs’ contribution to GDP.

The critical assumptions were: (1) The favorable business environment and policy support for SMEs are
sustained; (2) institutional set-up for government of SME policies was strong and with sufficient coordination;
and (3) financial means were available and accessible for SMEs to invest and innovate to achieve increased
competitiveness. However, according to PAD, access to finance was one of the main barriers to the
improvement of private sector competitiveness in the country. With the termination of the planned line of
credit, the project design lost a key element which could enhance overall impact of the program on the
competitiveness of the targeted SMEs.

Outputs:

      Strategic assessment of supply chain financing program completed: Assessment with
       recommendations on all aspects of the terms of refence for a factoring program was completed
       including feasibility study and technical specifications.

      Enhanced institutional structure and technical approach for cluster competitiveness: Target
       was to include an enhanced institutional structure and best practices in GoK’s approach to cluster
       competitiveness. This target could not be achieved.

      A fully functioning and credible third-party monitoring system in operation and actively managing
       a flow of calls, escalating issues to the appropriate policy levels to ensure resolution and policy
       change based on systemic and specific feedback received. This target could not be achieved.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)




      Value of increased sales of SMEs facilitated through participation in the project: The target was
       US$ 25 million. The project achieved US$ 66.4 million. This indicator represents direct impact of the
       project on the SMEs competitiveness through SDP participation. On the other hand, the figure
       represents increased sales of 15 participating SMEs (out of 53) only. The project’s M&E framework
       had design weaknesses. The role of the participating SMEs in providing data that would evidence
       project results was not clearly defined. Therefore, the participating SMEs were not obliged to disclose
       data on increased sales or revenues. This weakness in M&E framework limited the access to relevant
       information and capturing full impact of the project’s intervention. In addition, there was no
       counterfactual discussion, i.e., the sales for non-participating SMEs could have also increased during
       project implementation period due to favorable conditions. In order to define a clear attribution, a
       methodology which compares results with a control group needs to be implemented.

      In order to assess the impact of Cluster programs on the competitiveness of the SMEs, “Performance
       Review of Cluster Operations” was conducted with the Bank’s initiative. The review concluded that
       although all six sectoral SMEs groups made considerable achievement in forming territorial clusters, it
       was not possible to assess the project’s impact on the participated SMEs, as clusters were at early
       stages of their development and their benefits to participating SMEs were still limited (except for
       indirect limited evidence regarding furniture cluster established in Almaty city). The project’s M&E
       framework was weak in monitoring of actual performance of beneficiary SMEs and was not designed
       to provide enough evidence to assess impact of the project. Therefore, no systematic effort was made
       to record actual changes in the performance of SMEs that are the members of the emerging clusters..

Core Indicator:

      Direct Project beneficiaries: The original target was 5,000 beneficiaries (50% female) and the
       project achieved 1,476 beneficiaries (44.55% female).



Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first objective is rated Modest.” The impact of the cluster
programs on competitiveness of the SMEs could not be evidenced. In a more general sense, the lack of a
counterfactual as well as the weak M&E framework limited the collection of relevant data and the provision of
evidence to assess the impact of the project’s intervention on enhanced competitiveness for targeted SMEs.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enhance the competitiveness of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the Borrower’s territory.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change:



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



This remained essentially the same. The second stage of SDP and establishment of SME dashboard were
cancelled and installation of a factoring program was added. Also, some minor adjustments in the output
targets were made. However these did not change the structure or the objective.

Outputs:

      Strategic assessment of supply chain financing program completed and factoring program
       installed: The indicator was revised to include installation of a factoring platform. The factoring
       program could not be installed as the relevant authorities did not procure the necessary IT
       infrastructure at the time of project closure. However, the assessment itself initiated a policy dialogue,
       helped reaching a consensus on a national factoring platform model as well as creating awareness
       and emergence of an active stakeholder community following “factoring agenda” (ICR, p.22).

      Enhanced institutional structure and technical approach for cluster competitiveness: Target
       was to include an enhanced institutional structure and best practices in GoK’s approach to cluster
       competitiveness. This indicator was dropped at the First Restructuring.

      A fully functioning and credible third-party monitoring system in operation and actively
       managing a flow of calls, escalating issues to the appropriate policy levels to ensure resolution and
       policy change based on systemic and specific feedback received . This indicator and relevant
       activities were dropped at the First Restructuring.

Outcomes:

Outcomes under this objective did not change after the restructuring.

Core Indicator

      Direct Project beneficiaries: The revised target was 1,500 beneficiaries (3,500 at the First
       Restructuring and further down to 1,500 at the Second Restructuring) and the revised target for
       female beneficiaries was 30%. The project achieved 1,476 beneficiaries 44.55 % of which were
       female).



Overall, there was no major change in the level of achievement after the first restructuring. As there was no
change in the objective, it remained ambitious, and the lack of counterfactual data as well as the weak M&E
framework persisted, which limited the collection of relevant data and provision of evidence to assess the
impact of the project’s intervention on the competitiveness of the SMEs.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
                                                                                                      Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



Objective 2: To enhance capacity of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the Borrower’s territory.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The project included activities such as, training of business advisors, entrepreneurs, SMEs owners and
managers; conducting a comprehensive awareness campaign on government’s advisory programs,
increasing capacities of government institutions (MNE, NCE) on development of SME strategies, managing,
monitoring of NFS programs and certification of SMEs through their participation at the SDP. These activities
were expected to result in outputs such as establishment of master trainers’ network, increased awareness
about the NFS available in the country, increased quality and efficiency of services provided to SMEs in
substance and methodology, SMEs achieving approved “supplier status” with accreditation, increased
capacities of the government institutions to implement competitive cluster programs and contributing to
market linkages for the SMEs, As outcomes, the capacity of these entrepreneurs, owners and managers to
access markets and finance would increase and were expected to have world class standards to become
viable suppliers to multinational companies and state economic enterprises. The government’s capacity for
developing SME support policy would also improve through enhanced advice. In the long term, these would
be expected to result in increased firm productivity and revenues and augmenting the overall contribution of
SMEs to the economy. The critical assumption here is that enhanced training, technical advice and
certification would increase capacities of the SMEs.

Outputs:

      Number of local SME Advisors trained to undertake SME capacity building based on an
       established competency framework: The original target was 750 advisors (43.50% women). The
       training could not be performed due to travel and gathering restrictions imposed by COVID-19 (ICR,
       p.47).

      Percent of training participants who found the training offered as effective and useful to them:
       Target was 75% of the participants. The project achieved 90%. Over the course of 2016-2021, about
       289 participants of various training programs held under different project components (from both
       private sector and government agencies) found their training sessions to be effective and useful. This
       constitutes about 90.3% of training participants that filled the questionnaire. The training modules
       were conducted on cluster development, supplier development, and M&E of SME support programs
       (ICR, p.47).

      Number of candidates to master trainers, assessors, instructional designers developed and
       trained in global best practice: The target was 40 candidates. The trainings did not take place due
       to COVID-19 restrictions.

      Number of impact evaluations of SME interventions conducted or underway: The target was
       three evaluations. Three programs were evaluated: "Business Roadmap 2020" and "Enbek" as well as
       preliminary assessment of the SME Competitiveness Project of the World Bank.




                                                                                               Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)




      Number of government and associated professionals/staff receiving capacity building through
       trainings, workshops, study visits: The original target was 125 participants. The project financed
       the training of 188 participants.

      Number of SMEs who are in the process of becoming "accredited suppliers" to large
       companies: The original target was 200 and the project achieved 31 SMEs.

      Number of Cluster Competitiveness Action Plans that have been developed: The original target
       was four action plans. Six cluster competitiveness action plans were developed.

Outcomes:

      Number of SMEs which become accredited suppliers to large companies: Target was to accredit
       100 pre-qualified SMEs for participation in procurement processes of large companies. The project
       achieved accreditation of 53 SMEs (70 local and international certificates were achieved and 102
       accreditation processes were completed and accreditation of SMEs in more than one database of
       large companies was possible).

      Number of Cluster Competitiveness Action Plans for which implementation has begun: The
       original target was four action plans. The project achieved six programs.

      Percentage of participating SMEs reporting improved management and business practices:
       Target was 75% of participating SMEs. The project reached 82.5%. This indicator was set for SMEs
       participating in both Component 1 and Subcomponent 2.1. The assessment of actual progress was
       undertaken through three rounds of the survey of participating SMEs conducted through 2020. About
       200 SMEs participated in each round (ICR, p.45).

 The ICR also reports an outcome of improved SME support policies which could be attributable to increased
policy making capacity of the government through project’s interventions. The said policy changes included
strengthening of policy emphasis on the provision of non-financial support for SMEs underlying the policy shift
towards support for capacity building and skills accumulation by SMEs from the instruments of financial
support. This policy shift reflected in the GOK’s decision No. 1060, adopted in December 2019, which
introduced the new rules for allocating non-financial support to entrepreneurs for the period of 2021-25. This
decision was followed in April 2022 by the GOK’s resolution No. 250, which approved a new concept for
facilitating the development of SMEs in the RK until 2030. The concept spelled out a more balanced approach
to the utilizing financial and non-financial instruments of SME support. Both new government documents
incorporated several suggestions proposed in the earlier outputs developed and submitted by the project-
funded consultants (ICR, p.25).



Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the second objective is rated Substantial but marginally so, as only
two of the three outcome indicators were achieved and some key activities that would serve to achievement
of the objective such as training of SME advisors and master trainers could not be performed.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 2: To enhance capacity of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the Borrower’s territory.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change:

This did not change because neither the structure and the design of the project nor its objective changed.
Some of the relevant activities and outputs were scaled-down only and some were increased to match the
achievements. One new intermediate results indicator was added.

Outputs:

      Number of local SME Advisors trained to undertake SME capacity building based on an
       established competency framework: The revised target was 150 advisors (44.50% women). The
       number was revised in accordance with the assessment conducted by the consultant team. The
       training could not be performed due to travel and gathering restrictions imposed by COVID-19 (ICR,
       p.47).

      Number of government and associated professionals/staff receiving capacity building through
       trainings, workshops, study visits: The revised target was 190 participants (Second Restructuring).
       The project financed the training of 188 participants.

      New indicator added at the First Restructuring: Beneficiaries who reported that the approaches
       discussed in the framework of the discussions held during the Project reflect their opinion:
       The target was 75% and the project achieved 90.60%.

      Number of SMEs who are in the process of becoming "accredited suppliers" to large
       companies: The revised target was 100 and the project achieved 31 companies. According to the
       ICR (p.47), cancelling of second stage of SDP at the project restructuring, reduced opportunities for
       achieving this target.

      Number of Cluster Competitiveness Action Plans that have been developed: The revised target
       of six cluster competitiveness action plans was achieved.

Outcome:

      Number of Cluster Competitiveness Action Plans for which implementation has begun: The
       project achieved the revised target of six programs.




                                                                                                Page 12 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



                              Overall, there was no major change in the level of achievement after the first restructuring.. The conditions
                              and restrictions imposed by COVID-19 also adversely affected implementation of trainings and the
                              achievement of this objective.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The first objective, “to enhance the competitiveness of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the
                            Borrower’s territory” is rated modest before the restructuring due to insufficient evidence. The second
                            objective, “to enhance capacity of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the Borrower’s territory” is
                            rated substantial before the restructuring but marginally so due to partially achieving the outcome indicators
                            and not completing SME advisor and master trainings. The project’s overall efficacy is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The first objective, “to enhance the competitiveness of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the
                            Borrower’s territory” is rated modest after the restructuring due to insufficient evidence. The second objective,
                            “to enhance capacity of targeted small and medium sized enterprises in the Borrower’s territory” is rated
                            substantial but marginally so after the restructuring due to partial achievement. Therefore, the project’s
                            revised overall efficacy is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                         Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence


   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis

   Ex-ante analysis:

   A detailed economic and financial analysis was conducted for each of the components at appraisal with a
   comprehensive list of assumptions and external factors for each of the components. The analyses used ex-ante
   cost-benefit analysis framework to assess and monetize costs and benefits of the Project and associated

                                                                                                                                Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



externalities. Two types of costs were associated with the project: i) Direct financial outflows under the project
components and (ii) indirect cost of public funds needed to finance the project. On the benefits side, the principal
benefits from the project were development SME sector through increased capacity of government agencies,
several hundred local business advisors and SMEs; additional business with local and foreign large companies;
increased access to finance; better monitoring and design of SME support policies. The analysis covered
financial and economic revenues to be generated by increased SME competitiveness and development of both
supply and demand sides. The analysis arrived at Net Present Value of US$ 22.13 million in the baseline case.
The cost-benefit analysis was based on a series of assumptions, available statistical data, and relevant
literature. The project’s net present value (NPV) was US$ 22.13 million using 5.5% discount rate (with projected
multiplier effect of 7) for baseline case with total SME support of US$ 46 million. Further calculations were made
for pessimistic case and worst case. It was estimated that future sales of SDP participants would grow 2.5 times
over five years including gains of 70 percent in the first year after graduation from the program.

Ex-post analysis:

The analysis was conducted on the second component of the project (SDP) only. It is the component with the
largest share of financing after the restructurings—around 40 percent of the full project costs (around USD$ 5
million), including the portion of certification costs covered by SMEs (US$ 0.4 million) and the value of
government co-financing (less than US$ 0.4 million). According to the ICR (p.29), the review of changes in the
performance of SDP beneficiaries suggests that project investments in designing and implementing the SDP
were highly efficient. For every dollar spent by the project in reimbursement (de facto, subsidization) of SMEs’
costs on certification, the beneficiaries managed to expand their sales by US$ 105. If full costs of certification
are considered (given the actual reimbursement ratio of 74 percent), the respective ratio is estimated as 78
dollars in extra sales per one dollar spent on certification. However, these efficiency estimates are based on the
limited number of SDP beneficiaries that provided their actual data on incremental sales and costs of
certification. No counterfactual data available to enable comparison. The selection of the SDP beneficiaries for
the analysis was not random. The available data is only from the SMEs which agreed to provide information, as
it was not obligatory for the beneficiaries to provide such information in the project. Out of these 53 successful
beneficiaries, 15 reported increased sales. In addition, 12 out of 15 had obtained reimbursement of the project
cost. These 12 SMEs received more than a combined amount US$ 510,000 in reimbursement, which amounts
to about 57 percent of the total reimbursement financed under the project (ICR, p. 29). The ICR (p.29) also
reports that the SDP contributed gains to government budget: based on the data submitted by the same sample
of 12 SMEs, on average for every US$ 1 spent by the project on the reimbursement of certification costs, the
state budget received US$ 6.4 in additional taxes paid by SDP beneficiaries. For two of the other major project
components (clusters and factoring), cost-benefit analysis was not conducted.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency:

The cost of major activities was kept within the original budget estimates and savings were realized during the
procurement of consulting services to support cluster development under subcomponent 2.2, furthermore as a
result of devaluation of tenge resulted in savings as well. However, there were some shortcomings in the
project’s administrative and operational efficiency. The project had significant implementation delays resulting
from delayed counterpart contribution, lack of understanding among the involved institutions on the
implementation of the project and changing priorities of the government. These delays accordingly impacted
procurement of some of the goods and services and lead to cancellation of significant part of the activities
particularly under Component 1. Due to delays in counterpart funding the salaries of PIU’s staff could not be




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



paid on time and hired staff had to leave their positions which adversely affected PIU’s performance of its
fiduciary and coordination functions.

Although the SDP component was efficient, it is not possible to assess efficiency of the project as a whole due
to lack of evidence and underachievement. Furthermore, shortcomings of operational and administrative
efficiency affect the rating.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome ratings both before and after restructuring are moderately unsatisfactory due to modest efficacy
and efficiency ratings. When a split rating is implemented as per Bank Guidance, the project's overall outcome
does not change. It is moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following are the risks to the sustainability of the achieved results:

Macroeconomic Risk: The country’s continued dependence on exports and trade relations with Russia, as
well as the war in Ukraine put pressure on implementation of macroeconomic policies in the country and may
negatively affect implementation of support provided to SMEs.

Governance and Policy Risk: Also, if disputes that were encountered during implementation among several
government institutions including, MNE, NBK, MoF and others on the implementation of support programs
and mechanisms, continue, SME development and sector’s increased contribution to the economy could be

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



impeded. Frequent changes in the government structure and high turnover in relevant government agencies
which negatively impacted project activities during implementation, may result in loss of capacities built with
the support of the project. Nevertheless, government’s issuance of new regulations on SME support policies
is encouraging for continued commitment of the government on the development of SMEs sector.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had a strategic relevance to assist Kazakhstan in developing its SMEs sector and increasing
  its contribution to GDP. The project aimed to increase professional and managerial skills of the SMEs,
  promoting them to become accredited suppliers to value chains as well as increase the capacities of the
  relevant government agencies in Kazakhstan in development and implementation of SME support
  programs. Although the design took the Bank’s and the Government of Kazakhstan’s experience in SME
  sector into account, it did not engage regional administrations in project implementation. The MNE did not
  have any representation at the subnational level and did not try much to mobilize regional stakeholders.
  This limited the pace of project implementation, especially in the case of cluster subcomponent (ICR,
  p.39).

  Implementation arrangements were inadequate. The Department of Entrepreneurship Policy and
  Development of MNE was to oversee implementation of the project; a PIU within the MNE would manage
  overall implementation and a Project Implementation Commission, chaired by the Minister of MNE would
  perform strategic management and coordination across ministries and agencies. However, the ownership
  by the MNE and other government agencies were over estimated. A lack of clarity about distribution of
  responsibilities among different government entities resulted in implementation delays. The ICR reports
  that these could have been avoided if several analytical project activities were piloted under JERP before
  being included in the project. This could have been clarified in advance and would have enabled the
  project team to make better decisions on the design of the project. The PIU was not given enough
  powers to execute its functions. Also, the involvement of too many numbers of agencies created conflicts.

  At entry, major risks associated with the project were identified as fiduciary, implementation capacity and
  macroeconomic risks and overall risk rating was substantial. On the other hand, the counterpart risk and
  the risk for sector strategies and policies were underestimated and no mitigations measures were
  identified. The late payment of borrower’s contribution was not among the identified risks but came out to
  be one of the major factors that delayed project’s implementation. To mitigate risks associated with
  implementation capacity and fiduciary, measures were identified in the PAD such as close supervision,
  training and capacity building to the MNE and PIU staff. However, these measures were insufficient
  during implementation.

  Fiduciary aspects of the project were adequate. A procurement and a financial management specialist
  were to be employed in the PIU to support MNE. The project was the first Bank project that MNE
  implemented. Close supervision and capacity building from the Bank and trainings to the MNE staff were
  foreseen.

  M&E framework had weaknesses. As mentioned in the M&E section below, the identified PDO level
  indicators were at the output level. Majority of the intermediate results indicators were to measure

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



  progress in capacity building. The results framework was insufficiently designed to provide evidence on
  achievements of the project particularly on enhanced competitiveness of SMEs. Lastly, the PDO was
  overambitious and remained over-ambitious when it was clear that credit line was not accepted by the
  government. While revisions in in some of the intermediate indicators were made and budget was
  revised, PDO remained unchanged.

  The project did not trigger any safeguard policies.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team’s focus on development impact was demonstrated by their effort to address slow
 implementation of the project and to restructure the project in accordance with the findings of Quality
 Enhancement Review and Mid-Term Review. The Bank also provided technical and procurement support
 to the PIU throughout implementation. During the restructuring, the team showed its commitment by
 proposing alternative financial support schemes to the GoK including the reallocation of funds and
 expanding the availability of funding for project beneficiaries. However, these proposals were rejected by
 the government.

 The Bank took timely action to restructure the project and extend the implementation period to ensure the
 completion of activities. At the first restructuring, the project components were re-adjusted according to
 changing needs of the government and a significant amount of funds was cancelled. However, the project
 team did not take the opportunity and address the weaknesses in the M&E design at the restructuring. The
 revisions made in the M&E design reflected changes in the components and the targets were revised
 accordingly, but these changes did not improve the quality of the indicators to sufficiently capture the
 project outcomes. The PDO and outcome targets could have been revised to better reflect project activities
 and the revised scope.

 The PIU was staffed with a fulltime procurement specialist, but procurement capacity was limited at the
 beginning of the project and took some time to develop within the implementation unit. PIU also did not
 have enough powers to execute its functions particularly at the early years of implementation. The project
 team was successful in negotiating with the MNE the extension of decision-making powers assigned to the
 PIU. This helped to accelerate procurement and disbursement under the project. (ICR, p.40)

 Throughout project implementation, the World Bank’s performance reporting was candid. In total, 14
 Implementation Status and Results Report (ISRs) were filed. The Bank’s project team conducted a total of
 12 missions during the implementation of the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was weak. One of the three outcome indicators (percentage of participating SMEs
 reporting improved management and business practices) was more of an intermediate results indicator
 than an outcome indicator. One of the intermediate indicators (value of increased sales of SMEs facilitated
 through participation in the project) was an outcome indicator for enhanced competitiveness. However, the
 collection of necessary quantitative evidence/data for this indicator was not secured at the design stage
 and accordingly the participating SMEs were not obliged to disclose any data on this indicator. Although
 the intermediate indicators were specific, measurable, achievable and relevant, most of them were related
 to capacity building. The indicators were insufficient to capture the project’s impact on “enhancing
 competitiveness”. The targets were available. However, there were no baseline and no counterfactual data
 as all activities were new and no prior experience was available in the country.

 It was foreseen that the PIU would be the main body for collecting M&E data. In addition, project
 implementation committee (PIC) would regularly review project’s M&E data. Also, the NCE and Economic
 Research Institute (ERI) would evaluate and monitor progress in the development of the SME sector
 (Component 3).



b. M&E Implementation
  To monitor project’s performance, the PIU developed regular reports. The PIU also coordinated the
  implementation of several enterprise surveys which were utilized by the M&E system (ICR, p.36). The
  shortcomings in the M&E design were not addressed during project implementation. The revisions made
  in the results framework at the restructurings were limited to changing some of the targets or cancelling of
  the indicators that were not relevant. The weaknesses in results framework, such as lack of adequate
  indicators on enhancing competitiveness or weakness in PDO indicators were not addressed. In
  addition, as mentioned in the M&E design section, M&E arrangements regarding monitoring of actual
  performance of beneficiary SMEs were not ensured. No additional measure was taken to ensure better
  data collection during implementation. At project closure, as part of ICR preparation, the special
  performance review of the emerging clusters was undertaken. The review included field visits to all six
  territorial clusters and in-depth interviews with the representatives of participating SMEs.

  The ICR (p.36) reports a lack of evidence regarding material engagement of either ERI or NCE in the
  implementation of project M&E.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project team utilized the M&E framework to assess progress towards PDO achievement and
  address implementation challenges. The project was restructured in December 2018 as a result of QER
  followed by a mid-term review. The data collected were used for restructurings of the project as well as

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



  in the preparation of the mission reports and Implementation Status Reports. ICR does not include
  information about the dissemination of project results to the relevant stakeholders.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was considered to be an Environment Category C project (with minimal or no adverse
   environmental or social impacts). The project did not trigger the Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP
   4.01).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project was the first IBRD project implemented by the newly established
   MNE which did not have experience with World Bank-financed projects. Therefore, MNE was supported by
   the PIU (Component 4) with a financial management (FM) consultant. However, significant delays were
   experienced in counterpart-funding. Nevertheless, the PIU submitted annual audited financial statements
   and interim unaudited financial reports on time with some exceptions. No significant issues were observed
   during the review of those reports and during regular risk-based FM implementation support and
   supervision missions. Internal audits were carried out regularly, and external audits were conducted
   annually (ICR, p.37).

   Procurement: The procurement of goods and services was carried out by the PIU established within the
   MNE. However, during implementation the PIU could not exercise its procurement function fully. The main
   reasons were inadequate budget allocations, lack of consensus among government authorities on
   procurement of services (i.e., Component 2.3), and insufficient procurement powers granted to the PIU. In
   addition, changes in the staffing had a negative impact on the development of procurement capacity. As a
   result, significant delays occurred in procurement of some of the services particularly under Component 1
   and eventually, some of the activities were cancelled as they became unfeasible to implement particularly
   in the early years of implementation. To overcome this difficulty the project team negotiated with the MNE
   for the extension of decision-making powers assigned to the PIU. This helped to accelerate procurement
   and disbursement under the project (ICR, p.40).

   Lack of agreement on SME policies and not so clear distinction of responsibilities among the involved
   agencies also resulted in delays in procurement processes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



   None.



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Project’s efficacy in achieving
                               Moderately            Moderately                  the objectives was modest
Outcome
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              because of insufficient evidence
                                                                                 and underachievement.
                                                                                 Significant shortcomings in QAE
                               Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                 mainly due to weak project
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 design.
                                                                                 M&E framework was insufficient
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest                      to capture the project’s
                                                                                 outcomes.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following are lessons learned from the ICR (paragraphs 115 and 118 to 120) with some
paraphrasing:

      Maintaining a balance between volume of technical assistance and value of direct
       financial support to SMEs can increase attractiveness of project participation for
       many SMEs and individual government agencies and accordingly can increase impact
       of the program. Elimination of the Line of Credit resulted in a bias towards technical
       assistance in the project design. The lack of developmental subsidies, such as matching
       grants or credit guarantees, was the most apparent in the cluster subcomponent’s design.
       The lack of government co-financing reduced the investment potential of participating SMEs
       and limited the pace of cluster formation.
      Engaging regional administrations in project implementation can increase the
       success of an SME support project particularly in large countries like Kazakhstan.
       Involvement of subnational administrations is valuable in SME support projects. This aspect
       was not considered in the case of this project, leaving regional administrations disengaged.
       The MNE does not have any representation at the subnational level and did not try much to
       mobilize regional stakeholders. This limited the pace of project implementation, especially in
       the case of cluster subcomponent.
      Necessary arrangements and explicit agreements reached with potential project
       beneficiaries on the disclosure of key operational results and performance data within

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)



         the M&E design can strengthen M&E system of the project and ensure collection of
         necessary evidence to capture the results of the project. As a system for collection of
         performance data from the SMEs was not part of the M&E framework and was not obligatory
         for the SMEs to provide data, project’s impact on the competitiveness of the SMEs could not
         be tracked and necessary evidence could not be collected.
        The targets in the results framework which are reviewed at each stage of project
         restructuring and, if necessary, adjusted in line with changes in project scope, can
         lead to better assessment of the project results. In the case of this project, at the first
         restructuring, although the project’s PDO remained unchanged, the activities were revised
         significantly. Some of the indicators were also revised accordingly to reflect these changes,
         However, the team did not downshift the main project targets. In particular, the target for the
         number SMEs obtaining accreditations remained unchanged despite the removal of the
         second stage of the SDP program from the project. This, while creating a disconnect
         between the project scope and project target, also impeded the quality of M&E framework.
        Streamlined implementation and involving limited number of ministry-level
         government agencies can improve operational and administrative efficiency in project
         settings with weak inter-agency coordination and institutional fragmentation.
         Implementation arrangements for smaller projects built around the single counterpart agency
         or splitting responsibility for project implementation (two implementing agencies with two
         PIUs, each with its own TORs) can help management efficiency. In the case of this project,
         splitting the implementation responsibilities between the MNE and MIID would transfer
         responsibilities for implementing the better performing subcomponents, which demonstrated
         better ownership would improve project achievements.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is candid in explaining the issues encountered at
different phases of implementation. The report is concise and follows most of the guidelines. In general, it is
internally consistent. There is a logical linking of the various parts of the report. The discussion in the Lessons
and Recommendations section are clear, useful, and mostly based on the evidence outlined in the ICR but they
are more in the form of findings and recommendations rather than lessons.

ICR has a few shortcomings. The split rating was not conducted in line with the Bank Guidance. The project
achievements before the restructuring should be assessed “for the entire duration of the project”, not partially
before and after the restructuring. The report adequately follows the Bank guidance with regards to most of the
ratings, but for the Efficacy and the quality of M&E, although the narrative candidly criticizes these aspects and
talks about the shortcomings, these are not reflected on the ratings.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                       Page 22 of 22
