     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023154

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P169486                                     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4110                                   31-Dec-2021                                           100,550,879.26

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2018                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         100,550,879.26                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Paul Holden                   Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to support the Government of Burkina Faso in enhancing
   food security readiness and delivery of core services in health and education in crisis-affected
   regions. (Financing Agreement, p. 4) For this ICRR, the PDO is unpacked as follows: (i) support the delivery
   of core services in education in crises-affected regions, (ii) support the delivery of core services in health in
   crises-affected regions; and (iii) enhance food security readiness.



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Recurrent costs in education and health sector for service delivery (estimated cost:
   US$74 million; 2021 restructuring: US$76.05 million; actual cost: US$82 million). Support the Recipient in
   paying non-procurable operating costs of the Recipient's ministries in charge of education and health
   including through transfers (excluding the security forces and police) for civil service salaries, electricity,
   telecommunication, insurance, water, transport and mission expenses as well as office supplies and
   equipment required for addressing the current health, education and food supply crises in the crisis-affected
   regions, and as set forth in a list pre-approved by the Association ("Recurrent Costs"), through:

      Sub-component 1.1: Paying recurrent costs in the education sector. Paying recurrent costs in the
   education sector of the Recipient's ministry in charge of education at the central, deconcentrated and
   decentralized levels, in order to maintain the capacity of the civil servants and teachers in the education
   sector in the crisis-affected regions to undertake their day-to-day duties, and to cover the organization for
   catch-up exams of displaced children.

      Sub-component 1.2: Paying recurrent costs in the health sector. Paying recurrent costs in the health
   sector of the Recipient's ministry in charge of health, at the central, deconcentrated, and decentralized
   levels and financing activities linked to free health services for the most vulnerable population, to maintain
   the capacity of the health sector civil servants to operate in the crisis-affected regions.

    Component 2: Enhanced food security readiness (estimated cost: US$21 million; 2021 restructuring:
   US$22.05 million; actual cost: US$18 million). Replenish the millet, maize, and sorghum cereals stock of
   the Société nationale de gestion du stock de sécurité alimentaire (SONAGESS) for the North, Sahel,
   Centre, and East regions of the Recipient and install food silos of the strategic stock and other food
   storage materials in the crisis-affected regions.

   Component 3: Targeted technical assistance for enhanced deployment of state resources (estimated cost:
   US$4 million; 2021 restructuring: US$1.05 million; actual cost: US$1 million). Provision of financing for
   conducting surveys, data collection, field work and analyses of issues related to the deployment of public
   resources across the territory of the Recipient, including human resources; prepare the groundwork for
   future reforms; and support the establishment of an iterative beneficiary monitoring system in order to
   undertake cost-efficient, rapid and regular surveys and data collection of service delivery and state
   resource, including of civil servants, deployment. Provision of technical assistance to SONAGESS to
   improve its capacity to verify the use of its strategic food stock and its targeting of beneficiaries of the
   strategic food stock.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



   Component 4: Project management (estimated cost: US$1 million; 2021 restructuring: US$0.85 million;
   actual cost: US$0.7 million). Support the Recipient's day-to-day implementation activities by financing the
   operating costs, including salaries, consultant fees and audits required for the Project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The approved amount for the project was US$100 million. The actual amount disbursed was
   US$101.7 million. The discrepancy between the actual amount disbursed relative to the approved amount
   was due to fluctuations in the SDR exchange rate. The project disbursed 95 percent of the total project
   funds by December 31, 2018, with the remaining 5 percent used to distribute the stock of food replenished
   to IDPs and to vulnerable households using national systems.

   Financing. The project was financed through an IDA allocation (IDA-D4110).

   Borrower contribution. There was no borrower contribution planned or made.

   Dates. The project was approved on November 29, 2018, and became effective on December 10, 2018.
   The mid-term review, which was initially planned for May 2020, was postponed due to the COVID-19
   pandemic and held on January 18, 2021. The project closed on December 31, 2021, with no delays
   incurred. The project was restructured once in April 2021 to reflect changes to the Results Framework,
   project components and costs, and a reallocation between disbursement categories. Component 1 was
   restructured to expand the geographic coverage of activities, with the number of regions recognized as
   being conflict-affected rising from four at appraisal (i.e., North, Sahel, Center, and East regions) to 13, and
   to provide clarifications regarding the nature and the scope of expenses eligible for project funding.
   Component 2 was restructured to (i) setup mobile storage facilities in targeted locations, (ii)
   develop institutional and human capacity in logistics, procurement, food safety, quality control, and
   warehouse management, including the digitalization of stock management, and (iii) digitalize SONAGESS’s
   paper-based stock management system. Component 3 activities were not modified, with the exception of
   the study related to identifying bottlenecks to the deployment of human resources across the country which
   was cancelled and integrated in the functional review of key ministries supported by a parallel World Bank
   externally financed output activity (with funds originally allocated to this activity re-allocated to Component 1
   and 2). Component 4 on project management was not modified. For the purposes of the split rating and
   given that US$93.68 million was disbursed prior to the 2021 restructuring, a weight of 93.1 percent and 6.9
   percent are used for measuring efficacy prior to and after the 2021 restructuring, respectively. Table 3 of the
   ICR presents the changes to project design and to the Results Framework following the 2021 restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, Burkina Faso was confronted with weak economic growth and significant challenges
to the delivery of public services, which undermined progress toward the country's development
objectives and increased its vulnerability to armed conflict. In 2018, Burkina Faso was one of the
poorest countries in the world, with roughly 44 percent of its population living below the international poverty
line of US$1.90 per day. Economic growth was increasingly dependent on the mining and the services

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



sectors, with the agricultural sector (on which the poor were heavily dependent) constrained by pest
infestations and low rainfall. Poor economic conditions, combined with weak state presence in rural and
remote areas, facilitated the recruitment of youth into armed groups. Poorly controlled and porous borders
permitted the cross-border movement of illicit trade and population movements.

In response to these challenges, the Government of Burkina Faso introduced the National Plan for
Economic and Social Development (Plan national de développement économique et social)
covering the 2016-2020 period, which aimed to support public investment, but with provisions for
recurrent spending in education, health and the purchase of strategic food crops lacking. The
deterioration in the country's fiscal space resulted in significant cuts in recurrent expenditure in education,
health and the purchase of strategic food crops. While the revised 2018 Budget supported the
government’s program of targeted free health care (Gratuité des soins) introduced in 2016, the financial
provision remained insufficient to deliver the program. Similarly, the revised 2018 Budget reduced the
allocation to the National Food Security Stock (NFSS) managed by SONAGESS by US$9 million relative to
the 2017 Budget.

All this took place within the context of a food crisis and rising violence in the North, Sahel and East
regions. The food crisis was caused by an invasion of fall armyworms which began in 2017 and extended
into 2018, resulting in crop production losses in more than 90,000 ha of farmland across 13 regions.
According to government estimates, the food crisis led to food insecurity for some 954,000 individuals, of
which 90,000 were considered to be in need of emergency food assistance. The government estimated that
2.6 million individuals were vulnerable to becoming food insecure across 83 of the country's 351
communes. The food crisis led to the acute malnutrition of an estimated 587,000 children under the age of
five, of which 187,000 were considered to suffer from severe malnutrition. The North, Sahel, East, and
Center regions, which were particularly affected by the food crisis, experienced a reemergence of armed
conflict. This led the government to reduce public service delivery in these regions in areas such as
education and health, while raising security expenditures by more than 37 percent between 2017 and
2018. According to the 2019 Budget, security expenditures were planned to increase 26 percent in FY2019-
20. These conditions created a vicious cycle which increased the country's vulnerability to armed conflict.

The food security crisis and the destruction of the strategic stock of food by armed groups resulted
in the need to replenish the NFSS. In 2018, SONAGESS had exhausted 78 percent of its strategic stock
of cereals as a result of the government's Emergency Response Plan -- which provided food and cash
transfers to 605,000 individuals -- as well as the destruction of inventories by armed groups. Violent clashes
by armed groups led to damages to SONAGESS' offices and facilities, adversely affecting its operations.

The insecurity caused by armed groups constrained the government's ability to deliver public
services in education and health. The government estimated that between 400 and 500 schools were
closed in 2018 due to security conditions, leaving 65,000 children in need of alternate schooling. Catch-up
classes, additional instruction time and examinations were required for school-aged children displaced due
to insecurity and conflict. These measures led to unanticipated education spending as additional teachers
needed to be trained, remuneration incentives provided, and equipment purchased. Furthermore, health
facilities were damaged and the security situation induced the temporary closure of facilities. The capacity
to deliver healthcare services was also impeded by the fact that some healthcare workers had left their
posts due to the presence of armed groups, while others were mobilized to treat the wounded.

Burkina Faso required urgent assistance to ensure effective state presence and delivery of basic
public services in the crisis-affected regions. The government’s response was intended to raise


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



               public confidence in the state’s ability to stave off fragility and conflict, and to achieve positive short-term
               outcomes ahead of broader institutional reforms, in line with the recommendations of the World
               Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development. The delivery of basic public services
               required predictable resources earmarked for the crisis, as well as regular payment of civil servants’
               salaries and other operating costs. The government estimated the short-term cost of its response at more
               than XOF 115.0 billion, with a financing gap estimated at more than XOF 50.4 billion.

               The objectives pursued by the project were aligned with the government’s strategy, as well as the
               World Bank’s strategy and ongoing commitments. The 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic
               identified low and unequal level of access to social services including in education, health, and nutrition, as
               key constraints to ending poverty and supporting shared prosperity. The interventions featured under the
               project were fully aligned with the Burkina Faso Country Partnership Framework for FY18–FY23, supporting
               the achievement of Objectives 2.1 (“Support inclusive, high-quality education and skills development”), 2.2
               (“Expand access to reproductive and child health services and improved nutrition”) and 2.3 (“Expand social
               protection to the most vulnerable”). They funded free health care services for women, children under the
               age of five, catch-up exams for displaced children, professional training for teachers, and salary of civil
               servants in the ministries of National Education and Health for January and February 2019 and January
               2019. Project interventions were aligned with the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and
               Violence (2020–2025) to prevent violent conflict and interpersonal violence. The interventions were
               designed to complement World Bank-supported interventions through other engagements, such as, the
               Health Services Reinforcement Project, the Education Access and Quality Improvement Project, the
               Agricultural Productivity and Food Security Project, the Livestock Sector Development Support Project, the
               Burkina Faso Local Government Support, COVID-19, And Resilience Response Project, the Economic
               Governance, Govtech, and Citizen Engagement Project, and the Public Sector Modernization Program.

               The ICR provides a reasonable justification for IPF. At the time of appraisal, an IPF adapted to
               Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints and was considered the most appropriate
               instrument as it allowed fast preparation and disbursement to respond to the escalating multi-faceted crises
               that Burkina Faso was facing. An emergency Development Policy Operation (DPO) or triggering Contingent
               Emergency Response Components (CERC) of existing IPFs were also considered. While a DPO could
               have encouraged the GoBF to adopt reforms, scope was limited by the emergency context and
               uncertainties, including on timely implementation of reforms to allow disbursement of resources that the
               country urgently needed. CERCs, meanwhile, would not have allowed sufficient resources to be mobilized.
               An IPF adapted to Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints was therefore
               considered the most appropriate instrument. In addition to enabling rapid project preparation and
               disbursement, the operation combined emergency assistance with capacity building to strengthen country
               resilience to future crises and shocks." (ICR, p. 27)


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Support the delivery of core services in education in crisis-affected regions

Rationale
The PDO sought to provide catch-up classes and examinations to students who were out of the school
system in crisis-affected regions. It responded to the challenges of providing education to school-aged
children to reduce their likelihood of joining armed groups, and to inculcate them with the skills and the
knowledge which would later allow them to join the labor force and to meet labor market demands. The
geographic coverage for this PDO was expanded from four regions (i.e., North, Sahel, Center and East
regions) at appraisal to 13 regions affected by the security crisis following the project restructuring. The end
targets were revised to reflect the impact of a highly volatile security environment and the COVID-19
pandemic.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes. The project generated four outputs which met their respective targets
by December 31, 2021. First, it allowed for the salary payment of 118,590 staff, including, 73,088 teachers,
employed by the Ministry of National Education to be made during the months of January and February 2019.
This measure prevented important delays in the payment of civil servants in the education sector, which
staved off potential strikes and social unrest. Second, it enabled remedial examinations to be organized in
2018 and 2019, as well as following the restructuring, for 6,612 displaced students (of which, 3,021 were
girls) whose classes were disrupted due to violent attacks against a revised target of 6,600 students
(downwardly revised from 20,000 students) and a baseline of 0. The task team clarified that the original target
of 20,000 was in reference to the original PDO level indicator of “students benefitting from catch-up exams
organized for regions affected by the crises” and that the PDO level indicator had to be reformulated to the
“number of displaced children completing the school year in crisis-affected region” due to security conditions.
The restructuring justified this downward revision in the target given the challenge of mobilizing students to
take part in catch-up exams in crisis-affected regions, as well as the COVID-19 pandemic and the November
elections. Third, it allowed for the training of 54,717 new teachers in crisis-affected regions against a revised
target of 50,000 (the original target of 5,000 constituted a typo according to the project team and the target
was always intended to be 50,000). Fourth, it allowed for the provision of school textbooks in support of the
free education policy. While an intermediate result indicator on the fiscal deficit in proportion to GDP was
featured in the Results Framework, and the end target was achieved, this indicator is not relevant as it does
not measure achievement toward the objective nor is its timeframe aligned with the disbursements of this
project.

Outcomes. The project achieved the outcome of supporting the delivery of core services in education
in crisis-affected regions. The target on the number of displaced children completing the school year in crisis-
affected regions was met with 6,612 students completing their school year in these regions against a target of
6,600 students (downwardly revised from 20,000 students) and a baseline of 0. The target on the number of
displaced children completing the school year in crisis-affected regions was met with 3,021 girls completing
their school year against a revised target of 3,000 students (revised down from 10,000) and a baseline of 0.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support the delivery of core services in health in crisis-affected regions

Rationale
This PDO sought to deliver healthcare services to women and children below the age of five to improve
health outcomes as it pertained to maternal and child health, nutrition and disease surveillance.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes. There were three outputs under this objective. First, the project
financed a portion of the annual operating costs of public health centers in 2018 and 2019. To limit fiduciary
and safeguard risks, investments and medicine costs were excluded. Second, salaries of public servants
working in crisis-affected regions were paid for the month of January 2019 by the Ministry of Health. This
measure prevented important delays in the payment of civil servants in the health sector, which staved off
potential strikes and social unrest. Third, 9,264,098 medical consultations and follow-up care for women and
children under five were offered as part of the Gratuité des soins program, exceeding the target of 9,000,000
medical consultations. While an intermediate result indicator on the fiscal deficit in proportion to GDP was
featured in the Results Framework, and the end target was achieved, this indicator is not relevant as it does
not measure achievement toward the objective nor is its timeframe aligned with project disbursements.

Outcomes. The project achieved the outcome of supporting the delivery of core services in health in the
crisis-affected regions, with 9,264,098 medical care acts offered to women and children under the age of five
against a target of 9,000,000 (upwardly revised from 15,000) and a baseline of 0. The medical care acts were
defined as actions and services provided to promote and maintain a patient’s health, and included assisted
childbirth, caesarean sections, care during pregnancy, screening for precancerous lesions of the cervix, and
consultations for pregnant women and children under the age of five.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance food security readiness

Rationale
The PDO sought to replenish SONAGESS' strategic food stocks to enhance the country's food security in
order to support the delivery of basic food supplies to vulnerable individuals in crisis-affected regions.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes. There are a number of outputs generated under this objective. First,
40,000 tons of maize, millet, and sorghum were purchased by December 31, 2021 to replenish
SONAGESS’ strategic food stock meeting the project target. Second, according to data collected by the
National Council for Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation (Conseil national de secours d’urgence et de
réhabilitation), a government body charged with the coordination of the disaster and humanitarian crisis
response, basic food supplies were secured for 849,925 individuals (of which 436,362 were internally


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



                            displaced persons) against a target of 400,000 individuals. The corresponding target for basic food supplies
                            secured for vulnerable individuals in regions affected by the crisis was also achieved with 436,362 individuals
                            benefiting from this measure against a target of 200,000. Third, the project allowed for SONAGESS'
                            digitalized stock management plan to be in place by June 4, 2021 against a baseline of no stock management
                            system. Fourth, 35 mobile storage units (i.e., storage warehouses that can be assembled and dismantled
                            quickly) were purchased to ensure the proper conservation of the additional stock of grains purchased by
                            SONAGESS by December 31, 2021 against a target of 30 and a baseline of 0. Finally, a governance crisis
                            response framework which establishes measures to enable an effective, efficient and transparent
                            management of public finances in response to targeted urgent needs of the population in times of crisis was
                            made available by June 4, 2021 against a baseline of no governance crisis response framework. The
                            governance crisis response framework is structured around five thematic blocks: (i) the establishment of
                            overall institutional governance; (ii) the financing of emergency measures; (iii) the implementation of
                            budgetary, accounting, and financial management procedures adapted to the situation; (iv) the guarantee of
                            an ex-post accountability mechanism; (v) and the tools to be implemented, in a cross-cutting manner, for
                            greater transparency of the system.

                            Outcomes. The project achieved the objective of enhancing food security readiness. First, it enhanced food
                            security readiness and resilience to crisis through the purchase of 40,000 tons of maize, millet, and sorghum
                            by December 31, 2021 to replenish SONAGESS' strategic food stock. Second, basic food supplies were
                            secured for 849,925 vulnerable individuals in regions affected by the crisis against a target of 400,000
                            individuals, of which 436,362 were internally displaced individuals (against a target of 200,000).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved the targets of PDO indicators 1, 2 and 3 on supporting the delivery of core services in
                            education in crisis-affected regions, supporting the delivery of core services in health in the crisis-affected
                            regions, and enhancing food security readiness (Table 1). The PDO indicators and the intermediate results
                            indicators linked to each of the three objectives supported the achievement of the overarching objectives
                            pursued by the PDOs.

                            Table 1: PDO Indicators

                                                                                                      Actual
                                                                              Original               Result at
                                                                    Baseline            Restructured
                                     Indicators and IRIs                     End Target              closure            Status
                                                                     (2018)              End Target
                                                                               (PAD)                  (Dec-
                                                                                                      2021)
                            PDO Indicators by Outcome
                            Outcome 1: Delivery of core services in education in the Crisis-affected Regions

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)




                                                                                   Achieved
                                                                                     (Not
 Displaced children completing the
                                                                                   achieved
school year in crisis-affected regions    0        20,000    6,600        6,612
                                                                                   based on
              (number)
                                                                                    original
                                                                                    target)
                                                                                   Achieved
                                                                                     (Not
 Displaced children completing the
                                                                                   achieved
school year in crisis-affected regions    0        10,000    3,000        3,021
                                                                                   based on
       of which girls (number)
                                                                                    original
                                                                                    target)
Outcome 2: Delivery of core services in health in the Crisis-affected Regions
                                                                                   Achieved
Basic health care secured for women                                               (Achieved
  and children under the age of 5         0        15,000   9,000,000   9,264,098 based on
              (number)                                                              original
                                                                                    target)
Outcome 3: Enhancing food security readiness
  Enhanced food security readiness
                                         0     40,000       40,000     40,000 Achieved
  and resilience to crisis (metric ton)
    Basic food supplies secured for
vulnerable people in regions affected    0      n.a.    New, 400,000 849,925 Achieved
         by the crisis (number)
    Basic food supplies secured for
vulnerable people in regions affected    0      n.a.    New, 200,000 436,362 Achieved
 by the crisis of which IDPs (number)
IRIs by Component
Component 1: Support the delivery of core services in health and education in crisis-
affected regions
        Months of salaries paid          0        3            3          3       Achieved
 Fiscal deficit contained below 6% of
                                        Yes     n.a.         Yes        Yes       Achieved
                   GDP
                                                                                  Achieved
     Teachers benefiting from the
                                            500 (former                          (Achieved
   professional training organized to
                                         0      PDO         50,000     54,717 based on
  support the regions affected by the
                                             indicator)                            original
                   crisis
                                                                                   target)
Component 2: Replenishment of the strategic food stock of SONAGESS
     SONAGESS digitalized stock
                                        No      Yes          Yes        Yes       Achieved
     management plan is in place
 Number of mobile storage available      0      n.a.          30         35       Achieved
   Availability of a governance crisis
  response framework for enhanced       No      n.a.         Yes        Yes       Achieved
          crisis management


                                                                                            Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)




  Component 3: Targeted technical assistance for enhanced deployment of state resources
     Number of projects that have
                                         0         1          1          1      Achieved
    implemented an IBM approach
  Component 4: Project management
  Audit of Project Financial Statements No        Yes       Yes        Yes      Achieved

  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
No ex ante economic analysis was performed at appraisal. The task team justified this based on the emergency
context. An ex post economic analysis for two of the project’s interventions was undertaken, pertaining to the
payment of public servant wages and the distribution of staple foods to vulnerable households:

Payment of public servant wages. The project allowed the payment of salaries of roughly 10,000 civil servants
working in education and health in remote and conflict-affected areas at the beginning of 2019. Since the benefit
stream considered by the project team consisted of the multiplier effect of a spending of US$29 million on public
servant wages on GDP, which is not linked to the achievement of the PDO, the IEG does not consider the
results of this economic analysis to be of relevance.

Distribution of staple food to vulnerable individuals. Some 40,000 tons of staple food (millet, sorghum, and
maize) were distributed to 849,925 individuals by October 2019, of which 436,362 were internally displaced
persons according to data collected by the National Council for Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation. The
intervention is assumed to have reduced the malnutritional burden of disease through morbidity and mortality
from Burkina Faso’s higher-bound to the middle-bound prevalence over one year. The benefit related to the
reduction in the malnutritional burden of disease was estimated at US$8.6 million for one year, with benefits
expected to accrue beyond one year. The benefit related to the value of lives lost being averted is estimated at
US$4.9 million. Furthermore, the task team estimated that the more efficient procurement of staple foods
generated savings of US$4.4 million. The ICR reports that these savings were in turn used by SONAGESS to
improve its capacity and logistical capacity, which, although not quantified for the economic analysis, are
expected to accrue. The ICR notes that "time and cost efficiency was achieved by purchasing from both large
suppliers (70 percent) and farmer organizations (30 percent) including a women-owned organization made up of
210 members. Commodity losses resulting from food mishandling were significantly reduced due to WFP quality
and safety standards. The UN agency trained approximately 100 SONAGESS staff in Centre-Nord on food
storage management best practices. Two workshops to raise awareness among 40 transporters from all over
the country, on security and capacity issues generated by a fast-developing humanitarian emergency, were also
organized." (ICR, p. 16) The task team could have reflected these additional benefit streams in the economic
analysis.

The ICR also identifies a number of intangible benefits which would support project efficiency. For
instance, the training of 54,717 teachers in CARs will definitely reap benefits for future generations for years to
come ; the catch-up exams for 6,612 students, whose classes were disrupted due to violent attacks, will
increase their opportunities in the future; the improvement of SONAGESS’s management capabilities will
improve the country’s food security for years to come; the transfers to support public health centers and medical
consultations financed by free health care excluding drugs will, if sustained, improve the well-being of the

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



population at large and more specifically vulnerable people; and the development of a governance crisis
response framework for enhanced crisis management at the national level will increase the GoBF’s
preparedness to respond more efficiently to a crisis." (ICR, p. 43) The ICRR notes, however, that catch-up
examinations for 6,612 students is not considered an intangible benefit, but a tangible benefit for which an
economic analysis could have been performed.

The task team indicated to the IEG as part of this ICR Review that an efficiency analysis which measures the
cost of each activity (by multiplying the unit cost of each output times the total output) was not conducted. As
such, it is impossible to judge how efficiently the project's funding was deployed.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The project outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory
until the 2021 restructuring given the fact it failed to meet the original PDO level targets on Objective 1. The
project outcomes is rated Satisfactory following the 2021 restructuring with the project meeting the revised and
less ambitious targets on Objective 1. (Table 2)

Table 2: Overall Outcome Ratings Prior to and Following the 2021 Restructuring

                                    Original targets prior to 2021 Revised targets following the
       Rating Dimension
                                            restructuring               2021 restructuring
    Relevance of objectives                                  Substantial
             Efficacy                        Substantial                     Substantial
    Objective 1: Support the
   delivery of core services in
                                               Modest                        Substantial
 education in the crisis-affected
             regions



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



   Objective 2: Support the
  delivery of core services in                             Substantial
health in crisis-affected regions
  Objective 3: Enhance food
                                                           Substantial
      security readiness
          Efficiency                                          Modest
      Outcome ratings               Moderately Satisfactory                 Satisfactory
        Disbursement                  US$93.68 million                     US$6.92 million
    Share of disbursement                  93.1%                               6.9%
Weighted value of the outcome
                                              3.72                              0.34
           rating
     Final outcome rating                            Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk to the development outcome relates to progress with delivering public services and
enhancing food security not being sustained due to the intensification of the security crisis, which is
being exacerbated by inflationary pressures and by the lack of political continuity. The ICR reports
that the conflict has spread to other regions, including, the Boucle du Mouhoun, Center-East, Cascades and
Center-North regions. Some 3,680 school were reported to be closed as of January 2022, with 590,000
children and 14,900 teachers remaining out of classrooms. Some 500 health facilities were reported to be
affected, with 160 being closed in January 2022. An estimated 3.5 million individuals are in need of
humanitarian assistance according to the United Nations. The military coup d’état of January 2022 also
introduced additional uncertainty regarding the government's ability to address these multifaceted challenges
and maintain the fiscal deficit below 6 percent of GDP in 2022. The war in Ukraine is also leading to higher
inflation due to the rising cost of fuel, and agricultural products and inputs, eroding the population’s
purchasing power, and thereby raising their vulnerability to join armed groups.

The ICR recognized that the project made gains with regards to the three PDO indicators in the short-
term, but that additional financial resources and technical assistance are required to consolidate and
build upon gains in light of the evolving context. The ICR states that "the project supported the increase
of the strategic stock of SONAGESS to 60,000 tons by January 2021, beyond the recommended level of
50,000 tons. However, stocks replenished by the project were used to support IDPs and vulnerable people
affected by the worsening security crisis, COVID-19, and floods. Therefore, stock levels have plummeted
since March 2021, reaching 13,000 tons by December 2021. As a result, at project closure, there was a need
to further replenish the stock with at least 37,000 tons of cereals to face the upcoming food security crisis.
Additional support is also required to unblock governance challenges to service delivery, helping consolidate
and build upon current gains within the rapidly evolving country context." (ICR, p. 27) Governance challenges
related to human resources management, and financial management and procurement challenges.
Challenges in human resources management pertained to the high concentration of civil servants at the
central rather than at the local level, the inefficient cooperation between the central and local governments,
and the inadequate regulation to manage internally displaced civil servants. Financial management and

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



procurement challenges related to delays in fiscal transfers from the central to local governments, the
insufficient amount of money being transferred from the central to the local governments, poor budget
planning, and inadequate procurement procedures.

The ICR states that risks to the sustainability of development outcomes will be partly addressed by
the Burkina Faso Local Governance for Basic Services and Resilience Program with planned Board
delivery in FY23. This project is expected to respond to some of the challenges presented in this review and
to specific population needs at the decentralized level. The project will place significant emphasis on state
redeployment for service delivery, with plans to invest in prevention, build resilience, and respond to
emergency crises. The project is informed by the recommendations of the 2019 World Bank Risk and
Resilience Assessment, the Governance Strategy for the Sahel, and findings of functional reviews carried
out in four key service delivery ministries (Labor and Civil Service, Education, Health, and Justice).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PAD articulated the link between project activities and PDO results indicators. The results chain was
  further elaborated in the 2021 Restructuring Paper.

  While IEG agrees that the PDOs were highly relevant to the country context, it is not clear how project
  design was linked to the undertaking of broader institutional reforms to address the underlying causes of
  fragility and conflict.

  IEG concedes with the project team that the speed of project preparation impeded quality-at-entry. As the
  ICR indicates, 95 percent of the project financing was disbursed within the first two weeks of project
  implementation. This most likely contributed to the shortcomings pertaining to the design of the M&E
  framework, which led to ambiguities regarding M&E responsibility and inappropriate results targeting. The
  task team indicated that the FY18 results data were not made available to the task team before or during
  the first supervision mission in 2019 and as a result, more realistic targets at appraisal could not have
  been established. The project was effective over three years starting December 8, 2018. By end
  December 2018, 95 percent of the total project funds were disbursed for expenditures incurred in 2018
  (40 percent) and as an advance for expenditures to be incurred in 2019 (55 percent). By mid-2019, the
  advance was fully used for expenses incurred in 2019 as reported in the audit report issued by ASCE-LC.
  However, the project remained effective for two more years, initially to implement a TA for the
  deployment of State resources (4 percent of total project funds). The activity was subsequently cancelled,
  and in 2021, US$3 million was reallocated to recurrent costs in the health and education sectors
  (Component 1) and recurrent costs for the MFSNF to implement the National Solidarity and Crisis
  Management Program (Component 2). IEG agrees with the project team that project implementation
  costs could have been reduced had the team designed the project such that it would be implemented
  over a one-year period, with a grace period of a few months being offered.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



  Moderately Satisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 The IEG agrees that the project team was proactive in adapting to the fluid security condition by expanding
 the geographic coverage of the project to all 13 regions of the country and increasing the allocation to the
 National Solidarity and Crisis Management Program. But the fact that 95 percent of project financing was
 front-loaded limited to scope of the Bank’s intervention.

 The IEG agrees that planning for capacity building activities in a project where the focus was on meeting
 immediate needs may have caused inefficiencies in project implementation. Unsurprisingly, activities under
 Component 3 on technical assistance for enhanced deployment of state resources could not be completed
 under the project due to condensed up-front stakeholder coordination.

 IEG agrees with the project team that project supervision could have benefited from more frequent
 missions until mid-2020 when full-time in-country presence was inexistent.

 IEG concedes that project performance could have been improved, including, as it related to the
 overshooting or undershooting of some PDO indicators relative to target through a better M&E framework.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The IEG acknowledges the adequacy of the PDO results indicators. The six key indicators and eight
 intermediate results indicators allowed to monitor progress toward the achievement of the PDO through a
 credible results chain. The articulation of the results chain was, however, missing at appraisal. The ICR
 indicates that "[t]he original project design illustrated the links between project activities and PDO
 indicators, but a clear theory of change was only retroactively traced and updated during project
 restructuring." (ICR, p. 21) The ICR states that "three PDO-level indicators were linked to the financing of
 recurrent costs to deliver core services in education and health. These indicators measured the provision of
 free health care to women and children and the number of students and schoolgirls in particular, taking
 remedial school examinations. Three other PDO indicators were linked to the outcome of enhancing food
 security readiness. More precisely, they measured the quantity of cereals purchased to replenish the
 depleted food security stock and the number of vulnerable people benefiting from food assistance, with a
 focus on IDPs. Intermediate indicators were properly linked to activities being implemented and, for the
 most part, they properly tracked the progress toward project implementation." (ICR, p. 21)



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



 There were a number of issues with the M&E arrangements as reported in the ICR. First, project-
 specific M&E arrangements were not documented in a dedicated manual, leading to challenges in
 stakeholders' understanding of procedures and methods for tracking project results. Second, "medical
 consultations" and "medical care acts", which constitute different medical procedures with only 30 to 35
 percent of reported care acts consisting of consultations, were used interchangeably until the project
 restructuring in April 2021. Third, the end targets for PDO indicators did not consider the feasibility of such
 achievements based on past experience. Out of the four PDO indicators introduced at appraisal (excluding
 gender-aggregated sub-indicators), two had significantly underestimated targets and one appeared to have
 overly ambitious targets. Original targets for the number of free medical consultations and the number of
 teachers benefiting from professional trainings were set significantly below the preliminary results of FY18.
 Given the objective of maintaining the provision of basic services, the ICR team believes that the end
 targets in the health and education sectors should have been at least equal to the preliminary results of the
 first semester of 2018. This assessment is reinforced by the fact that while the project was approved in
 November 2018, it retroactively funded recurrent costs in the health and education sectors for FY18. The
 original target of students benefiting from catch-up exams could also be considered overly ambitious
 compared to the preliminary results of FY18.

 The challenges with targeting were identified by the World Bank supervision team and addressed
 through the April 2021 restructuring. The end targets for medical care acts financed by free health care
 in regions affected by the crisis and teachers benefiting from the professional training organized to support
 the regions affected by the crisis were revised upward to better reflect expected results from the project.
 The same was intended for the indicator measuring students benefiting from catch-up exams. While
 acknowledging that the original end target of 20,000 students could not be achieved due to school closures
 caused by the increased insecurity and the COVID-19 pandemic, the team retrofitted targets to actual
 achievement at the time of restructuring. This was not intended to mislead but was reflective of the
 misunderstanding on the part of the team, which should have maintained the original targets, allowing for a
 single ex post evaluation of achievement of the originally foreseen education outcomes that built in due
 consideration for the emergence of unexpected security constraints.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E framework proved to be inadequate, with challenges in explaining large discrepancies
  between planned targets and actual outturns. The ICR states that "as early as February 2019 (three
  months after project effectiveness), there were clear indications that end targets set to measure PDO
  outcomes were not appropriate and needed to be revised. More precisely, the Aide Memoire of the first
  project implementation support mission reported that 29,000 teachers had benefited from professional
  training in CARs in 2018, compared to the project’s end target of 500 teachers. It also reported that, in
  2018, 6,241,254 medical consultations were funded in CARs, while the end target in the RF was 15,000.
  These results were then reported for the first time in the April 2019 and January 2020 Implementation
  Status and Results Reports (ISRs), respectively. However, the significant result variances were not
  properly explained during project implementation, except that the project performance had significantly
  exceeded targets. There was therefore a missed opportunity to revise targets much earlier into project
  implementation than the eventual April 2021 project restructuring." (ICR, p. 23)

  The M&E framework did not allow for direct engagement with project beneficiaries. While a
  grievance redress mechanism was established by the Project Coordination Unit, the front-loading of
  activities did not allow for grievances to be addressed and considered in project implementation.

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



  Furthermore, the complaints management committees in the Center and North regions were established
  but only project completion. Contrary to what was initially planned, the project did not put in place a
  mechanism to engage with its beneficiaries on time. The ICR also states that "while the project
  succeeded in establishing an IBM system, it could not be used by the PCU to monitor the implementation
  of project activities. This was due to the IBM approach requiring an electronic list of IDPs, while IDPs
  were listed manually at the time of project implementation. However, the project financed the deployment
  of the IBM approach on the Social Safety Nets Project (P124015). As a result, by its closure, the project
  had not succeeded in putting in place the promised robust mechanism to ensure feedback from its
  beneficiaries." (ICR, p. 23)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR indicates that the M&E framework developed for this project informed the discussions during
  the mid-term review. The ICR concedes, however, that some of the targets of the M&E framework
  should have been reconsidered prior to the 2021 restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   None noted. There was no environmental assessment conducted at appraisal or at the ICR stages.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   None noted.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended positive or negative impacts reported in the ICR or through the interview with
   the task team.




d. Other
   First, the project reduced the incidence and depth of poverty. The ICR indicates that "the project has
   made key contributions toward alleviating the high costs of health services to the most vulnerable,

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



   supplementing insufficient public financing of the health sector, and temporally mitigating low and unequal
   access to education for a subset of school children in areas affected by widescale school closures. Overall,
   the project maintained a focus on CARs, benefiting the most vulnerable populations, including IDPs and
   flood-affected populations in need of food and access to basic services, ensuring that food was distributed
   to close to 840,000 people in need." (ICR, p. 18)

   Second, the project emphasized the provision of education and healthcare services targeting girls
   and women. As indicated earlier, the key outcome indicator under Objective 1 allowed 3,021 girls out of a
   total of 6,612 displaced children to complete their school year in affected regions, representing 46 percent
   of the total number of children. Also, as indicated earlier, the key outcome indicator under Objective 2
   allowed more than 9 million medical care acts for women and children under the age of five. This included
   assisted childbirth, caesarean sections, prenatal and postnatal care, emergency obstetric care, and
   screening for precancerous lesions of the cervix and breast cancer. Furthermore, the provision of
   healthcare services to children below the age of five was viewed as directly benefiting women, who are the
   main caretakers to children, especially among the poor and vulnerable.

   Third, the project strengthened the institutional setting for supporting basic public service delivery
   and enhancing food security in crises situations. The project was designed to strengthen the GoBF’s
   capacity to respond to crises by funding the salary payments of civil servants, and operating expenditures,
   in targeted sectors and regions. The ICR states that "this has enabled the GoBF to better absorb the impact
   of various shocks and maintain delivery of essential services in CARs ahead of undertaking broader longer-
   term institution reforms." (ICR, p. 18) With regard to the objective of enhanced food security, the ICR states
   that "other key project inputs toward equipping the GoBF to better manage crises include the new crises
   response framework, additional food storage capacity, and the new computerized stock management
   system." (ICR, p. 18)



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The IEG concurs with the lessons drawn from the ICR, which are:

    1. The speed of disbursements is supported by prior knowledge of a government's financial
       management capacity and expanded reliance on ex post controls. A detailed assessment of
       the Government’s financial management capacity early during implementation and expanded


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)



        support to implement risk mitigating measures are therefore essential to provide reasonable
        fiduciary assurance in rapid response investment operations." (ICR, p. 28)
     2. The eligibility criteria for retroactive payments must be clearly communicated to
        governments. In order to reduce reputational, fiduciary, and environmental and social
        safeguard risks, the task team ensured that retroactive payments to salaries for defense and
        security forces, civil works and other construction; medical drugs, and fuel, vehicles,
        equipment purchases, and staff costs paid outside the payroll were excluded. This was
        particularly important given that 40 percent of the total financial envelope for the project was
        allocated to funding retroactive expenses.

In addition to these lessons, it would be important for project teams to coordinate an emergency
operation of this nature with an operation that aims at addressing the underlying drivers of fragility
and conflict in order to ensure that immediate gains reaped through an emergency operation can be
sustained over time.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is judged Substantial. The ICR document provides a relatively detailed analysis of the
project context, the objectives which were sought by the project, and the achievement of results. The overview
of World Bank performance, the M&E, and other issues were also relatively detailed and clear. The ICR could
have been improved if the task team undertook analysis to measure the efficiency with which the financial
resources allocated through this project generated outputs, and at explaining how the targets for the indicators
in the Results Framework were established. For example, it is not clear how the end target of 50,000 teachers
benefitting from the professional training organized to support the regions affected by the crisis was determined
while the end target of only 6,600 displaced children completing the school year in crisis-affected regions was
established, and the ICR should have provided the rationale for these targets.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BF: Emergency Recurrent Cost Fin.Project (P169486)




                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
