     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023007

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151869                                    BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Burundi                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0570                                  30-Jun-2022                                         38,018,542.41

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jun-2016                                30-Jun-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            55,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             39,056,858.15                                              0.00

 Actual                                         38,018,542.41                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Chikako Miwa                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (PACSC) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA. page 5) was almost identical (except where underlined) to the
   one in the Project Appraisal Document (paragraph 24) aimed to:

   "increase coffee productivity and improve its quality among small-scale coffee growers in the
   Recipient's territory." The underlined section was stated in the PAD as "in Burundi."


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

   1. To increase coffee productivity among small-scale coffee growers in the Recipients territory.

   2. To improve coffee quality among small-scale coffee growers in the Recipients territory.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Institutional strengthening and value chain governance (appraisal cost: US$8.64 million, actual
   cost: US$5.39 million). This component would streamline the sector’s governance structure by: (i)
   reviewing and adapting the current institutional framework to improve its effectiveness and efficiency; (ii)
   improving the dialogue among the main public and private actors so that they resolve value chain
   bottlenecks; (iii) strengthening the capacity of the key organizations overseeing the sector so that they can
   provide the needed services to their members and promote an enabling business environment; (iv)
   enhancing the position of women and youth in the coffee sector value chain; and (v) establishing an
   information/management system for the sector. This component included the following five sub-
   components:

   1.1. Streamlining of the institutional framework.

   1.2. Enhancing value chain coordination and public-private dialogue (PPD).

   1.3. Strengthening the capacity of the key organizations overseeing the sector.

   1.4. Women and youth empowerment.

   2. Coffee growers productive capacity enhancement (appraisal cost: US$47.04 million, actual cost:
   US$24.73 million). This component aimed to enhance, on an economic and sustainable basis, the
   productive capacity of small coffee growers so as to increase coffee production, reduce the cyclical swings
   of production and improve cherry quality. For its implementation, the project would make use of InterCafé’s
   current contractual system for provision of extension services and supply of inputs, as well as the Ministry of
   Environment, Agriculture and Livestock's (MINAGRIE) technical services including its decentralized
   extension network, special programs (such as the national fertilization program) and specialized entities
   (e.g., the Burundi Institute of Agronomy and Sciences - ISABU). The services of the territorial administration
   would also be enlisted for the general sensitization and outreach campaigns. It include the following four
   sub-components:

   2.1. Rejuvenation of existing plantations.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



  2.2. Improving access to fertilizer and agro-chemicals.

  2.3. Dissemination of sustainable agricultural practices including climate change adaptation and
  mitigation.

  2.4. Applied coffee research.

  3. Coffee quality improvement and market access (appraisal cost: US$9.40 million, actual cost:
  US$3.96 million). This component would finance technical assistance, training, infrastructure and goods to
  promote quality enhancement along the entire value chain (field, washing station, dry mill, quality control
  laboratories, storage, etc.). It would also promote the Burundi coffee brand for increased market access. It
  included the following two sub-components:

  3.1. Coffee quality improvement.

  3.2. Marketing and promoting the Burundi Coffee brand.

  4. Coordination, monitoring and knowledge management (appraisal cost: US$7.16
  million, actual cost: US$4.57 million). This component would support: (i) the project administrative,
  technical, and financial management; (ii) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure an efficient
  flow of information and support to all value chain actors, in particular the small coffee growers; (iii) effective
  contractual arrangements with key official implementing partners and private sector operators; (iv)
  monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the project financial, environmental, and social impact
  management; and (v) development of communication activities to publicize and disseminate the project
  results, best practices and success stories.

  Revised Components.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 33) "components remained unchanged during the entire project duration."



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$72.25 million. This amount was revised
  downwards to US$39.06 million. The actual cost according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$38.02
  million.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Grant of US$55.00 million. The amount was revised
  downwards to US$39.06 million after the cancellation of US$19.2 million at the request of the Government
  (ICR, footnote#30 & 32). The actual amount disbursed was US$38.02 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$17.25 million from InterCafé, the
  beneficiaries and the private sector. However, none of these funds were contributed.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 17, 2016 and became effective four months later on October 12,
  2016. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 15, 2019, which was in line with the
  expected time for MTR in the PAD (3 years into implementation). The project closed on June 30, 2021
  which was two years earlier than the original closing date on June 30, 2023. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 37) the earlier than expected closure of the project was due to a "reversal of the liberalization


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



   policy on development of the coffee sector, as well as the project’s institutional arrangements and regulatory
   framework which no longer conformed to the FA, and an impasse on the optimum way forward."

   The project was restructured twice, both restructurings were Level 2 as follows:

   1. On June 30, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$27.91 million, in order to reallocate funds
   between disbursement categories.

   2. On June 25, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$37.93 million, in order to change the loan closing
   date from June 30, 2023 to June 30, 2021, cancel IDA financing in the amount of US$19.20 million,
   and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   Rationale for Changes and their Implication on the Original Theory of Change

   According to the ICR (paragraph 39) "the Government of Burundi's (GoB) January 2020 institutional and
   regulatory reforms had major implications for the ToC." One of the critical assumptions that underpinned the
   achievement of the PDO was the continued liberalization and privatization of the coffee sector. The GoB
   was legally committed per the FA to using ARFIC, InterCafé and CNAC as implementing agencies with
   project resources directly allocated to these entities. However, in January 2020 project implementation
   responsibilities were transferred to a State-controlled entity (Office for Coffee Development), with a
   mandate to oversee the coffee value chain, which ran counter to the legal underpinnings of the ToC.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In Burundi, the coffee value chain presented considerable potential for growth. Its
impact extended to several other sectors through backward and forward linkages (inputs, processing,
transport, financial services, taxes). Hence, it played a vital role in the country for job creation, food security
and poverty reduction (PAD, paragraph 11). The coffee sector faced several challenges including:
persistence of structural deficiencies, low productivity, limited competitiveness, high processing cost, weak
infrastructure and services in the transport sector, and political economy considerations related to land and
agricultural production. The project would help the sector become more competitive, sustainable and
private sector-led.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has a long experience supporting value chains development in
agriculture, for cash crops and food crops. It has supported the coffee sector in Burundi through several
projects in the 1980s and 1990s. It has a comparative advantage for this type of project that addresses the
entire value chain, as it takes an integrated approach to covering all industry operations and players. The
Bank also could coordinate other sources of funding that are generally interested in only some individual
segments of the value chain. The project approach builds on past World Bank (WB) experience in Burundi
and lessons learned in coffee value chains development in the region (Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda and

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



Kenya), and in Central and South America (Colombia).The project was an integrated operation focused on
ensuring the long-term sustainability of the coffee sector by promoting value chain liberalization and policy
dialogue and implementing the required institutional reforms to ensure participation of all actors.

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS, FY13-FY16) that aimed to support the country’s development as an increasingly
stable, competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities for productive employment and
improved standards of living. Specifically, the project contributed to the CAS' pillar of improving
competitiveness by strengthening the country’s largest employment sector, expanding research and
extension services, assisting farmers’ organizations, establishing marketing strategies for high quality
coffee and promoting crop diversification in coffee areas. The PDO was also in line with two main pillars of
the Bank's Strategy for Africa: (i) Competitiveness and Employment by promoting profitable public-private
partnerships for coffee commercialization and strengthening the coffee value chain which is a labor-
intensive sector; and (ii) Vulnerability and Resilience through the promotion of Sustainable Water and Soil
Management (SWLM) practices supporting the adaptation to climate change, building resilience against the
impacts of droughts and other agriculture climate-related risks. Finally, the PDO was also in line with Bank’s
goal of promoting shared prosperity and reducing poverty jobs.

At completion, the PDO remained in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY19-
FY23), specifically its two priority areas: (i) strengthening human capital; and (ii) strengthening the
fundamental foundations for economic and social resilience. The project was also fully aligned with the: (i)
Bank's Strategy for Africa (2019-23) that aimed to create sustainable and inclusive growth, strengthen
human capital and build resilience to fragility and climate change; and (ii) the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP II, 2012-2015), Burundi’s major blueprint for poverty reduction and economic development at
the time of project design.

Consistency with the Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the National Coffee
Strategy (2015-2021). The strategy aimed at a sustainable and profitable industry for the benefit of all
stakeholders, especially small-scale coffee growers. Under the strategy, the coffee production target was
aimed to reach 30,000 tons by the year 2021 from the current 15,000 tons, with the increased production
volumes being accompanied by an increase in quality to reach at least 75% of fully washed coffee from the
current 50-60%.

At completion, the PDO was no longer in line with the Government priorities for the coffee sector. The
context of this change started in January 2020 when the government of Burundi negated the agreed-on
sector liberalization process. This change had far-reaching and significant negative consequences as it
impacted achievement of the PDO and led to early project closure two years ahead of the initial closing
date (ICR, paragraph 40).

Summary of the Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and focused. The
PDO was in line with the Bank and Government strategies at appraisal. However, at completion the
Government priorities changed as noted above, which hindered the achievement of the PDO. The
Government sponsored institutional and regulatory reforms in January 2020 that distorted the agreed-on
strategic orientations for the coffee sector and changed the project implementation modality. Therefore,
Relevance of Objectives is rated Modest.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                          Page 5 of 20
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To increase coffee productivity among small-scale coffee growers in the Recipients territory.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would implement two groups of
                activities: (i) strengthening value chain institutions and governance; and (ii) enhancing coffee producers'
                productive capacity. Through the first group of activities, the project would support strengthening institutional
                capacity of InterCafé, ARFIC and the National Consortium of Coffee Growers Associations (CNAC) on value
                chain management, developing a legal framework for private-public partnership dialogue, and providing
                training to and implementing subprojects for women and youth stakeholders. These activities and succeeding
                outputs were expected to contribute to the short-term outcome of the public system and governance to
                support the stakeholders of coffee value chains strengthened. Through the second group of activities, the
                project would also support the provision of rejuvenation and fertilization packages and the extension of the
                Good Agricultural Practice (GAP). These activities and succeeding outputs were expected to contribute to the
                short-term outcomes of the coffee outputs sustained and the cash-flow and food production maintained. In
                addition, the project would support enhancing the applied research on coffee, which was expected to
                contribute to the short-term outcome of the production of planting material and new varieties improved. All the
                above short-term outcomes were expected to contribute to the PDO-level outcome of the coffee productivity
                enhanced. The anticipated long-term outcome was the creation of an enhanced professional and sustainable
                coffee value chain that would fairly compensate all actors and produce high-quality coffee.

                The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. Strong
                government commitment and political will to fully liberalize the coffee value chain; 2. No major adverse
                climatic events; 3. Political stability and no social unrest; and 4. Good prices on international marketed
                Burundi coffee.

                The stated activities were directly linked to the objective in a plausible causal chain. A key assumption for
                project implementation underlying the ToC was the Government’s continued strong commitment and political
                support to liberalize the coffee value chain. In January 2020, the Government of Burundi reversed their
                commitment to liberalize the coffee value chain and this in turn undermined the achievement of the PDO.

                Outputs/Intermediate Results

                1. Institutions and value chain governance strengthening:

                      313,981 direct project beneficiaries were reached, exceeding the target of 300,000 direct project
                        beneficiaries. However, the project achieved half of the final target for women as only 15.6% of the
                        end target were women compared to a target of 30%.

                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)




      The Coffee Act was not adopted by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock not achieving the target.
      77% of coffee cooperatives were legally registered, increasing from the baseline of 31% and
       exceeding the target of 70%.
      Coffee pricing formula was not accepted by InterCafé, CNAC and ARFIC not achieving the target.
      Coffee sector MIS was not in place and not operational not achieving the target.
      Beneficiary satisfaction with project services (including CNAC, InterCafé) reached 97% exceeding the
       target of 70%.

2. Coffee growers' productivity capacity enhancement:

      Productivity increased from the baseline of 0.8kg per tree to 1.2kg per tree, not achieving the target of
       1.6 kg per tree (50% of the target)
      16.06 million coffee trees were replanted almost meeting the target of 16.50 million (97% of the
       target).
      18.92 million coffee trees were rejuvenated through full stumping exceeding the target of: 18.75
       million.
      6,498.14 ha were established with improved intercropping systems, almost meeting the target of 7,050
       ha (92% of the target).
      97,687 producers adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project, exceeding
       the target of 90,000 producers.

In addition to the results measured by the results framework, the ICR reported the following outputs and
intermediate results, which did not have any formal targets.

      The project supported the rehabilitation of the Burundi Institute of Agricultural Sciences (ISABU)
       Kayanza research station comprising biotechnology and phytopathology laboratories, and training and
       documentation center.
      13 tons of coffee seeds were produced by ISABU.
      14,315 man/days training on GAPs based on Farmer Field School (FFS) were provided with the
       establishment of 72 demonstration plots.

Outcome

      The project did not achieve the envisioned results for strengthening value chain institutions and
       governance. The project achieved only one positive result regarding registration of coffee
       cooperatives. Following the coffee sector institutional and regulatory reforms in January 2020, the
       Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Livestock (MINEAGRIE) was unable to prepare the Coffee
       Act and regulatory documents that would have preserved the liberalization reforms agreed under the
       2015 Coffee Strategy. Also, ARFIC, InterCafé and CNAC were no longer able to achieve the update of
       the coffee pricing formula and implementation of a sector Management information System (MIS),
       since project implementation responsibility was removed from them (ICR, paragraph 45). Also, the
       MIS based on the geo-tagging of coffee areas using satellite imagery was not completed (ICR,
       paragraph 45). The project reached 313,981 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of
       300,000 direct project beneficiaries. However, the project achieved half of the final target for women
       as only 15.6% of the end target were women compared to a target of 30%.


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)




      The project also did not achieve the envisioned results from enhancing coffee growers' capacity and
       productivity. By project completion, the increase in coffee productivity achieved was 50% of the final
       project target (an increase of 0.4 kg per tree against 0.8 kg per tree expected). The ICR (paragraph
       48) noted that the years 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 were off-production years in terms of quantities
       produced in Burundi. Also, given the reduced project timeframe, the rejuvenated and replanted coffee
       trees under the project did not have enough time to reach full production at project closure (ICR,
       paragraph 48). That said, there was no assurance that given two more years of implementation the
       target of 1.6 kg/tree could have been achieved

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project fell short of achieving its envisioned results for
strengthening value chain institutions and governance as only one intermediate results indicator (out of
four) was achieved. Also, the project only achieved 50% of its outcome target on coffee productivity. It is also
evident that the disruption of project activities after the Government intervention in January 2020 and shifting
the implementation responsibility from AFRIC, InterCafé and CNAC, had a detrimental effect on the progress
of the project towards fully achieving its PDO. Therefore, and based on the results above and the evidence
provided in the ICR, the achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve coffee quality among small-scale coffee growers in the Recipients territory.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would increase cupping capacity,
improve the Coffee Washing Stations (CWSs) operational management, modernize processing, and enhance
road access to CWSs. These activities and succeeding outputs were expected to contribute to the short-term
outcome of the operational quality control procedures improved. The project would also promote the Burundi
coffee brand, enhance market intelligence and innovative promotional activities. These activities and
succeeding outputs were expected to contribute to the short-term outcome of the market network developed
and the market intelligence enhanced. All the above short-term outcomes were expected to contribute to the
PDO-level outcome of the increased production of high-quality coffee and specialty coffee. The anticipated
long-term outcome was the creation of an enhanced professional and sustainable coffee value chain
that would fairly compensate all actors and produce high-quality coffee.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: 1. Strong
government commitment and political will to fully liberalize the coffee value chain; 2. No major adverse
climatic events; 3. Political stability and no social unrest; and 4. Good prices on international marketed
Burundi coffee.

The stated activities were directly linked to the objective in a plausible causal chain. A key assumption for
project implementation underlying the ToC was the Government’s continued strong commitment and political



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



                            support to liberalize the coffee value chain. In January 2020, the Government of Burundi reversed their
                            commitment to liberalize the coffee value chain and this in turn undermined the achievement of the PDO.

                            Outputs/Intermediate Results

                                  The share of coffee production with AA/A/FW1+ quality increased from the baseline of 59% and
                                     reached 65.93%, not meeting the target of 69% (70% of the target).
                                  No data was available on the share of specialty coffee of total exports.
                                  None of new cupping labs became operational in major production areas, not meeting the target of 7
                                     new cupping labs.
                                    24 CWSs and dry mills were equipped with eco-friendly tech/ infrastructure and/or upgraded storage
                                     facilities, not meeting the target of 56 CWSs and dry mills (43% of the target).
                                    No data was available on additional man/days offered by CWSs (disaggregated by gender). The
                                     target was 240,000 man/days.
                                    33 km of rural roads were rehabilitated, not meeting the target of 60km (55% of the target).
                                    No data was available on coffee export procedure processing time. The target was to achieve the
                                     coffee export procedure processing time of 3 days, decreasing from the baseline of 10 days.

                            Outcome

                                  The share of coffee production with AA/A/FW+ grade rose from 59 to 66% (70% of the target in
                                   incremental terms over the reference situation). However, there was no information on the second
                                   outcome indicator (share of specialty coffee in total exports) after the removal of ARFIC, the agency
                                   originally tasked with providing the data for this indicator. According to the ICR (paragraph 52) the
                                   "new Coffee Development Office (ODECA) structure failed to provide any data."
                                  The ICR (paragraph 53) explained that after the changes in institutional implementation arrangements
                                   and the reduced project timeframe, all intermediary results exhibited modest achievements or no
                                   achievements at all. There was no data available on whether or not processing time for export
                                   procedures had been reduced from the referenced 10 days to the project target of 3 days.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project fell short of achieving the envisioned results
                            for improving coffee quality among small-scale coffee growers. While it achieved 70% of the target
                            for production with AA/A/FW+ grade, the share of specialty coffee in total exports was not reported. The
                            project also achieved modest results or fell short of all its targets for its intermediate results indicators. This
                            under achievement was directly related to change in implementation arrangements and shortened project
                            timeframe. Therefore, the achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)




  Rationale
  Overall Efficacy is rated Modest. The project fell short of achieving its targets on coffee productivity and
  on improving coffee quality among small-scale coffee growers. Most of the results indicators linked to
  objectives 1 and 2 were under achieved or not achieved. That said, the project achieved good progress under
  the rejuvenation/ fertilization program. Overall, the limited results were linked to the change in the institutional
  implementation arrangement and the backtracking (by the Government) on the coffee value chain
  liberalization process. These changes negatively impacted the entire project and were the key reasons for
  early project closure and under achievement of the PDO (ICR, paragraph 55).



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

     The project economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 22.7% over a period of 15
      years. For the economic analysis, benefits from individual enterprises were aggregated using the number
      of hectares covered each year of project implementation in the five targeted provinces.
     The financial analysis used a without and with project situation. The financial internal rate of return
      (FIRR) with the project support was estimated at 75.5% compared to 36.4% without the project support.
      For the financial analysis (gross margin and returns to family labor) was prepared for crop enterprises
      concerning coffee, and intercrops (red beans and soybeans).
     Benefit streams. Project activities were expected to generate three main benefit streams: (i) increased
      amount of production of coffee and associated crops due to rejuvenation (replanting and stumping), use
      of improved planting material, fertilizer and pesticides, as well as improved cultural practices (pruning,
      weeding, mulching, use of compost); (ii) returns to investments on product quality enhancement mainly
      through processing facilities, as well as investments in access roads linking producing areas to Coffee
      Washing Stations (CWSs); and (iii) benefits from capacity building for farmers’ groups and cooperatives,
      and other organizations down the value chain.
     Sensitivity Analysis. Projected benefits were more sensitive to the gross margin and delay in project
      execution. If projects costs were 30% higher than expected, the IRR would decrease to 14.9%, and if the
      gross margin dropped by 30% either from price or quantity produced, the IRR would drop to 12.4%. A
      two-year delay in expected benefits would decrease the IRR to13.3%. The sensitivity to delayed benefits
      suggests that project implementation delays should be avoided to the extent possible (PAD, Annex 5).

ex post

     Following the same methodology used at appraisal, an ex-post economic and financial analysis was
      conducted as part of the ICR. The project economic benefits computed over a 15-year period of analysis
      were expected to yield a NPV of US$2.3 million and generate an ERR of 6.9%.
     The financial analysis showed that the ex-post FIRR ranged between 92 and 96% without project support
      and between 126% and 135% with the project support.

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



      According to the ICR (paragraph 62) the project resulted in a net GHG sink of 2.99 million tons of CO2
       equivalent, corresponding to 4.0 tons of CO2 equivalent per hectare per year.
      Sensitivity Analysis. The analysis showed that the IRR was expected to drop to 1.6% if benefits were
       reduced by 30%, which indicated a high risk that the project impact would not be positive as far as
       economic profitability was concerned.
      Implementation Efficiency. Project implementation benefited from the administrative set-up of the then
       ongoing Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets Development Project (PRODEMA, P107343). It became
       operational quickly and did not face administrative difficulties which could delay the start of initial
       activities, effectiveness and disbursement (ICR, paragraph 63). The project closed two years earlier than
       estimated. The earlier than expected closure of the project was due to a "reversal of the liberalization
       policy on development of the coffee sector, as well as the project’s institutional arrangements and
       regulatory framework which no longer conformed to the FA, and an impasse on the optimum way forward
       (ICR, paragraph 37)." This early closure prematurely terminated the project activities and undermined the
       achievement of the PDO. Procurement of fertilizer was problematic and difficult to implement and some
       aspects were still under investigation by the Bank (ICR, paragraph 63).

 Summary of Efficiency Assessment. At 6.9% the ex-post EIRR was sharply lower than the ex-ante estimate
at 22.7%. This result indicated that the project was not efficient as expected and failed to generate the expected
benefits to coffee growers. The lower-than-expected efficiency stemmed mainly from the change in
implementation arrangements, which disrupted implementation of project activities, and resulted in the limited
use of available funding resources. The project closed with a disbursement rate at 54%. Therefore, Efficiency is
rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 22.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              6.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Modest. Overall Efficacy was rated Modest. The project fell short of
achieving its targets on coffee productivity and on improving coffee quality among small-scale coffee
growers. Overall, the limited results were linked to the institutional implementation arrangement changes and
the backtracking (by the Government) on the coffee value chain liberalization process. Efficiency was rated

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



Modest. The ex-post EIRR at 6.9% was sharply lower than the ex-ante estimate at 22.6%. The lower-than-
expected efficiency stemmed mainly from the change in implementation arrangements, which disrupted
implementation of project activities, and resulted in the limited use of available funding resources. The project
closed with a disbursement rate at 54%.

Based on a Modest rating for all criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency), Outcome is rated
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following risks that could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Government ownership/commitment risk. The 2020 reversal of the liberalization policy of the coffee
sector and the subsequent regulatory and institutional changes resulted in non-completion of key component
2 activities. These activities were critical to the long-term productive status of the coffee sector. According to
the ICR (paragraph 91), "this risk is assessed as substantial in the long run in the absence of a policy
readjustment and if MINEAGRIE does not have minimum capacity to directly handle project operations
through the General Directorate for Ag Mobilization, Self-Development and Extension (DGMAVEA) and the
Burundi Institute of Agricultural Sciences (ISABU), after the removal of ARFIC, InterCafé and the National
Consortium of Coffee Growers Associations (CNAC)." Also, the Bank-funded Landscape Restoration and
Resilience Project and the Great Lakes Regional Integrated Agriculture Development Project could not be
used as alternative projects to continue support key related activities under this project due to procedural
difficulties.

2. Social risk. The risk related to the non completion of the small investment sub-projects programs for
vulnerable groups (women, youth and Batwas) and upgrade of CWSs regarding environmental features.
While these activities were of small scope and size, they were critical to the project development outcome as
they addressed both the plight of vulnerable groups and environmental issues surrounding coffee processing
(ICR, paragraph 92).

3.Governance risk. The project was under investigation for possible mis-procurement of 4,000 tons of
fertilizers. If the investigation reveals any ineligible expenditures, the GoB would be required to reimburse
them

4. Technical risk. The project was supporting 8 students (6 students at the master’s level and 2 PhD
candidates). The earlier than expected cancellation of the project would jeopardize all the gains accrued so
far and prevent them from obtaining their degrees in various scientific topics related to the coffee sector.
According to the ICR (paragraph 92) "arrangements to fund the remaining costs under the Bank-funded
Great Lakes Regional Project as of completion of this report were approved."




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was in line with Burundi's National Coffee
           Strategy (2015-2021) that aimed at a sustainable and profitable industry for the benefit of all
           stakeholders, especially small-scale coffee growers. The project also contributed to Burundi’s
           FY13-FY16 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) that aimed to support the country’s development
           as an increasingly stable, competitive and diversified economy with enhanced opportunities for
           productive employment and improved standards of living. Finally, the project was in line with the
           World Bank’s goal of promoting shared prosperity and reducing poverty.
          Technical, Financial, and Economic aspects. The technical preparation of the project was
           guided by: (i) the coffee sector development strategy 2015-2021; (ii) the Burundi coffee value
           chain analysis conducted by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in
           2013; (iii) income and production costs of coffee sector actors in Burundi by Trademark East
           Africa, 2013; (iv) Burundi in the Coffee Global Value Chain – Skills for private sector development,
           by the World Bank, 2014; and (v) the diagnostic of the sector competitiveness and development
           strategy, conducted under the World Bank, 2008. The project design incorporated the
           recommendations of the coffee strategy, including support to governance to further liberalize the
           sector, coffee orchard rejuvenation to increase productivity, and enhancement of coffee quality
           and marketing to take advantage of international markets, particularly niche markets (ICR,
           paragraph 87). Design included a number of innovative features most important of which was the
           actual inclusion of the small coffee growers at all stages of the value chain and their involvement
           in the decision-making process to maximize impact (PAD, paragraph 86). Finally, the EFA at
           appraisal showed high economic returns of the project.
          Implementation Readiness. The project benefitted from the administrative set-up of the then
           ongoing Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets Development Project (PRODEMA, P107343). It
           became operational relatively quickly and did not face administrative difficulties (ICR, paragraph
           63).
          Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. The project was expected to have a
           beneficial social impact through improving coffee productivity to small holders, which was
           expected to improve incomes and alleviate poverty. However, the project did not specifically
           monitor the increase in farmer income generated by the project. The project was gender-tagged
           with the objective was to reach 30% of women as part of its direct beneficiaries. Design featured
           activities specifically designed to address the specific needs of vulnerable groups, including
           women in terms of coffee productivity with a focus on environmental concerns (ICR, paragraph
           66). These were to be implemented through a small matching grants program. The ICR
           (paragraph 66) noted that gender activities under the project "were insufficient in scope and scale
           to adequately address gender and other gaps and make a marked difference across
           components."
          Environmental Aspects. Improving the management of coffee orchards was expected to have
           positive environmental benefits. These included: reducing soil run-off and enhancing soil fertility
           through using organic manure and compost, and reducing the need to use chemical fertilizers.
          Fiduciary Aspects. The assessment of the FM capacity of the implementing entities (InterCafé,
           CNAC and ARFIC) revealed some weaknesses and risks mainly in the areas of staffing
           arrangements and capacity, accounting systems, both internal and external auditing, and



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



         reporting arrangements. Despite the mitigation measures financial management was weak and
         procurement was problematic, which contributed to implementation delays.
        Adequacy of Risks and Mitigation Measures Identification. The project overall risk was rated
         High. Nine risks were identified at appraisal. Political and Governance, Macroeconomic,
         and Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability were all rated High. Despite that
         the risk on governance was rated high, it was not expected that the Government would completely
         reverse the liberalization course. Fiduciary risk was rated substantial. While the PAD included
         relevant mitigation measures, fiduciary activities continued to be challenging. This Review finds
         that a High rating was warranted for fiduciary risks as financial management and procurement
         were more challenging than anticipated.
        M&E Design. The Results Framework (RF) included Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant
         and Time-Bound (SMART) indicators that adequately captured all pertinent outcomes. However, it
         lacked an indicator to track the impact of the project on framers' income and another on the
         degree of efficacy of the pursuit of the coffee sector liberalization and privatization reforms (ICR,
         paragraph 80).

  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project benefited from a sound preparation
  process. Design was innovative and implementation arrangements were adequate. While risk
  identification and mitigation measures were acceptable, the project faced an extreme situation with the
  government's decision to reverse the liberalization and privatization reforms. Fiduciary aspects identified
  weaknesses and risks related to financial management and procurement. However, environmental
  aspects could have benefited from further details. Finally, M&E design suffered some shortcomings.
  Overall, QAE had only minor shortcomings and is therefore rated Satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project faced a challenging socio-political landscape especially after the MTR. Challenges
        included: unclear government procedures and processes, the corresponding use of budget
        resources, the increase in the fertilizer subsidy, and COVID-19 pandemic limitations (ICR,
        paragraph 88).
       The Bank conducted 11 implementation support missions organized every six months. Missions
        were conducted in close collaboration with key sector stakeholders, which facilitated supervision
        coordination and maintained the momentum of political/strategic dialogue among all the different
        stakeholders. Supervision missions in 2020 and 2021 were conducted virtually due to the Covid-19
        pandemic restrictions.
       In between support missions, the Bank project team systematically responded to the client’s project
        team requests (for non-objection or technical advice) in a timely manner. The project
        implementation unit benefitted from regular implementation support and training (ICR, paragraph
        88).


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



       The ICR (paragraph 88) described discussions with the client as "fractious discussions" sometimes.
        It took more than a year for the World Bank and GoB to reach the final decision to close the project
        early. The Bank and the Government faced an impasse on the coffee sector governance which
        eventually resulted in the decision to close the project early. The ICR (paragraph 80) correctly
        pointed out that the availability of data on the progress of the liberalization and privatization reform
        could have potentially helped the Bank team with their discussion with the Government prior to their
        decision to revert the sector back to State control. However, M&E lacked qualitative surveys that
        would have provided further insight about key issues such as the additional employment generated
        by coffee processing facilities and the impact of the increase in producer income.
       The ICR (paragraph 89) correctly pointed out several options that could have been pursued to save
        the project including revising the PDO and /or adjusting the results targets. The ICR also noted that
        "both parties could have immediately embarked on a practical course to use the remaining project
        funds for the ongoing technical programs under Component 2 that were proving extremely useful as
        indicated at MTR (e.g., coffee orchard replanting, full stumping and fertilization programs)."

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. Prior to the MTR supervision was successful in
 steering the project activities and achieving notable results. However, after MTR and the impasse with the
 Government on the coffee sector governance, supervision struggled to keep the project activities going.
 Eventually the project closed two years early and 44% of the project grant funding had to be cancelled.
 This had detrimental impact on achieving the PDO. Bank supervision should have done more to avoid this
 situation and ensure the continuation of the project. Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately
 Unsatisfactory.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline between
 OPCS and IEG.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) or results chain. Nevertheless, the ICR included
        an ex-post ToC that was constructed based on the PDO, the project activities and
        the results indicators as reported in the PAD. The activities in the ToC were directly linked to the
        PDO in a plausible causal chain. The ToC also included four critical assumptions that underpinned
        the achievement of the PDO.
       M&E design envisioned an integrated MIS for the entire sector for use by the entities in charge of
        sector regulation and control, and those representing stakeholders, to elicit their participation and
        inform the dialogue of the different parties within the sector. The M&E system was expected


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



        to integrate geo-referenced data and associated GIS mapping outsourced to specialized bodies to
        gauge the evolution of coffee production.
       The Results Framework included core indicators to assess the project impact on beneficiaries;
        and specific outcome and intermediate indicators to assess the impact of activities per component
        and for the entire project. Most RF indicators were devised on a Specific, Measurable, Achievable,
        Relevant and Time-Bound (SMART) basis.
       However, the RF lacked two critical indicators, first, an indicator to assess the project impact on the
        income of targeted producers, and second, an indicator to assess the degree of efficacy of the
        pursuit of the liberalization and privatization reform and the continued existence of the related
        institutions (ICR, paragraph 80). The ICR (paragraph 80) correctly pointed out that the availability of
        data on the progress of the liberalization and privatization reform could have potentially helped the
        Bank team with their discussion with the Government prior to their decision to revert the sector back
        to State control.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E activities were managed through the PIU and implemented through three entities: ARFIC,
         InterCafé and CNAC, where each entity collected data on their respective contribution to project
         implementation. Specifically, ARFIC would produce information on the quality of exports and the
         processing time to complete coffee export procedures, InterCafé in coordination with
         MINEAGRIE’s extension directorate would collect data on the evolution of the various project-
         supported coffee enhancement activities; and CNAC would help undertake the satisfaction
         surveys using its networks with producers on the ground (ICR, paragraph 81).
        According to the ICR (paragraph 81) "the system worked reasonably well up until the MTR."
         The M&E unit at the PIU coordinated data collection across the relevant institutions and
         processed and summarized data adequately. However, M&E lacked qualitative surveys that would
         have provided further insight about key issues such as the additional employment generated by
         coffee processing facilities and the impact of the increase in producer income.
        M&E implementation was negatively impacted by the institutional changes which disrupted the
         implementation arrangement. This resulted in the lack of data collection on several intermediate
         outcome indicators (see section 4 for more details).



c. M&E Utilization
       Prior to the MTR, the data generated through the M&E system informed the RF and successfully
         tracked the project progress on most activities. However, the system failed to establish a proper
         MIS system for the sector as envisioned under project design (ICR, paragraph 82).
        M&E utilization was undermined when the implementation arrangement changed and the new
         implementing entity failed to track the project progress and data on several indicators were not
         collected.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design had shortcomings related to the lack of indicators
  to track income and the progress on the liberalization process. M&E implementation was mixed. M&E
  activities were implemented as expected prior to the MTR; however, these activities were disrupted after


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



  the MTR. Finally, M&E utilization was undermined with the disruption of the project's implementation
  arrangement. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category B (Partial Assessment). It triggered four safeguard
   policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Pest Management
   (OP 4.09); and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10 ). The environmental impacts were
   expected to be of a small-scale and site specific, as well as remediable. These were linked to: (i) the coffee
   plantations rejuvenation program and increased use of fertilizers and changes in agricultural
   pest management practices which, on balance, were more likely to be environmentally positive; (ii) civil
   works to upgrade the CWSs; and (iii) rehabilitation of rural access roads. These policies were addressed
   through the following safeguards instruments prepared by the GoB and approved by the Bank: (i) an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Pest Management Plan (PMP); (iii) an
   Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP); and (iv) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). These
   documents were sent by the Bank to InfoShop (March 20, 2015) and subsequently publicly disclosed.

   The ICR did not explicitly include a statement on the compliance of the project with Bank's safeguard
   policies, but stated that an environmental and social safeguards audit concluded that "overall, project
   activities conformed to the environmental and social standards (ICR, paragraph 86)." The ICR also did not
   specifically discuss any of the triggered safeguard policies and whether the project activities generated
   environmental or social impacts during implementation and, if so, to what extent the project addressed them
   through the planned mitigation activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). Overall, FM was weak. The ICR (paragraph 84) reported that FM
   performance remained Unsatisfactory at project closure due to: (i) delayed transmission of the internal
   auditor's project audit reports to the World Bank by the PIU; (ii) involvement of the PIU in accepting 4,000
   tons of fertilizer that did not meet contractual specifications (according to the ICR footnote#44: this matter
   is currently part of a complaint submitted to the World Bank’s Integrity unit and remains to be resolved); (iii)
   the project’s disbursement date deadline was extended to process some payments at project closure; and
   (iv) ineligible expenses that according to the ICR (paragraph 84) were resolved. The ICR did not provide
   further information regarding external audit reports and whether any were qualified.

   Procurement. Procurement was challenging during the project implementation as the PIU had limited
   experience in Bank's procurement procedures. Procurement weaknesses included: lack of proper

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



   procurement planning and contracts packaging (especially for large contracts); weak management of the
   procurement process to minimize delays and limited follow-up on implementation of the procurement
   plan; inadequate planning in sequencing project activities; insufficient proactivity in dealing with the
   procurement process; and inadequate record keeping and document management system. There were
   also significant delays in the procurement of fertilizers and fungicides. Procurement improved at a later
   stage of the project after recruiting an additional procurement specialist with experience in the Bank's
   procedures per the Bank’s recommendation (ICR, paragraph 85).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately             Moderately                  Quality of Supervision was rated
Bank Performance
                                Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory              Moderately Unsatisfactory.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. In a FCV context, having more flexible procedures to transfer funds across the World
Bank country portfolio in an emergency can increase disbursement rates. The absence of a
flexible procedure to transfer funds under this project resulted in cancelling US$19.2 million, about a
third of the grant funding.

2. Setting farm level prices at a sufficiently high level can incentivize producers to invest
more of their resources and efforts into crop production. Enhancing farmer incentives through
better pricing can result in higher yields and improved coffee quality. Higher volumes of quality, fully
washed coffee can, in turn, lead to lower per unit processing costs and to more stable and higher
payments by off-takers. Thus, higher prices can contribute to more generous margins across the

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



board, enabling a renewed cycle of investments. This can contribute to a steady growth of Burundi’s
coffee sector

3. Improving rural roads can be indispensable for coffee farmers to reduce time and cost of
transporting fresh primary production to processing points and markets. Coffee cherries need
to be brought to CWSs within 6 hours after harvest to avoid a drastic decline in quality. While
distances are short in Burundi, rural roads are poor and hardly passable during the rainy season.
The project experience showed that producers were particularly satisfied with the 33 km (out of the
planned 60 km) of roads constructed/rehabilitated under the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that both M&E design and implementation had shortcomings. Data
on several indicators were not collected, which not only undermined tracking the progress of activities, but also
hindered a comprehensive assessment of the achievement of the PDO.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections. However, the absence of data
on several indicators undermined the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR discussed the achievement of the PDO based on the available data to the extent
possible. The discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome
indicators and what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to the extent possible to justify most
of the assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was undermined due to the absence of data on several
indicators. The ICR lacked a discussion on any of the triggered safeguard policies and whether the project
activities generated environmental or social impacts during implementation and, if so, to what extent the project
addressed them through the planned mitigation activities. In addition, the ICR did not provide information on the
timeliness of project external audits and whether the external auditors’ opinions were qualified.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. However, reporting on safeguards was limited and did not include an
explicit statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with shortcomings.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BI-Coffee Sector Competitiveness Project (P151869)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                    Page 20 of 20
