     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023037

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P174145                                 DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Dominican Republic                      Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91440                                                                                 100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2020                             31-Mar-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                                   0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                    100,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa              Fernando Manibog            Kavita Mathur                  IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation as stated
in the Program Document (PD, para 27) is: “to respond to the COVID-19 emergency by (i) supporting the
capacity of the health system; (ii) providing income support to poor and vulnerable households; and
(iii) reducing the tax burden on households and corporations.”


                                                                                               Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



For the purpose of this ICR Review, the individual objectives to be assessed are as follows:

Objective 1. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by supporting the capacity of the health system.

Objective 2. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by providing income support to poor and vulnerable
households.

Objective 3. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by reducing the tax burden on households and
corporations.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDO was to be achieved under three pillars (PD, para 27):

Pillar 1. Support the capacity of the health system.

Pillar 2. Provide income support to poor and vulnerable households.

Pillar 3. Reduce the tax burden on individuals and corporations.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$100 million. At project closing, the actual cost
was US$100 million.

Financing. This single-tranche operation was financed by an IBRD loan of US$100 million. The tranche was fully
disbursed on completion and verification of prior actions.

Dates. The Bank approved the operation on June 26, 2020. It became effective on December 17, 2020,
and closed nine months later as scheduled on March 31, 2021.

No changes were made to the pillars or the prior actions during implementation (ICR, para 13).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context. With the largest number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the Caribbean, the Dominican
 Republic has been severely affected by the pandemic. As of May 31, 2020, 17,285 confirmed cases and 502
 fatalities were attributed to COVID-19 and the spread of the disease was straining the national healthcare
 system (PD, para 2). On March 19, 2020, the President declared a national emergency, and social distancing
 measures were adopted (PD, para 2). Pandemic-related travel restrictions, coupled with the plunge in global
 demand for travel services, had a profound impact on the large and economically vital tourism sector in the
 country. Remittances from abroad were projected to decline by 1.7 percentage points of GDP to 5.2 percent of
 GDP in 2020 (PD, para 13). The COVID-19 crisis was projected to reduce the economic growth rate by

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



almost 6 percentage points, disrupting the stable economic growth that the country had been achieving for 25
years and increasing the risks to fiscal sustainability (PD, para 3). Preliminary estimates indicate that the crisis
could cause the loss of between 1 to 1.5 million jobs, which could result in increasing the moderate poverty
rate from 21 percent to 40 percent and the extreme poverty rate from 2.6 percent to 16.4 percent (PD, para 4).
The challenges to the health system and strained ability to respond to COVID-19 were exacerbated by the
country’s vulnerability to severe weather events and the impact of climate change. The country ranked 8th out
of 183 countries on the Germanwatch Global Climate Risk Index in 2014 (PD, para 5). The health sector had
clear links to climate variability through both direct exposure from extreme climate events, such as heat waves,
hurricanes/storms, floods and droughts, as well as indirect pathways, such as climate impacts on water, food,
and air quality (PD, para 5).

Relevance to Government Strategies. The PDO was in line with the government’s short term COVID-19
response program that aligned with the National Development Strategy and focused on public health, social
spending, and support to the private sector (PD, para 21). The government’s COVID-19 response program
enhanced health spending to respond to increased demand for testing and patient care. It also expanded
existing programs on emergency cash transfers to vulnerable households and laid-off workers and developed
new programs to protect independent workers. In addition, it provided tax breaks and liquidity support to the
private institutions through the banking system.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. The PDO was aligned with the World Bank’s assistance
strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2015-FY2018,
which was extended to cover FY2019. The CPS aimed for strengthening social services delivery (Results Area
5) through interventions including supporting health reforms to further improve access and quality of health
services, enhancing health sector governance and spending efficiency, strengthening the capacity of the
Ministry of Health to manage public health emergencies, and implementing inclusive social protection
strategies (CPS, paras 68-69). The Systematic Country Diagnostic 2018 stated the need for improving health
care financing and expenditure efficiency to ensure the quality of health care provision and equitable access to
health services to enhance the accumulation of human capital (SCD, page 85). At closure, the PDOs were
well-aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2022-FY2026. This CPF identified the need
for improving access to quality public service delivery as High-Level Outcome 1 and outlined "enhanced
coverage and quality of health and safety nets" as a key objective (Objective 1.3) (CPF, page 31).

Previous Bank Experience. Over the last decade, the World Bank provided financial and technical support
for the disaster risk management (DRM) and the social protection system, including through: (i) DRM
Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (P159351); (ii) the Investment
Project Financing operation titled Integrated Social Protection and Promotion Project (P147213); and (iii) the
Advisory Services and Analytics on strengthening social protection interventions for disaster preparedness and
response (P164854). This DPF complemented the World Bank’s current portfolio by alleviating liquidity
constraints and addressing cross-sectoral challenges to strengthen the DRM.

The World Bank team at appraisal determined that the macroeconomic situation at appraisal was robust
enough for supporting a DPF operation. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved approximately
US$650 million in emergency financial assistance to the country under its Rapid Financing Instrument on April
29, 2020 (PD, para 20). The prior actions of this operation were based on sound analytical underpinnings
(discussed below).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)




Rationale

Objective 1. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by supporting the capacity of the health system. This
objective aimed to address the gaps in the capacity of the health care system, both in terms of prevention and
treatment.

Baseline conditions. According to the Program Document (para 28), in a scenario where 5 percent of the
population was infected, about 24,000 people would likely require hospitalization, with an estimated 6,000 in
need of critical care, although the country’s intensive care unit capacity was estimated at 800 beds. The
country’s readiness to respond to a pandemic ranked 91st out of 195 countries (2019 Global Health Security
Index). Critical equipment and supplies, including personal protective equipment for health personnel and
ventilators for intensive care, were in short supply globally with escalating prices and delays in delivery time.

Prior Action (PA) 1. As a prior action, the Borrower authorized the use of emergency processes for the
purchase and contracting of goods, works and services related to health care, as evidenced by Presidential
Decree No. 133-20, dated March 19, 2020, as amended by Presidential Decree 144-20, dated April 2, 2020.

The process of procuring medical equipment such as personal protective equipment in normal times takes
about 20 days typically from the publication of the tender until the award of the contract to the selected
contractor.

This prior action was based on sound analytical underpinnings such as the World Bank’s Fiscal Impact and
Policy Response to COVID-19 (2020) and the IMF’s Managing the Impacts of the Coronavirus: Guidance on
Health Spending Policies (2020) (PD, table 5, pages 26-28). This measure was combined with tax exemptions
for the import and sale of medical supplies (referred to under PA 4) to ensure the availability of supplies.

Establishing a legal framework for emergency procedures for procuring health care goods, works and services
was expected to reduce lead time in procurement for the Ministry of Health and an implementing entity of the
Health Contingency Plan, contributing to improved efficiency in the procurement of goods, works and services
related to health care. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

PA 2. As a prior action, the Borrower created a Citizen Oversight Commission for COVID-19 as a mechanism
for monitoring the procurement and contracting management processes for emergencies, as evidenced by
Presidential Decree No. 145-20, dated April 5, 2020.

Shortages of health-related equipment were expected to lead to price increases that required justification. The
emergency procurement processes also had potential risks to be misused for directly selecting firms or
purchasing poor quality goods. Based on the Law 340-06 for Public Procurement of Goods, Services, Works
and Concessions, the Court of Auditors (Contraloría General de República Dominicana) were only allowed to
conduct ex-post audit based on a report to be submitted within 15 days after the end of the national emergency.
Additional oversight measures were needed to enable real time oversight of procurement processes. This prior
action was based on sound analytical underpinnings such as the World Bank’s Fiscal Impact and Policy
Response to COVID-19 (2020) and Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Report
(2015), as well as Transparency International’s Public procurement during state of emergency: Minimum
requirements to ensure the integrity of contract awarded during crisis (2020) (PD, table 5, pages 26-28).




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



Creating the Citizen Oversight Commission for COVID-19 was expected to strengthen monitoring and reporting
of health emergency procurement processes, contributing to enhanced transparency and accountability in the
procurement processes. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

PA 3. As a prior action, the Borrower, through its Ministry of Health, adopted a COVID-19 Contingency Plan to
respond rapidly to the increasing number of cases, as evidenced by the submission to other ministries and
concerned entities of the said plan through the letter of the Ministry MSP-DESP-02029-2020, dated May 29,
2020.

Inadequate capacity for testing, isolation, and treatment in the health care facilities negatively affected the
country’s level of preparedness and operational readiness for health emergencies. A COVID-19 Contingency
Plan outlined key strategies for enhancing emergency preparedness and response, including stewardship,
multisectoral coordination, surveillance, laboratory and diagnostics, risk communication, infection prevention
and control, case management and treatment, and operational support. The Emergency Operations Center
created by Decree 360-01 was engaged in coordinating the response across sectors to ensure the
effectiveness and timeliness of the response. This prior action was based on sound analytical underpinnings
such as WHO’s Strategic preparedness and response plan (2020) and Updated Country Preparedness and
Response Status for COVID-19 as of 14 May 2020 (PD, table 5, pages 26-28).

Creating and implementing the COVID-19 Contingency Plan were expected to strengthen the capacity for
diagnosis, isolation, and treatment, contributing to improved delivery of emergency health care services. On the
other hand, adoption of the plan through the Ministry’s letter was insufficient to ensure engagement of all key
stakeholders to implement the plan. According to the ICR (para 15), the weak ownership by respective
ministries negatively affected monitoring and supervision of activities, which affected the achievement of the
relevant Result Indicator 3 (ICR, para 35). Engagement of private entities was not thoroughly considered in the
prior action. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated moderately satisfactory.

PA 4. As a prior action, the Borrower, through the Customs Directorate General of the Ministry of Finance
(DGA), took measures to release, during the emergency period, importation of listed medical supplies from the
import duty and the industrialized goods and services transfer tax (ITBIS: Impuesto de Transferencia de Bienes
Industrializados y Servicios), as evidenced by DGA notice dated April 2, 2020.

Tariffs were causing additional costs and administrative burdens for importing medical supplies, slowing down
the process and increasing the medical supplies’ sales prices. In addition, the country’s medical imports heavily
relied on a small number of source countries. During the pandemic, some of the source countries began barring
the export of certain COVID-19-related medical products, posing a threat to the medical supply chain. Based on
WHO’s identification of 46 items critical for the surveillance, triage, screening, and clinical management of
COVID-19, the General Directorate of Customs prepared a list of imports to be exempted from customs duties
and ITBIS. This measure was time bound until the state of emergency was lifted. This prior action was based
on sound analytical underpinnings such as OECD’s Tax administration responses to COVID-19: Measures
taken to support taxpayers (2020), the World Bank’s Domestic Resource Management Policy Responses
(2020) (particularly Annex 3: Customs administration and trade measures) and Revenue administration
responses to COVID-19 (2020), and IMF’s Tax and Customs Administration Responses (2020) (PD, table 5,
pages 26-28).

Allowing priority medical equipment and supplies to be exempted from the ITBIS was expected to accelerate
the import process, reduce the costs of imported medical supplies, and diversify import sources, contributing



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



to ensure availability of medical supplies for the health care system to function during the emergency period.
Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by providing income support to poor and vulnerable
households. This objective aimed to enhance the government’s temporary social protection system to support
vulnerable population to keep formal jobs and finance essential commodities including food and medicines.

Baseline conditions. Loss of employment or severe reduction of incomes were caused by business
shutdowns under the national emergency. The poor and vulnerable households faced increased financial
challenges due to suspension and termination of employment contracts and reduction of wages (ICR, para 24).

The vulnerability of these households was exacerbated by climate change effects (such as those caused
annually by the hurricane season and flooding) (ICR, para 11).

PA 5. As a prior action, the Borrower created a temporary solidarity assistance fund for employees to provide
support to vulnerable formal workers of the private sector to offset the economic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, as evidenced by Presidential Decree 143-20, dated April 5, 2020, as amended by Presidential
Decree 184-20, dated May 29, 2020.

The government established the Workers Solidarity Support Fund (FASE: Fondo de Asistencia Solidaria al
Empleado) as a job stability and income support program to provide wage subsidies to formal employees of
companies affected by the shutdown, in order to protect formal jobs of the population with low incomes. The
government program initially planned to last for two months but then extended the program duration until the
end of 2020. This prior action was based on sound analytical underpinnings such as the World Bank’s
Estimation of the impact of COVID on employment and poverty (2020), Jobs Diagnostic (2020), and Public
Expenditure Review (2020), as well as IMF’s Expenditure Policies in Support of Firms and Households (2020)
(PD, table 5, pages 26-28).

Creating the wage subsidy program for low-income population with formal employment in the private sector was
expected to supplement reduced wages and protect their employment status during company shutdowns,
contributing to the prevention of the vulnerable formal workers from falling into poverty. On the other hand, PA 5
focused on only formal workers and no explanation was provided regarding support to informal workers.
Overall, the relevance of this prior action is rated moderately satisfactory.

PA 6. As a prior action, the Borrower created the temporary “Stay Home” Program to deliver an emergency
transfer to vulnerable households, as evidenced by Administrative Resolution No. 001-2020 of the Cabinet for
the Coordination of Social Policies (GCPS), dated May 26, 2020.

Building on the government’s existing conditional cash transfer program supporting 811,000 households, the
government implemented the “Stay Home” Program as an emergency cash transfer program to provide
vulnerable households with cash for food and medicine for two months (April - May 2020). The “Stay Home”
Program increased the amount of monthly transfers to the existing beneficiaries by at least five times and
extended support to an additional 690,000 households who were not receiving any cash transfer before the
outbreak. The government’s existing social registry of the beneficiaries was expanded (ICR, para 50). This prior
action was based on sound analytical underpinnings such as the World Bank’s Estimation of the impact of
COVID on employment and poverty (2020), Jobs Diagnostic (2020), Public Expenditure Review (2020), and
The fiscal impact and policy response to COVID-19 (2020) (PD, table 5, pages 26-28).



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



Expanding the cash transfer program for vulnerable households in terms of the amount of cash transferred per
household and the beneficiary base was expected to support the vulnerable households to purchase food and
medicines during the travel restriction, contributing to the prevention of the vulnerable population from falling
into poverty. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

Objective 3. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by reducing the tax burden on households and
corporations. This objective aimed to reduce economic shocks that individuals and firms faced due to the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Baseline conditions. Loss of employment or severe reduction of incomes were caused by business
shutdowns under the national emergency. In general, the firms were responsible to pay 49 percent of profits as
tax and contributions (ICR, para 12).

PA 7. As a prior action, the Borrower deferred 2019 income tax payments of individual taxpayers, as evidenced
by Presidential Decree 137-20 and Ministry of Finance Directorate General for Internal Taxes (DGII) Notices
61-20, 58-20, 37-20, 23-20 and 21-20.

This prior action was based on analytical underpinnings such as IMF’s Tax and Customs Administration
Responses (2020), OECD’s Tax administration responses to COVID-19: Measures taken to support taxpayers
(2020), as well as the World Bank’s The fiscal impact and policy response to COVID-19 (2020), Revenue
administration responses to COVID-19 (2020), Domestic Resource Management Policy Responses (2020), and
Supporting Firm Resilience – a firms support program for COVID Phase 2 Response (2020) (PD, table 5, pages
26-28).

Deferring the tax payments for individual taxpayers was expected to allow them to allocate the amounts to
finance essential items for their survival during the economic shocks from the pandemic. On the other hand, it
was questionable to what extent PA 7 reached the poor and the most vulnerable populations because those
populations pay little or no taxes. The period of income tax payment deferment was only three months. PA 7 did
not integrate measures to strengthen the tax relief system to address possible external shocks and natural
disasters in the future. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

PA 8. As a prior action, the Borrower deferred firm tax payments to help businesses cope with the economic
impacts of COVID-19, as evidenced by Presidential Decree 137-20 and Ministry of Finance DGII Notices 61-20,
58-20, 49-20, 37-20, 23-20, and 21-20.

This prior action was based on analytical underpinnings such as IMF’s Tax and Customs Administration
Responses (2020), OECD’s Tax administration responses to COVID-19: Measures taken to support taxpayers
(2020), as well as the World Bank’s The fiscal impact and policy response to COVID-19 (2020), Revenue
administration responses to COVID-19 (2020), Domestic Resource Management Policy Responses (2020), and
Supporting Firm Resilience – a firms support program for COVID Phase 2 Response (2020) (PD, table 5, pages
26-28).

Deferring the tax payments for firms was expected to allow them to allocate the amounts to finance essential
items for sustaining their business during the economic shocks from the pandemic. On the other hand, deferring
the firm tax payments for two months was not a sufficient measure to prevent the firms in the economic shocks
from shutting down. PA 8 did not integrate measures to strengthen the tax relief system to address possible
external shocks and natural disasters in the future. Therefore, the relevance of this prior action is rated
moderately unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



 The PDO was relevant to the strategies of the government and the World Bank’s assistance at appraisal and
 remained so throughout the implementation. While acknowledging the strong short-term focus and emergency
 character of this operation (ICR, para 15), a shortcoming here was the lack of clarity in the PDO formulation
 around what development results were expected as a consequence of the program. The former part of the PDO
 formulation, “to respond to the COVID-19 emergency,” did not specify intended outcomes of the program. The
 latter parts of the PDO formulation (“by (i) supporting the capacity of the health system; (ii) providing income
 support to poor and vulnerable households; and (iii) reducing the tax burden on households and corporations”)
 only described activities or intended outputs.

 The prior actions were based on sound analytical underpinnings and, for the most part, appropriate along the
 results chain for realizing the intended objectives. However, the lack of clarity in the PDO formulation negatively
 affected the definition of some prior actions that gave insufficient consideration to longer-term outcomes. PA 3
 did not include establishing adequate implementation arrangements for the COVID-19 Contingency Plan. PA 5-
 8 mainly focused on temporary measures with limited measures to induce institutional reform to address the
 development constraints in a comprehensive manner. Of the eight prior actions, four were satisfactory, three
 were moderately satisfactory, and one was moderately unsatisfactory.

 Overall, the relevance of design is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by supporting the capacity of the health system.

Results Indicator (RI) 1. This indicator measured the average number of days spent by the Ministry of
Health for issuing a contract for health-related Personal Protective Equipment during health emergency.

The average number of days in the emergency procurement process was a direct measure of the impact
of PA 1 on progress toward achieving objective 1. This indicator was measurable. The definition, data
source, and data availability of the indicator were clearly described in the PD (Annex 1, pages 34-36).
Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is rated satisfactory.

RI 2. This indicator measured the percentage of the total emergency procurement processes conducted
under the umbrella of Decrees 133-20 and 144-20 that were monitored by the Citizen Oversight
Commission, as reported in the published Citizen Oversight Commission’s report. This indictor measured
the impact of PA 2 and progress toward objective 1. Measuring this indicator was straightforward as
documenting the monitoring process was part of the activity (ICR, para 34). The definition, data source,
and data availability of the indicator were clearly described in the PD (Annex 1, pages 34-36). On the
other hand, the indicator did not disaggregate data to measure a ratio of satisfactory
procurement processes, which resulted in a missed opportunity to further incentivize stakeholders to


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



improve accountability (ICR, para 34). Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is rated moderately
satisfactory.

RI 3. This indicator measured the number of spaces available in isolation centers, established for COVID-
19 patients during calendar year 2020. This indicator partly and inadequately captured the impact of PA 3
on progress toward objective 1. This indicator was not measurable because the number of units operated
by private entities was not reported (ICR, para 35). Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is rated
moderately unsatisfactory.

RI 4. This indicator measured the value (in RD$) of medical articles subject to tariff and tax exemptions.
This indicator was mostly adequate to capture the impact of PA 4 to measure progress toward objective 1.
This indicator was measurable. The definition, data source, and data availability of the indicator were
clearly described in the PD (Annex 1, pages 34-36). On the other hand, this indicator did not show any
ratio of tariff- and tax-exempted medical articles over the medical articles imported. To what extent the
global price increases of medical articles affected the achievement of the indicator was unclear.
Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 2. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by providing income support to poor and
vulnerable households.

RI 5. This indicator measured the number of formal workers under suspended and active contracts
supported by a cash transfer from the Workers Solidarity Support Fund (FASE: Fondo de Asistencia
Solidaria al Empleado). This indicator was mostly adequate to capture the impact of PA 5 on progress
toward objective 2. On the other hand, there was a lack of clarity in methodology to measure the
achievement of this indicator. No disaggregated data was collected, although data was expected to be
disaggregated based on the sex of beneficiary workers and the modality at appraisal (PD, page 35). No
data was collected on the cumulative number of individuals and firms covered by the program because
the number of participants was recorded for each disbursement tranche separately on a biweekly basis
(ICR, para 38). No target was set for the percentage of female formal workers to be covered under the
cash transfer program (ICR, para 39). Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is rated moderately
satisfactory.

RI 6. This indicator measured the number of “Eating First” households supported by the “Stay Home
program.” This indicator only peripherally measured the impact of the PA 6 and was not clearly relevant to
achievement of objective 2. The “Stay Home program” built on the existing “Eating First” cash transfer
structure that had been supporting the poorest households since before the pandemic (ICR, para 25).
Because the “Stay Home program” used the same cash transfer structure of the existing program, the
number of supported households were unlikely to change after the implementation of PA 6. Moreover, the
methodology to measure the achievement of this indicator was unclearly defined in terms of data
collection and target setting. No data was collected on the cumulative number of households covered by
the program because the number of participants was recorded for each disbursement tranche separately
on a monthly basis (ICR, page 27). No target was set for the percentage of female headed households to
be covered under the cash transfer program (ICR, para 39). Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is
rated unsatisfactory.

RI 7. This indicator measured the number of “Eating First” households supported by the “Stay Home
program” and identified as particularly vulnerable, receiving a top-up cash transfer. This indicator was
mostly adequate to capture the impact of PA 5 on progress toward objective 2. This indicator


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



was designed to measure the vertical expansion of the existing cash transfer program to reach out to the
poorest (ICR, para 40). However, this indicator did not use sufficiently disaggregated data. No data was
collected on the cumulative number of households covered by the program because the number of
participants was recorded for each disbursement tranche separately on a monthly basis (ICR, page 27).
No target was set for the percentage of female headed households to be covered under the cash transfer
program (ICR, para 39). Therefore, the relevance of this indicator is rated moderately satisfactory.

RI 8: This indicator measured the number of new households supported by the “Stay Home program,”
which was the direct measure of an expansion of the existing cash transfer program. This indicator was
mostly adequate to capture the impact of PA 5 on progress toward objective 2. However, this indicator
had shortcomings in data availability and target setting. No data was collected on the cumulative number
of households covered by the program because the number of participants was recorded for each
disbursement tranche separately on a monthly basis (ICR, page 27). No target was set for the percentage
of female headed households to be covered under the cash transfer program (ICR, para 39). Therefore,
the relevance of this indicator is rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 3. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by reducing the tax burden on households and
corporations.

RI 9: This indicator measured the percentage of individuals benefitting from tax payment deferrals related
to COVID-19. This indicator did not adequately capture the impact of PA 7 to measure progress toward
objective 3. No indicator was set to measure to what extent the temporary tax deferrals contributed to
ensuring necessary cash flows for individual taxpayers to maintain their livelihoods under the COVID-19
emergency. In addition, the definition of the indicator was unclear. While there were multiple measures
adopted by the decrees issued under PA 7, the indicator did not define which data source should be used
to measure achievement of the target (ICR, para 42). No clear justification on setting the target to 50
percent was given (ICR, para 42). Therefore, the relevance of this indicators is rated moderately
unsatisfactory.

RI 10: This indicator measured the percentage of firms benefitting from tax payment deferrals related to
COVID-19. This indicator itself would not be sufficient to measure progress toward achievement of
objective 3 in relations to reducing the tax burdens of firms. The definition of the indicator did not clarify
the data source to measure achievement of the target, resulting in the missing data regarding the deferral
of ITBIS from February to March 2020 (ICR, para 42). No clear justification on setting the target to 50
percent was given (ICR, para 42). Therefore, the relevance of this indicators is rated moderately
unsatisfactory.

Table. Results Indicators (RIs) and the Prior Actions (PAs): baseline, target values, actual change
in RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                                                          Actual
                                                                          change
                                      Baseline    Target
                                                           Actual value in RI           RI
                 Associated     RI   (including (including
  RI Number                                                 as of target relative achievement
                    PAs     relevance units and units and
                                                               date          to       rating
                                       dates)     dates)
                                                                         targeted
                                                                          change
Objective 1. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by supporting the capacity of the health system

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



RI 1. Reduction in
average time of
issuing contracts
during the health                                                           Over
emergency for                          20 days 10 days (Jun    9.90 days 100% of
                    PA 1       S                                                     High
health-related                       (Jan 2020)    2020)      (Jun 2020) targeted
Personal                                                                   change
Protective
Equipment by the
Ministry of Health.
RI 2. Percentage
of the total
emergency
procurement
processes
conducted under
the umbrella of
Decrees 133-20
                                                                          183% of
and 144- 20 that                      0% (Feb    30% (Jul      55% (Jul
                    PA 2      MS                                          targeted   High
have been                               2020)      2020)         2020)
                                                                           change
monitored by the
Oversight
Commission, as
reported in the
published Citizen
Oversight
Commission’s
report
*RI 3. Number of
isolation units
available in
isolation centers,                                                         27% of
                                        0 (Dec  4,000 (Dec    1,094 (Dec
established for     PA 3      MU                                          targeted  Modest
                                        2019)      2020)         2020)
COVID-19                                                                   change
patients during
calendar year
2020.
RI 4. Value of
medical articles                        0 RD$ 5,000,000,000 8,885,450,000 177% of
subject to tariff   PA 4      MS         (Feb    RD$ (Jun      RD$ (Jun   targeted   High
and tax                                 2020)      2020)         2020)     change
exemptions
Objective 2. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by providing income support to poor and
vulnerable households
RI 5. Number of     PA 5      MS        0 (Feb 600,000 (Dec 696,882 (Dec 116% of     High
formal workers                          2020)      2020)         2020)    targeted
under suspended                                                            change


                                                                                       Page 11 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



and active
contracts
supported by a
FASE cash
transfer
*RI 6. Number of
“Eating First”
households
                                                                         120% of
supported by the                      0 (Feb 750,000 (Dec 899,554 (Apr
                   PA 6        U                                         targeted Negligible
“Stay Home                             2020)     2020)          2020)
                                                                          change
Program”
receiving a cash
transfer
RI 7. Number of
“Eating First”
households
supported by the
“Stay Home                                                               114% of
                                      0 (Mar 300,000 (Dec 342,511 (Apr
program” and       PA 6       MS                                         targeted   High
                                       2020)     2020)          2020)
identified as                                                             change
particularly
vulnerable,
receiving a top-up
cash transfer
RI 8. Number of
new households
supported by the                                                         180% of
                                      0 (Feb 400,000 (Dec 718,609 (Aug
“Stay Home         PA 6       MS                                         targeted   High
                                       2020)     2020)          2020)
Program”                                                                  change
receiving a cash
transfer
Objective 3. Respond to the COVID-19 emergency by reducing the tax burden on households and
corporations
*RI 9. Percentage
of individuals
                                                                         123% of
benefitting from                      0 (Feb                 61.28 (Dec
                   PA 7       MU             50 (Dec 2020)               targeted  Modest
tax payment                            2020)                    2020)
                                                                          change
deferrals related
to COVID-19
*RI 10.
Percentage of
                                                                         162% of
firms benefitting                     0 (Feb
                   PA 8       MU             50 (Dec 2020) 81 (Dec 2020) targeted  Modest
from tax payment                       2020)
                                                                          change
deferrals related
to COVID-19




                                                                                        Page 12 of 21
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)




                (*) In line with the guidelines, the RI achievement rating has been adjusted downward given the
               unsatisfactory or moderately unsatisfactory relevance of the RI, which did not adequately capture the
               impact of the PA or the progress toward the achievement of the associated PDO.



   Rating

   Moderately Unsatisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To respond to the COVID-19 emergency by supporting the capacity of the health system. PA 1-4. RI 1-4.

                Rationale
                Theory of change (TOC). The TOC of objective 1 postulated that the prior actions for authorizing the use of
                emergency procurement process, establishing a Citizen Oversight Commission, and allowing the priority
                medical supplies to be exempted from the industrialized goods and services transfer tax (ITBIS) would
                contribute to the intermediate outcome of strengthening the capacity of the health care system to procure
                medical equipment and services with transparency and accountability under the COVID-19 emergency. The
                TOC of objective 1 also postulated that the prior actions for creating and implementing the COVID-19
                Contingency Plan would contribute to the intermediate outcome of strengthening the capacity of the health
                care system for diagnosis, isolation, and treatment. These intermediate outcomes were postulated
                to contribute to a longer-term outcome of the improved health system with sufficient capacity to deliver health
                care services for prevention and treatment under ongoing or future emergency situations.

                Critical assumptions included: (i) the temporary measures implemented under the prior actions to procure
                medical supplies and increase facilities for diagnostics and isolation under the COVID-19 emergency would
                induce reforms in the government system to enable them to reintroduce the measures to address possible
                emergencies in the future; (ii) all the main stakeholders were adequately engaged to implement the COVID-
                19 Contingency Plan which required cross sectoral coordination and contribution; and (iii) the human
                resources in the health care facilities were sufficient to respond to the increased workload associated with the
                increased numbers of laboratory testing and isolation units.

                Outcomes. (ICR, paras 28-46 and Annex 1)

                The Ministry of Health reduced the average time of issuing contracts during health emergency for health-
                related Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) from the baseline of 20 days to 9.9 days, achieving the target of
                10 days. The average duration of 9.9 days for the emergency procurement processes for PPE was recorded
                through data triangulation using the government’s reported data and the publicly available data (ICR, page
                25).

                The Oversight Commission monitored 55 percent of the total emergency procurement processes conducted
                under the umbrella of Decrees 133-20 and 144-20, exceeding the target of 30 percent. The target to monitor


                                                                                                                 Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



less than one third of the total emergency procurement processes was insufficiently ambitious (ICR, para 34).
The actual result of monitoring more than half of the total emergency procurement process was satisfactory.
On the other hand, no data was provided regarding what percentage of the monitored emergency
procurement process was assessed as having satisfactory due diligence by the Oversight Commission, which
resulted in limited evidence to measure to what extent transparency and accountability in the public
procurement system were enhanced at scale to address the development challenge identified at program
preparation.

1,094 spaces were established and available in isolation centers for COVID-19 patients during calendar year
2020, not achieving the target of 4,000 spaces. While the government reported that 1,094 beds operated by
the public health care system as the highest number available at any point that year, the number of units
operated by private entities was not reported (ICR, para 35). This outcome was therefore assessed as
modest and is illustrative of the marginal progress made in monitoring the health care services provided by
private entities. No evidence related to the strengthened diagnostic capacity of the health care system was
provided.

RD$ 8,885,450,000 (equivalent to about US$158 million) of medical articles were exempted from tariffs and
taxes, exceeding the target of RD$ 5,000,000,000. Total of 46 medical articles were exempted from tariff and
tax (ICR, para 36). More data is needed to differentiate to what extent the target was set at a low level (ICR,
para 36) and to what extent the global price increase of medical supplies boosted up the achieved (ICR, para
10).

Of the four results indicators for objective 1, three are rated high and one is rated modest for their
achievements. Referring to the TOC of objective 1, the reforms on the emergency procurement procedures
strengthened the capacity of the government to deploy necessary medical supplies in a timely manner. On
the other hand, insufficient evidence was provided to assess to what extent: (i) the transparency and
accountability of emergency procurement processes were enhanced at scale; and (ii) the overall capacity
of the health care providers was improved in terms of isolation and diagnostics, in light of the missing data on
the diagnostics capacity and the capacity of private entities. The achievement of objective 1, therefore, is
rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To respond to the COVID-19 emergency by providing income support to poor and vulnerable households. PA
5-6. RI 5-8.

Rationale
Theory of change. The TOC of objective 2 postulated that the prior actions for creating a temporary solidarity
assistance fund for employees and developing the temporary “Stay Home Program” to deliver an emergency
transfer to vulnerable households would contribute to the intermediate outcome of the horizontal and vertical



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



expansion of the social assistance programs to support poor and vulnerable households under the COVID-10
emergency, resulting in a longer-term outcome of the mitigated risks of the reversal of poverty gains.

Critical assumptions included: (i) the temporary measures to enhance social assistance programs would be
sustained to support poor and vulnerable households in possible emergencies in the future; and (ii) the
government’s capacity to create and implement effective and efficient social assistance programs was
strengthened.

Outcomes. (ICR, paras 28-46 and Annex 1)

The Workers Solidarity Support Fund (FASE: Fondo de Asistencia Solidaria al Empleado) cash transfer
supported 696,882 formal workers, who were (i) under suspended contracts, and (ii) with reduced wages
under active contracts, were supported by a FASE cash transfer, exceeding the target of 600,000 formal
workers. Of the total achieved, 309,696 beneficiaries (or 44 percent) were women.

The “Stay Home Program” supported 899,554 “Eating First” households that received a cash transfer,
exceeding the target of 750,000 households. Of the total achieved, 603,081 households (or 67 percent) were
female-led.

The “Stay Home program identified 342,511 “Eating First” households as particularly vulnerable that received
a top-up cash transfer, meeting the target of 300,000 households. Of the total achieved, 218,896 households
(or 64 percent) were female-led.

The “Stay Home Program” supported 718,609 new households that received a cash transfer, exceeding the
target of 400,000 households. Of the total achieved, 364,223 households (or 51 percent) were female-led.

Three indicators for objective 2 are rated high and one is rated negligible. Referring to the TOC of objective 2,
the cash transfer program laid the ground for strengthening the social registry to identify target populations
and developing delivery systems that can be deployed rapidly to provide support in case of shocks (ICR, para
50). However, the following important observations were made. The “Stay Home program” built on the
existing “Eating First” cash transfer structure that had been supporting the poorest households since before
the pandemic (ICR, para 25). Because the “Stay Home program” used the same cash transfer structure of the
existing program, the number of supported households was unlikely to change after the implementation of PA
6, weakening the relevance of RI 6. No data was collected on a cumulative number of beneficiaries covered
by the cash transfer, as described in section 4. The actual achieved data recorded for those indicators was
the highest number of beneficiaries or households per tranche (ICR, pages 27-28). The targets were set with
a low ambition, considering that the duration of the cash transfer program was extended (ICR, para 25). No
targets were set for the percentage of female beneficiaries or female-led households (PD, page 35). In
addition, regarding the indicator on the FASE cash transfer, no disaggregated data regarding percentage per
modality was reported in the ICR, though the disaggregated data was expected to be collected according to
the PD (page 35). The achievement of objective 2, therefore, is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)




                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      To respond to the COVID-19 emergency by reducing the tax burden on households and corporations. PA 7-8.
                      RI 9-10.

                      Rationale
                      Theory of change. The TOC of objective 3 postulated that the prior actions for deferring 2019 income and
                      firm tax payments would contribute to the intermediate outcome of ensuring cash flows for individual
                      taxpayers and firms to maintain their livelihoods and businesses under the COVID-19 emergency, resulting in
                      a longer-term outcome of the mitigated negative economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.

                      Critical assumptions included: (i) the temporary tax deferrals were sufficient to hold the population marginally
                      above the poverty line back from falling into the poverty; and (ii) the tax deferrals would not affect the
                      government capacity to finance provision of essential public services. According to the PD (paras 51 and 54),
                      these measures would negatively affect tax revenues only in the short-run because the total tax liability of
                      individuals and firms would remain the same.

                      Outcomes. (ICR, paras 28-46 and Annex 1)

                      61.28 percent of individual taxpayers (excluding salaried workers) benefitted from tax payment deferrals
                      related to COVID-19, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

                      81 percent of firms benefitted from tax payment deferrals related to COVID-19, exceeding the target of 50
                      percent.

                      All two indicators for objective 3 are rated modest for the efficacy. Referring to the TOC of objective 3,
                      insufficient evidence was provided regarding to what extent the temporary tax deferrals contributed to
                      ensuring necessary cash flows for individual taxpayers and firms to maintain their livelihoods and businesses
                      under the COVID-19 emergency. The achievement of objective 3, therefore, is rated moderately
                      satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

One objective is rated satisfactory and two objectives are rated moderately satisfactory; hence, overall efficacy is
rated moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                                        Page 16 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDOs were relevant to the strategies of the government and the World Bank’s assistance for Dominican
Republic. The prior actions which had strong analytical underpinnings, were appropriate first steps along the
results chain for realizing the intended objectives. Of the ten results indicators, nine of them met or exceeded
the targets. On the other hand, the achievement of one results indicator on the number of isolation spaces in the
health care facilities was negligible, as described in section 5. The number of isolation spaces in the privately-
owned health care facilities was not measured thus unable to be assessed. There is little evidence any
significant gains were made in this area. Of the nine achieved results indicators, eight of them have
shortcomings in the design to comprehensively measure progress toward achievement of relevant objectives,
as described in sections 4 and 5. Thus, the overall outcome rating is moderately satisfactory as achievement
against the objective had moderate design shortcomings.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership/commitment. Regarding objective 2, there was a potential risk that the expanded
social protection system might not be sustained after program closing. The potential risk was mitigated by
the ongoing discussion on the World Bank’s continued financial support for implementing and expanding an
integrated social protection system (ICR, para 64). The successful existing Integrated Social Protection and
Promotion Project (P147213), which supported the cash transfer program on which the emergency
operation’s cash transfer component was built has been extended. A new program for further expanding
coverage, using the expanded registry of beneficiaries developed under this emergency operation,
is currently being discussed with the government. Further, the government expressed interest in the World
Bank support to strengthening the Public Health system regarding pandemic preparedness and response
capacity.

Exposure to health emergencies. Regarding objective 1, there was a potential risk that another wave of
the COVID-19 pandemic might put further pressure on the capacity of the health care system for diagnostics
and isolation. The potential risk was partially mitigated by the increased number of isolation spaces in public
health care facilities as measured by RI 3. This potential risk could be further mitigated by expanding the
range of capacity monitoring to include (i) the capacity for conducting diagnostics, and (ii) privately-operated
health care services providers.

Environmental risk. Regarding objective 1, there was a potential risk that the quantity and the
mismanagement of medical waste might further increase along with the increasing number of people treated
through the enhancement of medical services, resulting in spreading infectious diseases (ICR, para 49). The


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



potential risk might be mitigated by the World Bank’s regional initiative on Solid Waste Management and
Marine Environment Protection (ICR, para 49). However, no specific evidence was reported regarding to
what extent the regional initiative would provide support on medical waste management in the country.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The World Bank prepared this operation based on its prior experiences in supporting one DPF (CAT DDO),
several IPF operations, and technical assistances (ICR, para 7). To support the country’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, the World Bank disbursed a US$150 million CAT-DDO on March 24, 2020, shortly
after the declaration of national emergency by the President of the country (PD, para 6). This DPF design
incorporated these lessons: (i) mitigating measures to reduce the impact of the crisis on the poor and
vulnerable could yield long-term benefits (PD, para 59); and (ii) using existing programs and systems to
distribute funds for an emergency operation (ICR, para 57). As discussed in section 3, the prior actions
were based on sound analytical underpinnings. However, the formulation of the PDO statement focused
mainly on outputs. The formulation of the results indicators (RIs) did not match with the data sources
available to the government to verify the achievements of results (ICR, para 53). RI 9 and 10 were not
specific and broadly defined, impeding a precise monitoring of the results (ICR, para 53). RI 3 was partially
measurable as the government was able to access data provided by only the public institutions and not the
private entities (ICR, para 53).

The World Bank prepared this operation in coordination with international donors. The International
Monetary Fund approved about US$650 million in emergency financial assistance to the country under its
Rapid Financing Instrument on April 29, 2020, with a recognition that the government was implementing an
appropriate package of fiscal, macroprudential, and supervisory measures, along with monetary easing, to
sustain economic activity during the crisis (PD, para 20). This program was also a part of a broader
coordinated response by the country’s development partners including the Inter-American Development
Bank, the Agence Française de Développement (AFD), and the Japanese International Cooperation
Agency, which provided financing to cover a part of annual fiscal cost of COVID-19 (PD, para 6).

A number of risks were identified at appraisal, including a high risk on macroeconomic aspects and
substantial risks on political and governance, social and environment, and fiduciary aspects (PD, para 66).
The mitigating measures identified to reduce the risks were credible and coherent. The macroeconomic
risks, that were rated high due to uncertainties regarding duration and costs of the government’s policy
responses and contingent liabilities, were mitigated by the government’s interventions on the monetary
policy and the foreign exchange rate (PD, paras 67-68).

There were modest shortcomings during preparation, as discussed in paragraphs in this section. The
World Bank’s performance on design, thus, is rated moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR (para 54) noted that the two-day closing mission held on March 8 and March 15, 2021 was not able to
collect the endline data on the achievements of results for the indicators in the results framework. During the
meetings with government representatives in the closing mission, an inconsistent and partial documentation of
results were brought into discussion. The Aide Memoire was not completed, signed, or circulated. The
data necessary to complete the results framework was collected after the closing mission, resulting in delays in
preparation and submission of the ICR (ICR, para 54).

There were modest shortcomings during implementation. The World Bank’s performance on implementation,
thus, is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The World Bank’s performance on both design and implementation are rated moderately satisfactory, leading
to a moderately satisfactory rating for the overall Bank performance.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

According to joint Government/World Bank estimates, without the social protection measures during the
pandemic, the poverty rate would have reached 29 percent in 2020. Two of the prior actions of this operation
were focused on implementing a cash transfer programs for primarily poor and vulnerable population. The
outcomes would be expected to contribute to reducing the incidence of poverty in the country, though no specific
evidence of this was reported.



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)




b. Environmental

The quantity and the mismanagement of medical waste increased, based on the increase in the number of people
treated through the enhancement of medical services (ICR, para 49). The environmental concern was addressed
by the World Bank’s regional initiative on Solid Waste Management and Marine Environment Protection (ICR, para
49). However, no specific evidence was reported regarding to what extent the regional initiative would provide
support on medical waste management in the country.



c. Gender

Increases in poverty had a more pronounced effect on women and the most vulnerable groups (ICR, para 48).



d. Other

The ICR (para 51) reported no unintended outcomes or impacts in relation to this operation.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provided a concise overview of the program. The ICR presented an adequate evidence base to
support the achievements reported in general. Triangulation of the sources of evidence was conducted where
appropriate (ICR, page 25). The lessons are clear and supported by the evidence and findings of the ICR. The
report followed the ICR preparation guidelines and methodology. The theory of change that was developed
ex post (ICR, Figure 1, page 12) showed a solid results chain for objective 1. On the other hand, the narrative
focused mainly on the short-term results, with only brief descriptions on sustainability of the development
outcomes. The theory of change in the ICR provided weak links among outputs, outcomes, and impacts for
objectives 2 and 3 and did not include any critical assumptions. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR COVID-19 Emergency Support DPF (P174145)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Relevance of Results                                  Moderately
                                ---
Indicators                                            Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 57-61) provided five lessons. four of them are presented below with rephrasing as these might
be relevant for the future programs to respond to health emergencies.

Creating a Citizen Oversight Commission can increase accountability and gain trust from the public on
the government’s integrity in the implementation of a legal framework for a crisis context. The
commission was independent and operated only during the period the emergency procurement processes were
in effect. The Commission provided additional scrutiny of the expedited procurement processes.

In a multi-stakeholder operation, it is crucial to ensure that all involved entities act with full ownership of
their respective activities. Not all ministries involved in the program had strong ownership of their responsible
activities under the program, negatively affecting monitoring and recording results in line with the results
agreement (ICR, para 54). A phased approach could be considered to create an incentive for efficient
implementation and monitoring and evaluation.

Institutionalizing inter-sectoral and inter-institutional coordination arrangements is important for
strengthening disaster preparedness. This program demonstrated the feasibility and importance of inter-
sectoral and inter-institutional coordination arrangements, which supported the government in making an
important step toward establishing an Adaptive Social Protection System.

The COVID-19 pandemic exemplified that public health emergencies should be incorporated in
comprehensive disaster preparedness strategies. The second CAT DDO currently under
preparation specifically encompasses public health emergencies, in addition to natural disasters, in part as a
lesson learned from the COVID-19 experience.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
