     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023082

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P129342                                      BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                       Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85750                                  31-Dec-2020                                        116,144,067.51

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Dec-2015                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            120,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             116,144,067.51                                              0.00

 Actual                                         116,144,067.51                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb             Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to: (a) reduce dropout of students in public secondary education; (b)
   increase access to diagnosis and treatment for patients with chronic diseases; (c) expand the registration of
   groundwater users in rural areas and land tenure regularization; and (d) increase the participation of rural
   family farmers in rural productive value chains (Loan Agreement, April 27, 2016, p. 6).

   On December 10, 2020, at which time 87 percent of the loan was disbursed, a level-2 restructuring revised
   the definition of three PDO-level indicators for accuracy purposes. One associated outcome target was

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



   revised downward, and both original and revised targets were exceeded. Therefore, this ICR Review did not
   apply a split rating that would have been inconsequential.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was designed to co-finance multi-sector interventions based on the government's strategic
   priorities. It had two components: (a) a results-based approach under Component 1; and (b) a technical
   assistance investment approach under Component 2.



   I. Provision of support for the implementation of Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) in the
   following areas: (a) public secondary education, (b) health care for patients with non-communicable
   chronic diseases, (c) water resources management, (d) land management, and (e) rural productive
   chains (IBRD cost at Appraisal: US$105.0 million; Actual IBRD cost: US$104.9 million). The EEPs
   constituted a subset of existing programs under the government's Multi-year Plans (Plano Plurianual)
   selected as priority programs to be supported by this operation (PAD, pp. 9-10). The component had 15
   disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).

   Subcomponent 1.1: Improving retention in public secondary education: carrying out activities aimed at
   improving retention in public secondary education through: (a) expanding the Youth Saving Program for
   public secondary education students in targeted municipalities; (b) expanding the full-time school model in
   secondary education; (c) expanding secondary technical education; (d) expanding distance learning for
   general secondary education; and (e) reestablishing a student assessment in the Borrower’s public schools.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Expanding access to health care for patients with chronic diseases: carrying out
   activities aimed at expanding access to diagnosis and treatment for patients with chronic diseases through,
   inter alia: (a) the setting up and operationalization of five Specialized Centers for Chronic Diseases
   (SCCDs); and (b) the elaboration and enforcement of State protocols and medical regulation.

   Subcomponent 1.3: Expanding the registration of groundwater users: carrying out activities aimed at
   implementing the State Water Resources Users (CERH) by (a) elaborating and implementing information
   and communication campaigns for registering groundwater users in CERH; and (b) carrying out verification
   of registration of groundwater users.

   Subcomponent 1.4: Strengthening real property rights: carrying out activities aimed at supporting the
   implementation of the Land Tenure Regulation Program and strengthening real property rights through (a)
   strengthening and modernizing the State Land Agency; (b) carrying out the identification, demarcation, and

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



  registration of State land; (c) carrying out the Land Tenure Regularization Program; and (d) supporting the
  operationalization of the Land Tenure Regularization Center.

  Subcomponent 1.5: Strengthening participation of rural family farmers in rural productive value
  chains: carrying out activities aimed at increasing participation of rural family farmers, including women and
  Quilombola communities in productive value chains by (a) financing Productive Investment Plans; and (b)
  building capacity on technical and managerial assistance, as well as on institutional organization and
  logistics.



  II. Provision of technical assistance to strengthen the Borrower’s public management (Estimated
  IBRD cost at Appraisal: US$14.7 million; Actual IBRD cost: US$10.9 million).

  Subcomponent 2.1: Modernize expenditure and investment management in the public sector:
  provision of technical assistance to modernize expenditure and investment management practices in the
  public sector, including (a) strengthening the process of planning, monitoring, and evaluation of investment
  projects in a single results-based system; (b) carrying out a study on public expenditure and financial
  accountability, and strengthening capacity to implement streamlined financial management processes and
  an accrual accounting system in line with national accounting norms and International Public Accounting
  Standards; (c) provision of training on the adoption of standards of the International Organization of
  Supreme Audit Institutions; (d) modernization of procedures and processes to carry out internal audits; (e)
  designing and implementing a new procurement information and contract management system; and (f)
  supporting project management, including hiring of key project staff, independent verification, and operating
  costs.

  Subcomponent 2.2: Build the Borrower’s capacity for water resources management, land
  management, and rural development: provision of technical assistance to strengthen the capacity to carry
  out the water resources cadaster, land tenure regularization, and rural development, including (a)
  operationalization and maintenance of the State Land and Environmental Geotechnical Center; (b) piloting
  of an integrated real estate registration system for notaries; and (c) establishment of a computerized
  monitoring, information, and management system for the Program for Employment and Income Generation
  in Rural Areas.

  Subcomponent 2.3: Generate evidence to support policy making and practice in education, health,
  gender, and citizen engagement: provision of technical assistance to generate evidence supporting policy
  making in education, health, gender, and citizen engagement, including (a) carrying out an impact
  evaluation and studies of secondary education; (b) elaborating a State Health Regulation Plan; (c) carrying
  out studies on gender in the Borrower’s territory; and (d) capacity building for the Borrower’s Ombudsman
  Office.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  At appraisal, the cost share of the World Bank was estimated at US$120 million consisting of an IBRD Loan
  that was processed as an Investment Project Financing (IPF) within a larger government program of
  US$1.1 billion. The IPF complemented and leveraged policy and institutional reforms supported by a single-
  tranche US$200 million Piauí Productive and Social Inclusion Development Policy Loan or DPL (P146981).

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



   The broader program costs were calculated based on the EEP’s budget amounts for 2015–20, including
   inflation forecasts (PAD, p. 10). By project closing, the actual World Bank cost was US$116.1 million,
   including a front-end fee of US$0.3 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Three previous State operations were focused on rural development in Piauí, one of Brazil’s poorest States,
and included the Rural Poverty Alleviation Project (P043871), approved in 1996; Rural Poverty Reduction
Project (P050881), approved in 2001; and the Green Growth and Inclusion DPL (P126449), approved in
2012 (ICR, p. 26).

The objectives of this multi-sectoral operation were focused on key identified challenges that included high
student dropout in secondary education; low access to health services in rural areas; productive exclusion
of the State’s poorest groups living in semi-arid regions; non-formalized land tenure for small-scale farmers
that hinders access to credit and subsidized financing lines; challenges in funding business initiatives and
strengthening family farming and production chains, especially among the poorest and most vulnerable
groups (women and Quilombola communities); and weaknesses in overall public sector management.

The project was prepared in conjunction with a DPL, and both adopted a common multi-sectoral approach
to address the above-mentioned priorities. Both operations were prepared and approved in parallel to
maximize intended impact. Development objectives were aligned with the objectives of State Programs that
served as the design platform of both operations (PAD, p. 7). The project also aimed at strengthening
institutional capacities and public sector management to plan and monitor key State Programs.

At project closing, development objectives continued to be in line with State Programs and with the World
Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Federative Republic of Brazil for the period
FY18-FY23, which proposes a focus on Brazil’s environmental and poverty reduction challenges, improving
the efficiency of public spending, and coverage and quality of public services. Specifically, CPF Focus Area
1 on Fiscal Consolidation and Government Effectiveness aims to support a sustainable and equitable fiscal
adjustment at both federal and subnational levels and to increase effectiveness of service delivery in both
education and health. Focus Area 3 on Inclusive and Sustainable Development aims to support gains in
social inclusion and sustainable natural resource management, with a particular focus on land use and the
promotion of socio-economic development of small rural producers and vulnerable groups. The CPF
specifically notes the need to address inclusion of the most vulnerable social groups, including small family
farmers, indigenous peoples, and traditional communities. It intends to facilitate productive inclusion of
family farmers at the subnational level by supporting investments that provide farmers with productive
assets, improved access to services, and better connections to local, regional, and global markets. It also
proposes to continue helping populations living in Brazil’s semi-arid region to adapt to the growing risk of
water scarcity through better water resources management, more efficient water service provision, and
more resilient water infrastructure.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



               However, the overall strategic approach to address development objectives became less relevant at project
               closing. When the project was prepared, the World Bank was emphasizing the use of broad, multisectoral
               operations at the sub-national level in Brazil to help address a multiplicity of institutional issues and
               multidimensional development challenges (ICR, p. 6). But in view of complexity and implementation
               difficulties that were observed under such operations, future Bank assistance shifted to more focused
               operations that were prepared under stand-alone IPF instruments (ICR, p. 16) as opposed to a design that
               encompassed various priorities under a single multi-sectoral operation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Reduce dropout of students in public secondary education

                             Rationale
                             Background: The high dropout rate in secondary education (SE) resulted from a systemic failure of State
                             schools to support students and to deliver quality SE effectively, thus contributing to social exclusion. The
                             decision to drop out of school was motivated by several factors, including the need of students from poor
                             families to earn an income, low quality of instruction, shortage of teachers in rural areas, and students’
                             perceptions that general SE was not relevant for improving their future employment prospects since the
                             schools were not providing skills demanded by the labor market.

                             The State’s Secretariat of Education and Culture was expanding the following four programs aimed at
                             reducing the dropout rate in SE and social exclusion: (a) full-time schools (FTS); (b) Secondary Technical
                             Education (STE); (c) the Youth Savings Program (YSP) or Poupança Jovem; and (d) Education with
                             Technological Intermediation (ETI), a computer-based distance learning program for SE (ICR, p. 7).

                             Explanatory note: The YSP is a program that aimed to incentivize extremely poor students to attend and
                             complete secondary education. The program provided a bonus to students for every school year completed to
                             reduce dropout and increase graduation to the next education level. Beneficiary students also had to
                             participate in extracurricular activities, such as good citizenship, criminality prevention, and distance learning
                             programs for SE.

                             The theory of change main thrust for reducing dropout of students in public SE consisted of the provision of
                             incentives to encourage students in State schools to complete SE, and the enhancement of opportunities to
                             enroll in SE through FTS, STE, and ETI. The theory of change held that expanding:




                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)




      YSP Incentive Program for secondary school students in the poorest municipalities, as well as training
         of school directors, pedagogical advisors, and teachers to identify at-risk students, visit parents,
         closely monitor school attendance, and offer academic tutoring and socio-emotional support;
        full time secondary education, allowing extended instructional time, more diverse and enriched
         curriculum, more laboratory hours to apply classroom learning, and extracurricular activities to
         enhance the learning experience, with teachers at FTS exclusively dedicated to a particular school to
         foster motivation and efficacy, while concurrently improving school facilities in terms of infrastructure
         and provision of pedagogical material and equipment, as well as in-service training for teachers and
         principals;
        secondary technical education as an appealing alternative to general SE;
        distance learning for general secondary education with a focus on remote rural areas and provision of
         broadcast equipment, improvements to electronic networks in teaching facilities and local substations,
         provision of instructional materials, and pre-service and in-service training for local tutors; and
        reestablishment of the standardized student assessment in State schools in Piauí, including testing
         students at the end of each education cycle every year to assess student performance and provision
         of critical inputs to the design and implementation of education policies at the State level that would
         contribute to student retention;

would be expected to result in more YSP students passing to the next grade, certification of full-time schools,
increased enrollment of students, STE school engagement in consultations on content and modalities of
training with the private sector, and carrying out and dissemination of learning assessments.

All of the above intermediate results would plausibly contribute to reducing student dropout from public SE.



Outputs and intermediate results

Students enrolled in YSP who passed to the next grade increased from an annual baseline of 8,900 students
in 2014 to 82,270 students in 2022, exceeding the target of 65,000 students.

Tutoring activities and monitoring of attendance of students enrolled in YSP were undertaken as planned, and
three State learning assessment tests were carried out.

Secondary FTS that were certified increased from a baseline of 33 schools in 2014 to 79 schools in 2022,
exceeding the original target of 57 schools and achieving the revised target of 79 schools.

Students enrolled in STE increased from an annual baseline of 20,000 students in 2014 to 181,788 students
in 2022, exceeding the original target of 113,000 students and the revised target of 180,000 students.

The number of STE schools that have engaged in consultations on content and modalities of training with
private sector representatives increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 25 STE schools in 2022,
exceeding the original target of 20 schools and substantially achieving the revised target of 30 schools.

During 2020 and 2021, the education sector was greatly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and all
schools closed by March 2020. In addition to the four main SE programs described in the rationale section
above, the State government, supported by the Federal Government, introduced additional measures to bring


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



back students to school and expanded distance learning with project support to reach all State municipalities
through five transmission studios, and provided classes in three sessions (morning, noon, and night) to
students at all levels. The Federal Government also expanded the number of beneficiaries and the amount of
social protection transfers distributed as Emergency Help.



Outcomes

The intended outcome was fully achieved and was supported by the intermediate steps described in the
theory of change. The dropout rate in public secondary schools declined steadily over the implementation
period, from an initial 2014 baseline of 16 percent annually to 8 percent in 2019, and to 6 percent in 2020,
exceeding the target of 14.5 percent.

According to the ICR (p. 17), data of the 2021 school census indicated continued improvement in dropout, but
data were not yet published.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase access to diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic diseases

Rationale
Background: Access to diagnosis and specialized care in non-communicable chronic diseases, a leading
cause of death in Piauí, was available almost exclusively in the capital city of Teresina. Also, Piaui’s State
health system lacked established protocols for diagnosis, treatment, and management of patients with chronic
diseases (PAD, p. 33).

The theory of change envisaged a two-pronged approach with two main activities: (a) setting up and
operating five Specialized Centers for Chronic Diseases (SCCDs) to be located in five municipalities across
the State and with adequate transportation accessibility; and (b) establishing State protocols and medical
regulations that would seek to optimize the use of SCCD resources, including doctors, laboratories, imaging
tests, and treatment. Implementation of the new protocols would be supported by a centralized medical
regulation unit.

The above activities would be reasonably expected to result in SCCDs being operational to receive and treat
patients, clinical protocols being developed, and family health teams and health specialists being trained in
the use of such protocols. These intermediate steps would plausibly contribute to increased access to
diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic diseases.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



Outputs and intermediate results

Five SCCDs were established, equipped, and staffed to serve patients in underprivileged rural areas. They
became operational at variable times (see below under Outcomes).

The State Health Regulation Plan was developed.

The number of access protocols to outpatient procedures increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 18
protocols in 2022 (against an original target of 17 and a revised target of 20 protocols).

The proportion of family health teams and health specialists trained to use protocols for outpatient procedures
in chronic diseases increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 100 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of
95 percent.



Outcomes

The ICR (p. 19) reported that, despite implementation delays, the five planned SCCDs were developed to
benefit underserved rural areas. Three SCCDs were operational by the closing date of December 31, 2021,
and two others became operational by April 2022, four months after closing (ICR, p. 44). Patients under
diagnosis or treatment for chronic diseases in SCCDs increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 41,960 in
2022, achieving the annual target of 40,000 patients. Nevertheless, there was no information on the relative
increase in meeting access needs.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Expand the registration of groundwater users in rural areas

Rationale
Background: Water Resources Management was inadequate and insufficient. The State Secretariat of
Environment and Water Resources (SEMAR) lacked the institutional capacity to enforce water resources
regulations and implement interventions envisaged in the State Water Resources Plan. This contributed to
productive exclusion of the poorest groups living in the semi-arid region who depended on rain-fed
agriculture. During severe droughts, small farmers would lose crops and herds, and were hesitant to request
funding from subsidized credit lines due to their perceived risk of not being able to produce and,
consequently, repay loans if the droughts continued (PAD, p. 4). Limited access to water impaired rural
production by small-scale and subsistence farmers. SEMAR maintained a registry of groundwater right
applications since 2006, when the registry was established. Available data did not allow a thorough analysis
of water resources demand and supply in specific water basins. As of August 2015, SEMAR had issued



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



permanent water use rights to less than 10 percent of the 28,391 deep wells installed in the State. For surface
water, SEMAR has limited information on the number of users because no research had been done.

The theory of change envisaged that enhancing registration of groundwater users through information
dissemination, registration campaigns, and enhanced registration capacities, supported by verification of
registration, would lead to increased registration of groundwater users, including self-registration, in the
CERH electronic database, and with registrations being verified by SEMAR through field visits. These outputs
would plausibly contribute to expanded registration of groundwater users in rural areas.

Ultimately, and in the long-run, formal registration of water usage would enable farmers to secure rights and
improve productive use of water resources.



Outputs and intermediate results

Nine registration campaigns to register groundwater users were undertaken.

Per agreement with the National Water Authority, SEMAR used the National Water Resources Users Registry
of the Water Authority as the electronic platform for the new State Registry.

The project financed related equipment, including flow meters and global positioning systems necessary for
the verification process.



Outcomes

The number of groundwater users registered in the CERH and verified by SEMAR increased from a baseline
of zero in 2014 to 8,537 users in 2022, exceeding both the original target of 2,000 users and the revised
target of 8,100 groundwater users. The results in absolute numbers were noteworthy, but there was no
information on estimated proportions.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Expand land tenure regularization

Rationale
Background: Project activities built on the legal basis established by the State through laws and decrees
issued in 2011 on the regularization of land tenure of small scale and subsistence farmers, medium and large
claimants who have been producing on the land for at least five years, and on land tenure regularization of
Quilombola communities. The project identified land tenure regularization conferring real property rights as an

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



instrument through which the poorest and most vulnerable farmers could access benefits associated with
formal land ownership, including social safety nets, access to credit, and a sustainable means for income
generation.

The State Land Agency (INTERPI) did not have an automated system to manage the thousands of land
tenure regularization and land purchase requests it received, and it lacked the resources to send its technical
experts to the field to execute surveys. INTERPI had a large backlog of State land demarcation and
registration requests due to the lack of resources, conflicting claims, and difficulties in coordinating with the
judiciary.

The theory of change envisaged that the following activities: (a) strengthening and modernization of
INTERPI; (b) State land identification demarcation and registration; (c) land tenure regularization of
INTERPI’s land reform settlements; (d) regularization of Quilombola Territories; and (e) operationalization of
the Land Tenure Regularization Center would result in teams being in place to execute land tenure
regularization activities, requests filed by small-scale farmers for land titles through the State Land Tenure
Regularization Program, women registered as beneficiaries or co-beneficiaries in land titles, and Quilombola
communities receiving land titles. All of these would plausibly contribute to increased land tenure
regularization.



Outputs and intermediate results

The project strengthened and modernized INTERPI through the rehabilitation of its headquarters; provision of
technical, legal, and administrative support; purchase of equipment and vehicles; development of a Service
Request Management System; scanning and indexing of archives; and staff training on land tenure. Project
support included notarial research and cadastral fieldwork, issuance of notary public certificates, and creation
of a State land inventory.

Teams that were put in place to execute land tenure regularization activities increased from a baseline of two
teams in 2014 to 13 teams in 2022, exceeding the target of 10 teams.

The number of requests for land tenure regularization through donation filed by small-scale farmers through
the State Land Tenure Regularization Program increased from a baseline of 4,151 requests annually in 2014
to 16,497 requests in 2022, exceeding both the original target of 11,000 requests and the revised target of
12,000 requests.

When applicable, women were registered as beneficiaries or co-beneficiaries in land titles through donation.

Land titles for Quilombola Community Queimada Grande were issued and submitted to the notary for
registration.

Land titling software e-Títulos was developed and adopted by INTERPI.

The project supported the operationalization of the Land Tenure Regularization Center that was established
in 2014 through consultant services; staffing; support to the court responsible for controlling registry offices for




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



the realization of inspections and the instruction of judiciary and administrative processes related to real
estate registries; and training on related competencies.

In response to concerns about property rights of traditional communities, the World Bank provided additional
support to help INTERPI address arising allegations, and to further strengthen the justice system, including
the prosecutor offices. There was a Request to the Inspection Panel for an investigation, but the latter was
not recommended because there was no plausible link between the alleged land grabbing and project
activities that did not cause or were likely to cause harm. The concerns raised in the Request to the
Inspection Panel represented unfulfilled expectations, such as complaints about alleged non-inclusion in the
project of traditional communities from the Cerrado region of Piauí, and the perceived slow pace of land
regularization processes. Management concluded that the World Bank followed the operational policies and
procedures applicable to the matters raised by the Request (Management Response, Annex II, February 20,
2020, pp v-vi – Document provided to IEG Review by the Task Team on January 9, 2023).



Outcomes

The number of beneficiaries who received land titles through the State Land Tenure Regularization Program
increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 15,054 beneficiaries in 2022, exceeding the annual target of
5,000 beneficiaries. Information on the relative change would have helped in assessing the extent of the
achievement.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
Increase the participation of rural family farmers in rural productive value chains

Rationale
The theory of change envisaged that market-driven diversification in agricultural and non-agricultural
productive chains, and capacity development on technical and managerial aspects, institutional organization,
and logistics, would result in Productive Investment Plans (PIPs) proposed by producer organizations led by
and mostly comprised of poor rural women or Quilombola communities, and in PIPs being monitored using
the new information management system of the Program for Employment and Income Generation in Rural
Areas. In turn, these outputs would plausibly contribute to increased participation in productive value chains.
Essentially, the project envisaged that the provision of financial and technical support would improve small
farmers’ productivity, including through a more adequate and efficient use of natural resources.



Outputs and intermediate results



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



                            The number of PIPs implemented and monitored using the monitoring system of the Program for Employment
                            and Income Generation in Rural Areas reached 53 PIPs, short of the original target of 120 and the revised
                            target of 80 PIPs.

                            The number of PIPs proposed by women-led organizations increased from a baseline of 9 PIPs to 39 PIPs in
                            2022, exceeding the target of 36 PIPs.

                            The proportion of PIPs under implementation benefiting poor rural women; families from Quilombola or
                            traditional communities, and/or families from land regularization settlements increased from a baseline of zero
                            to 100 percent, exceeding the original target of 60 percent and achieving the revised target of 100 percent.

                            Notes: Examples of pre-identified productive chains included bee-keeping, cashew production, artisan crafts,
                            sheep and goat farming, cassava production, and the production of grains and vegetables. Business plans
                            would be proposed for investments by the cooperatives and community organizations that represented the
                            beneficiaries (women and Quilombola small-scale farmers and non-agricultural producers).

                            According to the PAD (p. 40), selected beneficiaries would be required to contribute at least 30 percent of the
                            total cost of the investment, in cash or in kind, through materials or labor, to promote ownership of the PIPs
                            and ensure their sustainability and long-term potential for income generation.



                            Outcomes

                            Poor rural women and/or families from Quilombola or traditional communities and/or from land regularization
                            settlements participating in PIPs as direct beneficiaries increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 907
                            beneficiaries in 2022, exceeding the original annual target of 600 participants and the revised target of 500
                            participants.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to reduce dropout of students in public secondary education was fully achieved; and the other
                            four objectives to increase access to diagnosis and treatment of patients with chronic diseases, expand the
                            registration of groundwater users in rural areas, expand land tenure regularization, and increase the
                            participation of rural family farmers in rural productive value chains were almost fully achieved. The
                            aggregation of achievements is consistent with a substantial rating for overall efficacy. The achievements
                            were facilitated by broad institutional strengthening across several agencies of the State government and by
                            policy actions that were supported by the DPL (ICR, p. 16).



                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)




 Additional notes on strengthened institutional capacities supported by the project technical assistance:

 - The use of the Integrated Monitoring System by State secretariats and agencies increased from a baseline
 of 23 percent to 49 percent, exceeding the target of 40 percent.

 - The proportion of Councils of Sustainable Territorial Development using the Integrated Monitoring System to
 monitor investments in their jurisdictions increased from a baseline of zero to 100 percent, exceeding the
 target of 40 percent.

 - The Public Expenditure Observatory was implemented in the office of Comptroller General of the State of
 Piauí.

 - A public procurement system was developed, customized, and installed at the State Secretariat of
 Administration.

 - The State Land and Environmental Geotechnical Center was established and made fully operational.

 - The State Health Regulation Plan was elaborated and published in the Official Gazette.

 - The proportion of complaints that were registered and processed in a timely manner by the State
 Ombudsman’s Office reached 100 percent, exceeding the target of 90 percent.



 Additional notes reflecting the project’s efforts to mainstream a gender perspective into the design,
 implementation, and supervision of public policies in the State:

 Beyond the project’s added focus on women in key activities, the project contributed to advancing gender
 aspects at the institutional level by supporting the State Coordination of Policies for Women (CEPM) in the
 preparation, disclosure, and dissemination of the State Plan of Policies for Women, an activity that was
 monitored under the intermediate results indicators. The project supported the establishment and
 strengthening of the Organizations for Women’s Policies in 19 municipalities. It supported CEPM in carrying
 out some of its important activities and in strengthening its outreach to women, including for the prevention of
 violence against women (ICR, p. 23). Project support was facilitated by the State’s adoption of the legal basis
 to operationalize CEPM to mainstream a gender perspective into the design, implementation, and supervision
 of State public policies (a DPL Prior Action).



 Overall Efficacy Rating
 Substantial



5. Efficiency


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



The PAD carried out a cost-benefit analysis using education and health programs that represented 78 percent of
the investment. It also included the cost of technical assistance given its importance to the implementation of
activities and achievement of outcomes. The cost-benefit analysis made reasonable assumptions on
unemployment rates, foregone income, higher possibility of getting a job, and wages. In health, the economic
analysis used diabetes and hypertension data from the Brazilian National Household Sample Surveys and
benchmarks from the American Heart Association and the American Diabetes Association, and it compared
scenarios with and without project interventions. It used a discount rate of 3 percent. Net benefits in health were
estimated at R$725.5 million with an economic rate of return (ERR) of 18 percent, and in education, net benefits
were estimated at R$957.8 million with an ERR of 15 percent. The results remained robust under different
sensitivity calculations.

The ICR’s ex-post economic analysis was conducted following the same methodology used at appraisal.
Education programs were estimated to have an internal rate of return (IRR) of 16 percent and a net present
value (NPV) of R$666 million. These estimates were considered to be more realistic than those at appraisal, as
the analysis used more accurate data about the number of project beneficiaries. For example, it used the actual
number of students graduating in STE and the number of beneficiaries in YSP rather than predicted numbers.
Also, the cost-benefit analysis considered a rigorous ex-post impact evaluation of the YSP program that showed
a positive impact on dropout rates. The IRR of the health component was estimated to be 6 percent with an NPV
of R$30.6 million. The economic analysis did not consider gains from other activities.

In view of its multisectoral design, the project was implemented by 12 different agencies, understandably raising
complexity. Some delays in implementation were encountered, including in safeguard compliance. Staffing and
capacity issues impacted the contracting of technical assistance (ICR, p. 28). Nevertheless, the impact on
disbursements was limited to Component 2, and about 40 percent of the loan was disbursed during the first 18
months of implementation.

The Mid-Term Review (MTR), which was carried out in two visits (June 4-14 and July 23-27, 2018), concluded
that the project was largely on track with most targets already achieved, but that some project changes were
required, and a project restructuring was agreed in principle to address challenges in health and land
regularization activities, introduce modifications to the results framework and DLI Matrix, and improve
procurement. The MTR expected that restructuring would be processed around October 2018 (ICR, p. 30), but
approval was delayed mostly by continuous modifications to the proposal and by lengthy approval processes at
different levels.

The surge of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 presented another challenge to overall project
implementation. Project activities and Infrastructure work on two remaining SCCDs were impacted to variable
degrees. Since in-person training could not be conducted per the State’s social distancing legislation, distance
learning was promoted and expanded. Project restructuring extended the loan’s closing date by one year,
including for reallocating US$4 million in savings (resulting mostly from the devaluation of the Brazilian Real vs.
the US Dollar) to the State’s response to the pandemic.

The above implementation challenges had a moderate impact on overall efficiency, and disbursements reflected
a steady progress pattern, as shown by the ICR (p. 3). Only a one-year extension of the closing date was
needed. Also, project management costs were limited to one percent of total project costs.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated substantial in view of alignment with Piaui State and Bank strategies, but with
diminished relevance at project closing as there was a shift in pursuing such objectives through Bank
engagement under complex multi-sectoral operations. Efficacy is rated substantial, as project objectives were
almost fully achieved. Efficiency is rated substantial in view of high economic returns suggested by the
economic analysis, but with some negative aspects of implementation that moderately reduced overall
efficiency. These findings are consistent with a satisfactory overall outcome rating, reflecting only minor
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that development outcomes may not be maintained appears to be limited. The project strengthened
institutions through the development of systems, processes, procedures, and staff capacities. The State
Secretariat of Planning has evolved into a strong coordinating institution with notable capabilities to support
planning, programming, monitoring, and evaluation of State programs. Importantly, institutional strengthening
was grounded in legislation.

The World Bank is currently working with the State government to prepare follow-on projects in human
development, natural resources management, small-scale agriculture, and public sector management.
Together, these projects would provide continuity to some key activities (with the exclusion of the education
sector that would continue to be supported through the federal project “Recovering Learning Losses from
Covid-19 Pandemic in Brazil Program for Results, P178563”).

According to the ICR (p. 36), the State’s economic situation appears to be strong despite the economic
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The State is in compliance with the Federal Government’s Fiscal


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



Responsibility Law, and its payroll is within established limits. The currently planned operations would
continue to invest in programs that were supported by this project. Also, it is unlikely that future
administrations would not support and build upon project objectives and achievements, as these pertain to
programs fully owned by the State, regardless of Bank engagement.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At entry, the Task Team approach was consistent with the World Bank Country Partnership Strategy
  FY12-FY15 in designing single operations that encompassed multiple and various sectoral activities to
  help address multidimensional development challenges at the sub-national level while concurrently
  strengthening State institutions to implement them (ICR, p. 6 and p. 35). The project was prepared in full
  coordination with the DPL and both were processed simultaneously. The Task Team Leader was also a
  co-Task Leader for the DPL (ICR, p. 35). Sectors supported by the project were associated with actions
  also supported by the DPL. The latter sought to ensure that the legislative framework needed for project
  implementation was in place. The project design was informed by lessons learned from previous projects
  in Piaui, other Brazilian States, and other countries, and from analytical work. The project was planned to
  cover activities across ten sectors or subsectors: (a) education; (b) health; (c) water resources
  management; (d) land tenure regularization; (e) rural productive chains; (f) public sector management; (g)
  public finance management; (h) procurement management; (i) gender; and (j) citizen engagement.
  Twelve implementing agencies would be involved (see Section 4).

  The State Secretariat of Planning (SEPLAN) was assigned as the overall coordinating agency and as the
  World Bank’s main interlocutor (PAD, p. 12). SEPLAN would establish a Project Implementation Unit
  (PIU) to manage day-to-day work. SEPLAN would liaise with the State Secretariat of Finance for all
  matters related to financial management, disbursement, and auditing. A Project Management Committee
  led by SEPLAN would review strategic priorities and project performance. The PIU would liaise with
  technical focal points in each associated agency. Focal points would oversee monitoring activities in their
  respective sectors. Project reports would be submitted to the Bank twice a year before disbursement
  requests. DLI achievement would be independently verified. The results framework was extensive given
  the project’s multisectoral nature. The DLI Matrix overlapped with Intermediate Results Indicators in
  several areas to stimulate the achievement of critical outputs. The project was in an adequate state of
  readiness in terms of implementation arrangements through existing staff and structures, and a detailed
  Project Operational Manual was prepared by SEPLAN. However, there were weaknesses in M&E design
  (ICR, p. 31-32); these are discussed in Section 9a.

  The project carried numerous risks, many of which were adequately identified and mitigated, including
  financial management risks involving several budget executors and a large volume of transactions. A
  comprehensive technical assistance program was planned under Component 2. But there were risk
  identification gaps that were not explicitly addressed, such as risks related to the multisectoral design and
  that different implementing agencies may proceed at different paces (ICR, p. 28 and p. 35). The ICR also
  indicated that a wider and early engagement with all interested communities on land regularization would
  have expanded the understanding of the Bank’s approach, potentially reducing the risk of complaints
  inappropriately associated with the project.


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank Task Team reportedly maintained an open and continuous dialogue with its main counterparts at
 SEPLAN and in implementing agencies (ICR, p. 35). The Team included seven sectoral specialists, two
 safeguards specialists, and three fiduciary specialists. Implementation support benefited from continuity
 within the Bank Team and the PIU. The Task Team was reportedly results focused, pragmatic, effective,
 and constantly on top of emerging issues (ICR, p. 36). The Team provided quality reporting, and the
 Implementation Status and Results Reports were timely and clear, and provided a strong basis for
 understanding arising issues that could affect progress toward the achievement of objectives.

 The Team organized an effective Mid-Term Review that was carried out in two visits during June and July
 2018. The Mid-Term Review concluded that progress was adequate, that objectives were achievable, but
 that some design and results framework changes were required. Project restructuring was delayed due to
 continuous modifications to the proposal and lengthy approval procedures among State and Federal
 governments, all of which were beyond the Bank’s control. The Task Team was pro-active in responding to
 complaints related to land tenure regularization and in facilitating Management’s response to the Request
 for Inspection received by the Inspection Panel.

 A final supervision mission brought together representatives of all implementing agencies with the World
 Bank staff involved in implementation support. SEPLAN representatives and the Task Team were present
 in all of the meetings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Objectives were clearly specified and were reflected by selected indicators, but most of the latter were
 output-oriented. This was explained by the time required for institutional strengthening (ICR, p. 31). The
 PDO indicator concerning registered land titles was beyond the control of INTERPI, as registration was
 governed by Public Notaries (the indicator was subsequently amended during implementation to reflect
 only title donation). The indicator on registration of groundwater users was initially limited to self-registration
 (the indicator was subsequently amended to broaden registration options). The ICR (p. 31) stated that the
 project did not include an objective related to improving public management, which was cross-cutting
 across project activities and seemed to be the “glue” that held objectives together toward higher-level

                                                                                                        Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



 outcomes. This ICR Review considers that institutional strengthening under this project was part of the
 intermediate steps of the theory of change, and that it contributed to the achievement of stated objectives.

 Target setting was based on available information, implementation capacities, and the project's time frame.
 For patients with chronic diseases treated at SCCDs, target setting was facilitated by the plan of care for
 patients and by the Piaui Regionalization Master Plan that encompassed the role of five facilities, network
 of diagnostic support services, capacity of specialized physicians, and capacity to finance the production of
 services (Task Team clarifications, January 9. 2023).

 In terms of gender, the ICR conveyed that there was a strong focus on women, including support provided
 to the State Coordination of Policies for Women and Gender-Smart Public Policies. But the results
 framework had a large gap in gender-disaggregated data that could have provided a glimpse of the
 progress made in the areas of secondary education, groundwater registration, land tenure registration, and
 health services access for chronic non-communicable diseases.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was adequate and was coordinated by the PIU. Data were provided by focal points
  in each of the implementing agencies. Initially, information was provided in the form of printed reports,
  emails, and follow up communications. Starting in 2019, information was provided electronically, and this
  facilitated the exchange of monitoring data. According to the ICR, there was significant progress in using
  improved electronic systems. An impact evaluation of YSP Youth Program was completed and its results
  were disseminated. An evaluation was also carried out for the Full-Time School Program. Results were
  favorable and reflected in Section 4.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular monitoring and evaluation purposes. Achievement of DLIs informed
  disbursements. M&E findings are expected to feed into future implementation of related programs (ICR,
  p. 32).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Based on consultations with key stakeholders during preparation, the project triggered six safeguard
   policies, four of which were triggered on a precautionary basis:

        i. OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment: The project was classified as Category B given potential
          impacts that could be associated with project activities in areas such as health, regularization of rural
          land tenure, water resources, and civil works. The State government prepared a comprehensive

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



          Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an environmental management plan,
          guidance for the construction of health facilities, a simplified pest management plan, and a Health
          Waste Management Plan.
      ii. OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats was triggered because the project encompassed a land
          regularization program. The policy defined criteria and management procedures to avoid potential
          impacts on sensitive biodiversity areas and protected areas.

  The remaining four were triggered only as a precautionary measure:

       i. OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management: the project would not support the purchase of pesticides and
         other agricultural chemicals.
      ii. OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources: the project would not support activities in areas with
          known physical cultural resources.
     iii. OP/BP 4.36 on Forests: the project would not support any activity that may cause negative impacts
          on forests. The ESMF would consider safeguard requirements if restoration and plantation activities
          were planned.
     iv. OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.

  During implementation, OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was also considered based on the Client’s
  request. However, the policy was not triggered as the three social groups claiming recognition of their
  indigenous identity did not fulfill the criteria set by OP 4.10 for identifying indigenous people. These groups
  faced high degrees of vulnerability, but they did not differ from other poor rural communities in the State in
  accessing public programs and did not require distinct treatment for the purpose of social inclusion (ICR, p.
  33).

  SEMAR was responsible for the overall enforcement of project-related safeguards and had a designated
  safeguard specialist to liaise and coordinate with all relevant secretariats and agencies. The project faced
  issues with respect to staffing of safeguards personnel in implementing agencies. Staffing varied by
  implementing agency, since some agencies used dedicated staff as focal points for safeguards while others
  used consultants. In some cases, assigned staff had multiple other functions and lacked full understanding
  of safeguards issues. The overall safeguards rating reported in the Operations Portal was moderately
  satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  At entry, financial management was assessed as adequate, but with substantial risks in view of the
  involvement of multiple implementing agencies and the large volume of transactions. During
  implementation, financial management performance was mixed. Most Interim Financial Reports were
  considered acceptable, but delayed. The internal control environment was weak. Disbursements claimed
  against health-related EEPs were based on transfers to municipalities as opposed to actual expenditures.
  Audits were submitted on time. Two audit reports had qualified opinions due to inconsistencies and non-
  conciliation of balances brought from previous years. The World Bank worked closely with SEPLAN to



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



   address related issues and agreed with the State government on an action plan for improvement. There
   were no pending financial management issues at project completion (ICR, p. 34).

   Procurement functions faced difficulties, including from the lack of expertise in preparing technical
   specifications and the large number of executing agencies. Procurement functions were decentralized for
   agencies deemed to have adequate capacity, while SEPLAN carried out procurement for other agencies
   that did not have such capacity, and the Mid-Term Review agreed upon a series of actions to improve
   procurement. SEPLAN’s performance was strong and proved to be instrumental in supporting other
   implementing agencies’ procurement functions. The implementation of a new system to manage
   procurement in the State, including project procurement, was delayed as a result of several changes in
   senior staff. According to the ICR, the installation of a functioning packaged system for procurement is
   currently being processed with State funding.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                             ICR                     IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                             Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                                                                      There is no disagreement on the
                                                                                      sub-ratings of the two
                                                                                      dimensions of Bank
                                                                                      Performance (Moderately
                                                                                      Satisfactory Quality-at-Entry,
                                                                                      and Satisfactory Quality of
Bank Performance                    Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                      Supervision). Had the ICR
                                                                                      correctly aggregated its two sub-
                                                                                      ratings as per guidelines, its
                                                                                      overall Bank Performance rating
                                                                                      would also have been
                                                                                      Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                        Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)



Quality of M&E                     Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                     High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 37-38) offered some lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons re-
stated by IEG Review:

Intense land disputes arising from land tenure regularization programs can be minimized by
close and continuous communications with all interested population groups. The project
strengthened the capacity of the State Land Agency and judiciary mechanisms and started working
with two groups (agrarian settlements and Quilombola communities). As a result, other groups felt
that they were left out, triggering complaints. The project could have expanded its consultations and
engagement by reaching out to all interested groups to seek their feedback and to clarify its
approach to land regularization.

The concomitant utilization of a Development Policy Loan with a parallel Investment Project
Financing, both prepared in close coordination, provides a powerful approach to support
reforms. The structure of the DPL supported the IPF objectives and set in motion prior actions
needed to put in place the legislative and institutional framework for the implementation of
investments under the IPF and for improving public sector management. Areas of alignment and
complementarity included secondary education, access to chronic disease services, registration of
groundwater, land tenure regularization, and participation in rural productive value chains.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Despite the wide range of developmental topics that were addressed by this operation, the ICR provided an
adequate overview of the project experience and a coherent discussion that was anchored in multiple theories
of change in different sectors. The evidence was output-oriented but sufficiently reflective of intended results
and development changes. It was candid and aligned to stated objectives. Lessons were derived from project
experience. The ICR followed established guidelines. The overall quality of the ICR was high with occasional
minor lapses in clarity.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High



                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BR Piaui Pillars of Growth and Soc Incl (P129342)




                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
