     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022996

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P125689                                      KG Financial Sector Development Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                              Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50670,IDA-H7600                         30-Jun-2017                                             8,270,729.90

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Mar-2012                                 30-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              13,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                8,938,016.07                                               0.00

 Actual                                            8,270,729.90                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Ebru Karamete                Christopher David Nelson          IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement for the Kyrgyz Republic
   (Schedule 1, page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document was (PAD, page 5):

   (i) To enhance financial sector stability; and (ii) To increase access to financial services.




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-May-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were five components (PAD, pages 10 - 15).

   1. Strengthening the legal, regulatory and supervisory framework for banks, microfinance
   organizations (MFOs) and credit unions. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.50 million. The
   actual cost was US$0.33 million. This component supported measures for improving the legal, regulatory
   and supervisory frameworks of the banking sector and capacity building of the National Bank of the Kyrgyz
   Republic (NBKR). Activities in this component: (i) strengthening the legal framework; (ii) improving the
   regulatory framework; (iii) strengthening the supervisory framework; (iv) improving NBKR's human resource
   management policies; and (v) improving its Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
   infrastructure.

   Three of the five activities in this component were dropped through the second level 2 restructuring
   (discussed in section 2e). The dropped activities included strengthening NBKR's legal, regulatory and
   supervisory frameworks. However, some of these activities were completed by the NBKR with support from
   the complementary World Bank Technical Assistance (TA) funded by the Swiss Secretariat for Economic
   Affairs (SIDA) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The activity associated with improving NBKR's
   ICT was cancelled (discussed in section 2e). With these changes, the scope of this component was
   restricted to solely improving the NBKR's human resources management capacity.

   2. Enhancing financial services via the state-owned Kyrgyz Post Office (KPO) network. The estimated
   cost at appraisal was US$5.55 million. The actual cost was US$6.60 million. Activities included: (i)
   strengthening KPO's financial management capacity; (ii) modernizing KPO's business processes; and (iii)
   support for expanding the range of financial services provided by KPO and piloting new financial services.

   3. Supporting the state-owned Ayil Bank for privatization and deposit mobilization. The estimated
   cost at appraisal was US$4.15 million. The actual cost was US$0.00 million. This component planned to
   support Ayil by providing: (i) TA for deposit mobilization; (ii) TA for finalizing an action plan for privatization;
   (iii) TA for implementing the action plan; and (iii) credit line for liquidity needs to the Bank. This component
   was dropped through the first project restructuring (discussed in section 2e).

   4. Modernizing the secured transactions and debt resolution regime. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$1.00 million. The actual cost was US$0.8 million. This component planned to strengthen the
   regime for moveable collateral registration and execution through: (i) improvements in the legal and
   regulatory framework; (ii) modernization of the collateral registry; and (iii) capacity building of stakeholders.


                                                                                                          Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



  5. Project coordination and monitoring. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.80 million. The actual
  cost was as estimated. Activities in this component aimed to support project management in the areas of
  fiduciary management and monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$13.00 million. The revised estimate was US$8.93
  million. The actual cost was US$8.27 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$7.15 million and an IDA Grant of
  US$5.85 million. With this the Bank financing for the project was US$13.00 million. Financing allocated to
  component three activity (US$4.15 million) was cancelled. With this, the revised estimate was US$8.85
  million. The amount disbursed was US$8.27 million (US$3.63 million of the IDA Credit and US$4.63 million
  of the IDA Grant). The difference between the revised estimate and amount disbursed was due to exchange
  rate changes during implementation.

  Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
  contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project approved on March 8, 2012, became effective on December 25, 2013, and was
  scheduled to close on June 30, 2017. However, the project closed four years behind schedule on June 30,
  2021.

  Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings.

  The Bank supported the following changes made through the first restructuring on May 18, 2013.

        The activity of privatizing the Ayil Bank was dropped even before the project became effective due to
         the opposition within the Parliamentary Budget and Finance Committee and certain members of
         parliament after the election. Funds allocated to this component were cancelled and indicators for
         monitoring this activity were removed. This activity had triggered the safeguards category " Financial
         Intermediary and Environmental Assessment". Following the cancellation of this activity, the project
         was reclassified as a Category C project.
        The closing date was extended by an year from June 30, 2017, to June 30, 2018, for completing the
         ongoing activities.

  The changes made through the second restructuring on June 29, 2018 are as follows:

        Three component one activities were dropped. The fourth component one activity (NBKR's ICT
         infrastructure) was cancelled. The Bank declared "mis procurement without cancellation" for this
         activity, on grounds that the client did not award the contract from a competitive process. Funds
         allocated to this activity were reallocated to component two and three activities.
        The closing date was extended by two years from June 30, 2018 to June 30, 2020 for completing
         the ongoing activities.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



   Funds were reallocated between project components through the third restructuring on February 18,
   2019.

   The changes made through the fourth project restructuring on July 10, 2020 are as follows:

         The target value for the PDO 2 indicator (expanding financial services via the KPO network) was
          revised downwards. The volume of KPO's financial services declined from ten million at the baseline
          in 2011 to 8.6 million in December 31, 2019, due to changes in market conditions and increased
          competition. More adults were switching to cashless payments due to factors such as increased
          access to infrastructure via the Automated Teller Machine (ATMs) or e-wallets to receive
          money. This caused decline in the cash delivery of pensions by postal authorities, especially in
          urban areas. Hence, the original target was deemed to be unrealistic.
         New intermediate indicators were added.
         The closing date was extended by one more year from June 30. 2020 to June 30, 2021 due to the
          delays in completing the activities following the restrictions imposed in the wake of the COVID - 19
          pandemic.

   Split rating. Although the PDOs did not change, the project scope was drastically reduced through the
   second project restructuring. Therefore, this assessment is based on a split rating of objectives, when
   34.2% (US$3.03 million) was disbursed before restructuring, and the balance 65.8% (US$5.85 million) after
   restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. At appraisal in 2011, Kyrgyz Republic was recovering an economic crisis
following political instability in 2010. The Kyrgyz financial system is dominated by the banking sector (with
22 banks, of which three are state-owned), MFOs and credit unions, and the state-owned Kyrgyz Republic
Post Office (KPO) providing a limited range of financial services (ICR, paragraph 5). The political upheavals
of 2010, led to significant financial sector instability with large and immediate deposit outflows.

The challenges faced by the NBKR in resolving problem banks following the political upheaval, highlighted
deficiencies in the bank's resolution legal framework. The framework was fragmented and the gaps and
inconsistencies across several laws undermined NBKR's ability to address problem banks. The banking
crisis highlighted weaknesses in the supervisory framework in the areas of contingency planning and crisis
management. The deficiencies were exacerbated by an outdated ICT system and shortcomings in NBKR's
human resource management policies. Financial intermediation in Kyrgyz Republic was limited, with credit
and deposit penetration about 17% and 20% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), as compared to an
average of 55% and 33% in Europe and Central Asia (ECA) countries in 2008 (ICR, paragraph 9). The
supply of financial services to micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) was limited and deposit
services were virtually non-existent in rural areas.

While there were many constraints on access to finance, the following measures were regarded as likely to
have the most impact: (i) reforming and investing in KPO to expand its financial services through its large


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



               network of branch offices; (ii) privatizing the state-owned Ayil Bank and expanding its deposit services in
               rural areas; and (iii) modernizing the moveable collateral and debt resolution regimes.

               Government strategy. The coalition government that came into power in 2010 developed a one-year
               Action Plan for 2011, highlighting financial sector development as a key area of reform. Kyrgyz Republic's
               Medium Term Development Strategy for 2012-2014 articulated the need for reforms in bank resolution,
               deposit insurance system and bank supervision. The PDOs also supported the governments Banking
               Sector Development Strategies of 2009-2011 and 2012-2015.

               Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were consistent with the high-level objectives of the Bank's Interim
               Strategy Note (ISN) for 2011 - 2013: (i) improving governance, effective public administration and reducing
               corruption; (ii) economic stabilization to support recovery and sustained growth; and (iii) social stabilization
               through social services and community infrastructure. The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for 2019 - 2022 highlighted the need for financial sector strengthening including through improving
               bank supervision, modernizing payment systems, enhancing sectoral upgrading financial infrastructure
               (such as credit registries and secured transactions), and increasing financial inclusion.

               Previous Bank experience. The Bank has extensive experience with previous and ongoing lending
               projects, TA and analytical work aimed to support financial sector reforms in the Kyrgyz Republic. These
               include; (i) the ongoing payment and banking system modernization project; (ii) the 2002 Financial Sector
               Assessment Program (FSAP) and the FSAP follow-up TA project; (iii) a feasibility study of KPO potential in
               expanding access to financial services (May 2008); and (iv) a vulnerability assessment of the banking
               sector (June 2010). The scope of this project included institutional strengthening of the NBKR, expanding
               the range and scope of activities provided by the KPO and modernizing the moveable collateral and debt
               resolution regimes.

               The PDO 1 statement "enhancing financial sector stability" was however broad, especially given that many
               component one activities were dropped with the project restructuring. The PDO 1 statement remained the
               same. although the scope of component one activities was drastically reduced. Given this, the PDO 1
               statement could have been revised to align it with the actual project scope. Therefore, the relevance of the
               PDO is assessed as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance financial sector stability.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



Theory of change. The project activities aimed at the intended outcome of enhancing financial sector
stability of NBKR. Strengthening the legal, regulatory and supervisory framework of NBKR, replacing
NBKR's ICT system for on-site and off-site supervision and improving its human resources capacity, would
contribute to realizing the intended outcome. One key shortcoming of the theory of change was that four of
the component one activities were dropped during implementation. Given this, the PDO should have been
revised to better reflect the reduced scope of project activities.

Outputs. (ICR, pages 26 -27)

      71 NBKR supervisory staff were trained, exceeding the target of 25 in areas of liquidity risk, derivates,
       Information Technology (IT) security, operational risk, stress testing of credit systems, preparing
       International Financial Reporting System (IFRS) evaluations, systemic risk and consolidated
       supervision.
      Average years of experience of NBKR supervisors when the project closed was six as compared to
       two at the baseline. This exceeded the target of 4.5 years.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to enhance NBKR's financial sector stability by enabling the
authorities to adopt new major regulations. However, with the dropping of major activities from the project,
attribution of outcomes to project activities was not entirely possible.

The NBKR adopted two major regulations for improving its human resources management as per the revised
target. This was far short of the original target of 12. These regulations were:

      The regulation facilitating NBKR's transition to risk-based supervision from compliance- based
       supervision. This regulation was amended by NBKR (outside the project activities) on August 14, 2019
       and November 25, 2020, to include sections related to anti-terrorist financing, money-laundering, and
       responsibilities of curators/institutional inspections.
      The NBKR adopted the regulation on "Approval of the Provision on Certification of NBKR Staff" on
       May 22,2012. This regulation specified minimum qualifications and requirements for
       NBKR's supervisory staff. This regulation was amended on August 2, 2017, to add the requirement of
       certification of the supervisory staff.
      The team clarified that the NBKR also developed various legal acts during the course of the
       project. The team clarified that it was hard to delineate what reforms (change in legal, regulatory and
       supervisory frameworks) was done precisely under the project, since the component one activities
       intended to support the overall objectives in conjunction with a parallel TA.

Of the five intended activities, three (strengthening NBKR's legal, regulatory and supervisory frameworks)
were dropped and one (improving NBKR's ICT) was cancelled. The project eventually completed only one
activity. In addition, attribution to the project activities was only partial. Therefore, efficacy is assessed as
negligible before restructuring.



Rating
Negligible

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not revised. However, the project scope was drastically reduced with the second project
restructuring.

Revised Rationale
Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to enhance NBKR's financial sector stability by enabling the
authorities to adopt new major regulations. However, with the dropping of major activities from the project,
attribution of outcomes to project activities was not entirely possible.

      The NBKR adopted two major regulations for improving its human resources management as per the
       revised target.

The project restructuring did not significantly change the outcomes. The project eventually completed only
one activity. While the revised targets were met, they were not entirely attributable to the project. This review
concludes that the restructuring was not sufficient for realizing the development objective. Therefore, the
efficacy of this objective is modest after restructuring.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to financial services.

Rationale
Theory of change. The project activities aimed to address some of the constraints to accessing financial
services particularly by rural beneficiaries. Activities supporting KPO, such as connecting ICT-equipped post
offices to central terminals, installing centralized online accounting system, assistance for improving KPO's
accounting practices and training KPO staff, were likely to help KPO provide ICT based financial services in
rural and remote areas via agreements with utility companies and banks. Activities aimed at improving the
legal and regulatory framework for secured lending and debt resolution, modernizing the collateral registry
and capacity building of stakeholders were likely to strengthen the regime for registering moveable collateral
and thereby increase the access to credit for small and medium size enterprises with moveable collateral.

One shortcoming of the results framework was that the PDO remained unchanged, although the project was
left only with the KPO part and the Ayil Bank part of the project (which was also relevant for increasing to
financial services, particularly savings and loans) was dropped. It is not clear why the PDO was not made
more project-specific to reflect the actual scope of project activities.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



Outputs. (ICR, page 28 - 33).

      The KPO adopted a centralized digitalized financial management system as targeted for transitioning
         from paper-based processing practices. 388 post offices were equipped with IT system exceeding the
         target of 360. According to the additional information provided by the team, the post offices were all
         connected to the KPO's central hub by project closure. With this, around 664 post offices
         (representing 72% of Kyrgyz Republic's total postal network) were providing ICT-based financial
         services. 518 of the post offices were in rural areas with limited banks and ATMs.
        The KPO developed a new methodology for costing KPO's products and services as targeted. Based
         on this methodology, a software module was installed to enable KPO generate consolidated financial
         reports for accounting and costing, and filtering calculations by separate post offices for assessing the
         comparative effectiveness of its units.
        KPO developed an internal audit methodology and a three-year audit plan and published audited
         financial statements for four years from 2016-2019 (exceeding the target of three) and two financial
         audits (for 2019 and 2020) that were consistent with the International Financial Reporting Standards
         (IFRS).
        The project aided in creating KPO's own server infrastructure through the Data Processing Center and
         backup center (previously KPO had only a server with limited capacity).The KPO procured internet
         services with adequate bandwidth for post offices in the regions.
        1,700 KPO staff were trained, exceeding the target of 1,200. Twenty KPO staff were trained as
         trainers and four dedicated regional training centers were constructed under the project.
        A survey of KPO employees was conducted in September 29, 2021, on a sample of 100 employees.
         The sample included 9.1% frontline KPO employees directly involved in servicing retail customers.
         88% of the interviewees were women and 68% were working in rural areas. The main findings of the
         survey are: 80% of the interviewed had access to training courses under the project and 92% of them
         were satisfied with the course quality; 92% were satisfaction with the changes in their daily life due to
         the project interventions (including the new systems introduced by the project); and 63% of those
         interviewed considered that the number of clients served in their offices had increased by 20%
         compared to the previous year.
        KPO's global ranking in the Universal Postal Union (UPU) improved. The UPU launched a Postal
         Development Index, which measures four dimensions of postal development: reliability, reach,
         relevance and resilience. KPO's initial ranking was 129th out of 170 countries in 2016, dropped in
         2017 to 135th, improved to 106 in 2018 and further improved to 98th in 2019. The ranking for 2020
         was not available.
        KPO signed agreements with banks and utilities. The team clarified that these agreements referred to
         the KPO's processing of banks and utility companies' transactions on their behalf. These agreements
         benefitted customers in rural areas with no bank branches. The agreements also reduced the costs
         and time of rural households, who previously had to travel outside their villages to make a basic
         banking transaction (such as a regular credit service payment).
        Revenues from non-governmental financial service transactions to the KPO increased from 15% at
         the baseline to 24.70%, exceeding the target of 20%.
        The market share of KPO in total remittance inflow increased to 0.01% as compared to 0% at the
         baseline, but short of the target of 2%.
        The Ministry of Justice adopted amendments to four laws (The Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on
         Pledges, Civil Code, The Code of the Kyrgyz Republic on Violations and The Code of Administrative


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



       Responsibility of the Kyrgyz Republic) and issued nine regulations, including two ministerial orders on
       operations of the central collateral registration office and moveable property.
      The 'online collateral registration system' was developed as targeted to ensure registration of collateral
       and transactions in real time. This system was upgraded in 2020 to perform additional functions such
       as uploading data, based on personal Identification number (PIN) for individuals, for legal entities,
       uploading data based on Vehicle Identification System and uploading data based on PIN for MFOs
       and other financial and lending institutions.
      The Ministry of Justice staff were trained on digitalization technologies. Sixteen public awareness
       campaign were held for financial institutions on compliance requirements and on the online system
       and secured lending methods far exceeding the target of three.

Outcomes.

As indicated earlier, the activity of privatizing the Ayil bank was dropped and the range of financial services
supported by the project were confined mainly to the financial services provided by the KPO. The outputs
were intended to have two outcomes: (i) increase the number of financial services provided by KPO; and (ii)
increase the number of annual registrations using moveable capital as collateral.

      The number of financial services provided by the KPO was 9.8 million per year in June 2021 (the
       figures for 2021 were annualized based on the data for the first six months). This was less than 10
       million at the baseline and far short of the revised and original targets of 11 million and 17 million. The
       ICR states that the integration of the new IT system in KPO's branch offices with the relevant systems
       of commercial banks enabled the general public (including the unbanked individuals in rural areas)
       better access to financial services (such as for making payments, and repaying loans). According to
       the clarifications provided by the team, the shortfall in target was partly attributable to the COVID - 19
       pandemic which affected demand for payments, credit and other services.
      The team clarified that 3,575 new annual registrations were made through the secured transactions
       registry, using moveable assets as collateral when the project closed. This was short of the target of
       5,000.
      While the project made positive contributions via supporting the range of financial services provided
       by the KPO in remote rural areas with limited financial institutions, the number of financial services
       provided by KPO were less than at the baseline. The new annual registrations made through the
       secured transactions registry using moveable assets as collateral was short of the target of 5,000.
       Thus, achievement of this objective before restructuring is rated as modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not revised with the second project restructuring.

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



                            Outputs.

                            The outputs described above were also relevant after project restructuring.

                            Outcomes.

                            The only PDO indicator target that was revised was the number of financial transactions by KPO, which was
                            revised as 11 million, and the actual achievement was less than the revised target and even the baseline as
                            mentioned above. Further, it is not clear if the increase in access to finance was due to the project or due to
                            the private sector. In sum, given that the realized outcomes were much less than the targets, this review
                            concludes that the project made a modest contribution to the PDO of increasing access to financial services.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is modest. Efficacy of PDO 1 - enhancing financial sector stability - is rated as negligible
                            before restructuring and modest after restructuring. Efficacy of PDO 2 - enhancing financial sector stability - is
                            rated as modest before and after restructuring.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic benefits. The project benefits were expected to come from: (i) to the implementing agencies due to
   the increased effectiveness of the collateral registry (reducing its operating costs), improvements in KPO's
   financial performance and improved effectiveness of the NBKR supervision; (ii) to clients due to the increased
   access to financial services, reduced transaction costs and increased return on savings; and (iii) benefits to
   economic development through three channels. first, the regulatory and supervisory reforms would enhance
   financial stability and thereby contribute to the country's sustainable economic growth. second, expansion of the
   KPO's network would improve access to financial services to the underserved households in rural areas, and
   third, a modern moveable collateral registry would contribute to credit expansion and lowering the cost of credit.

   Economic analysis. Economic analysis was conducted for activities associated with establishing the collateral
   registry and the ICT infrastructure in the KPO that supported both back office and front office functions. These
   components accounted for 95% of the cost (ICR, paragraphs 82-84).




                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



Investments in Collateral registry. The main tangible benefit from the collateral registry came from the steady
growth in lending secured with moveable collateral. The stock of outstanding loans almost doubled over the
2015-2021 period reaching US$45 million. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate estimated at
US$2.6 million at closure was comparable to the NPV at appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of
Return (EIRR) was 10% (The EIRR was not calculated at appraisal).

KPO ICT Infrastructure investments. The main benefit from the collateral registry came from the steady
growth in lending secured with moveable collateral. The NPV of costs and benefits associated with these
agreements facilitated by the ICT investments in KPO was positive at closure. The ex post EIRR was 10% (the
ex-EIRR was not calculated at appraisal).

Administrative and operational issues. The project approved on March 8, 2012, became effective only on
December 25, 2013, due to the protracted delays in implementing the component three (privatization of Ayil
bank) activity. This activity accounted for over a quarter of the Bank financing (27%) for this project. Eventually
this activity was cancelled even before the project became effective. Likewise, the scope of the component one
activity (strengthening the legal, regulatory and supervisory framework for banks) was drastically reduce through
the second project restructuring. The project faced challenges at the outset outset due to the limited
implementation capacity and uneven commitment from stakeholders, including the Parliament. Implementation
was extremely slow in the early years and disbursements remained low (with only a third of the financing
disbursed more than five years into implementation). These were mainly due to the procurement delays,
exacerbated by factors over which the project had no control such as frequent changes in leadership and
restrictions due to the COVID 19 pandemic in the final years. The repeated extension of the closing date by four
years raised supervision costs.

Taking these factors into account, efficiency is assessed as modest, due to the administrative and operational
issues during implementation which resulted in the project size being much smaller, with many of the originally
planned activities dropped during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              10.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)




Relevance of the PDOs is substantial both before and after project restructuring. Overall efficacy is modest.
Efficacy of the first objective - enhancing financial sector stability - is negligible before restructuring and modest
after restructuring. Efficacy of the second objective - to increase access to financial services - is modest before
and after restructuring. Efficiency is rated as modest due to the administrative and operational shortcomings
during implementation, which resulted in the non-completion of many of the planned activities at appraisal. This
review concluded that there were significant shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives and
efficiency. The project's overall outcome is therefore rated as moderately unsatisfactory.

Table. Outcome ratings

                                              Before Restructuring                    After restructuring
       Relevance of Objective                                          Substantial
       Efficacy Objective One                       Negligible                              Modest
       Efficacy Objective Two                        Modest                                 Modest
              Efficiency                                                 Modest
          Overall Outcome                   Moderately Unsatisfactory              Moderately Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. The ICR (paragraph 127) notes that political environment is still volatile and frequent changes
in governments pose threats to the sustainability of project achievements. For instance, repeated changes in
KPO's parent ministry undermined the Ministry's oversight of project activities. Likewise, the Collateral
Registry Office unexpectedly came under the mandate of the Ministry of Justice. Such changes could
hamper the institutional stability of of public sector entities such as the KPO with weak capacity and political
weight and hence need political support at the higher level to sustain their reform momentum.

Economic risk. According to the team there is considerable risk as evidenced by the rising share of
commercial banks' Non Performing Loans (NPLs), due to a combination of factors including the pro-longed
COVID- pandemic and the war in Ukraine which is having a direct impact on Kyrgyz republic's banking
system.

Financial risk. The ICR (paragraph 128) notes that sustainability of project achievements at KPO depends
on institutional capacity at the KPO headquarters. Expanding the financial services and improving its
revenue base is required for its financial sustainability in the long-run. The ICR notes that KPO's corporate
culture needs to shift towards commercial-orientation, through establishing a marketing department and
strengthening its internal M&E arrangements. Likewise, the outcomes of activities associated with
modernizing the Central Registry Office could be undermined by inadequate funding for maintaining and
upgrading the IT system.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                        Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The analytical underpinnings of the project were sound (discussed in section three). The preparation of
  this project drew on the Bank's previous experiences with similar projects aimed at improving the legal
  framework, supervision and regulation of the financial sector in Europe and Central Asia (such as the
  Azerbaijan Financial Services Project, which aimed to expand the financial services provided by the Azeri
  post and the Kosvo Business Environment TA project which aimed to modernize its collateral registry).
  The lessons incorporated at design included: (i) focusing on strengthening the legal, regulatory and
  supervisory framework for financial sector stability; (ii) working closely with the IMF given the nature of
  financial sector activities of the project; (iii) TA for ICT procurement given the weak implementation
  capacity (although this activity was no addressed well in the project): and (iv) modernizing the postal
  system recognizing that a modern postal system could be an effective instrument for enhancing financial
  services in underserved rural areas in the country context. The arrangements made at appraisal for
  fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were significant shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry. The project was over-ambitious and even though
  the activity of privatizing the Ayil Bank which accounted for over a quarter of the Bank financing for this
  project was dropped before effectiveness, the PDO was not modified to reflect the reduced project scope.
  The project risks were significantly underestimated at appraisal. Several risk such as the overall
  implementation risk, stakeholder and governance risks and the weak implementation capacity were
  assessed as moderate at appraisal. This assessment was inappropriate as the weak implementation
  capacity, political commitment and significant lack of ownership by the project counterparts in the initial
  years contributed to the long gap between project approval and effectiveness and cancellation of the
  activity (privatization of Ayil bank). Weak capacity of KPO undermined project performance for most of
  the project period. These factors suggest that there was not enough consultation with stakeholders when
  this project was prepared. There were also significant M&E shortcomings (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Eighteen Implementation Status Results (ISR) reports were filed over the project lifetime. Supervision
 missions were conducted twice a year. The task team switched to virtual meetings/missions after the onset
 of the COVID-19 pandemic. The ICR (paragraph 119) notes that the supervision team included financial
 and private sector specialists and fiduciary specialists and many of the supervision team were based in
 Bishkek. Given the project delays in the initial years, during the final year of the project, the Bank
 intensified its supervision effort by holding weekly technical and bi-weekly management meeting with the
 counterpart and provided day-to-day support in the final months. This helped in addressing most of the
 challenges and helped in completing most of the activities in the final years. The support provided by the
 Bank's procurement specialist in the country office helped in addressing the procurement challenges. The
 Bank appropriately restructured the project to address the challenges on the ground and helped in
 addressing the deficiencies in the M&E framework (although this was made only in the final years).

 There were moderate shortcomings in Bank supervision. The ICR (paragraph 122) notes that the quality of
 Bank supervision was uneven. The ICR also notes that at times, the Bank supervision seemed to lose

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



 focus on the project's primary objectives and activities, skipped regular monitoring of progress towards key
 targets and was slow in strengthening country-based support for implementation. The continuity of
 leadership was undermined, especially in the early years. Further, the PDO was not modified and the M&E
 indicators were not revised adequately.

 Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry was moderately unsatisfactory and at supervision was moderately
 satisfactory. Since overall outcome is in the unsatisfactory range, overall Bank performance is assessed as
 moderately satisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators for monitoring PDO 2 (increasing access to financial services) - the number of
 financial transactions by KPO and the number of new annual registrations in the secured transactions
 registry) - were adequate.

 However there were significant weaknesses in M&E design. The PDO 1 statement (enhancing financial
 sector stability) was too broad and lacked specificity. The intermediate indicator used for monitoring the
 quality of NBKR supervisory staff (number of years of professional experience) was inadequate. A more
 appropriate indicator would have been to monitor the number of the supervisory staff who were certified by
 an accreditation agency. Likewise, the number of (bank) card payment terminals connected to the KPO's
 new central IT system was inappropriate, given that the market had shifted from card-based payment
 methods to mobile money-based methods. The indicator to measure access to financial services was
 inadequate, since the indicators were confined to the services provided by KPO.

 The ICR (paragraph 105) noted that there was no reliable base line and targets for several indicators, and
 that the PDO did not clearly spell out the responsibilities of the various stakeholders for collecting the data
 for monitoring project performance.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 106) notes that the M&E design weaknesses, including specification of indicators
  remained during most of the implementation period. Despite the significant of the project scope regarding
  the financial stability of the NBKR, the indicators were not modified. The Bank did not revise the targets
  for several indicators. The ICR notes that the baseline figure for the number of financial transactions

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



  provided by KPO was overestimated. A validation of the baseline figure would have provided a more
  realistic picture of the project's achievements. The ICR notes that a limited amount of data was collected
  and disclosed in the initial years.

  However, M&E implementation improved from 2020, after a M&E specialist was hired by the Project
  Management Unit and the Bank team more active in addressing the M&E weakness, especially
  pertaining to data collection and reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was utilized to assess progress towards PDO achievement and to address
  implementation challenges.

  In sum, M&E is assessed as modest, given the shortcomings in M&E design and issues in M&E
  implementation during the initial years.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category F (Financial Intermediary Assessment) project under the World
   Bank safeguard policies. As discussed in section 2e, following the cancellation of the component three
   activity, the project was reclassified as a category c project. No assessment was required.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial management (FM) assessment of the Credit Line
   Management Unit (CLMU) and the Project Implementation Unit (PCU) of the NBKR at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that FM arrangements were adequate (PAD, paragraph 52). The ICR (paragraph
   112) notes FM was satisfactory since December 2014. Throughout the project lifetime, the PCU submitted
   annual audited financial statements and interim unaudited financial reports that were acceptable to the
   Bank in a timely fashion, and that there were no significant FM issues during implementation. The ICR
   (paragraph 135) notes that although the project provided for modernization of the entire financial
   management in the KPO, the country office-based Bank financial staff were not initially involved in advising
   the client on this issue. According to the additional information provided by the team, the country-based
   Bank financial staff advised the KPO in the final phase of the project.

   Procurement management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 59). The assessment concluded that the procurement risk was high, due to the low capacity in
   KPO and limited competition in procurement in the country context. The mitigation measures, included

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



   hiring additional staff and more direct support from the Bank's procurement expert stationed in the country
   office.

   The ICR (paragraph 114) notes that procurement management was rated as moderately satisfactory
   during implementation. However there were procurement delays during implementation, and as discussed
   in section 2e, there was one case of mis procurement without cancellation for an activitiy associated with
   installing ICT infrastructure in NBKR (This activity was cancelled later).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (paragraph 95) notes that there were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   The ICR does not mention any unintended consequence due to the project activities.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Relevance of the PDO was
                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome                                                                          substantial. Overall efficacy is
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 modest. Efficiency is modest.
                               Moderately            Moderately                  There were significant
Bank Performance
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              shortcomings at Quality at Entry.
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. A careful design and adjustment of the development objectives helps in better monitoring
of project performance. In this project, the project scope was drastically reduced following the
second project restructuring. However the Project Development Objective (PDO) was not revised to
align it with the actual scope of the project. This negatively impact ratings as the project outcomes
were assessed against bigger objectives than what could be achieved through the project
interventions.

2. A comprehensive approach may be required for modernizing a state-owned enterprise.
This project broadly aimed at modernizing the state-owned Kyrgyz Republic Post Office (KPO) and

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)



expanding the range of financial services provided by KPO. However, the project e project activities
were confined to improving the ICT infrastructure of KPO. The lesson is that reforms needed a major
change in the corporate culture and institutional structure that were well beyond the scope of this
project.

3. Securing and institutionalizing high-level political commitment can help in overcoming
delays during implementation. In this project, the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) did not have
sufficiently high administrative profile and leverage. The lesson from this project is that when several
government agencies and ministries are involved in project implementation, forming a steering
committee headed by a senior official at the Prime Minister's office would signal a high-level political
commitment and facilitate resolving implementation issues more efficiently.

4. A careful consideration of the full array of Bank instruments is required for a sector
reform. In this project, the project activity of privatizing the state-owned Ayril Bank was cancelled
even before the project became effective due to political resistance. On hind sight it might have been
useful for the Bank to support a measure on privatization of state-owned banks with a robust
'Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) program and a specific prior action under a Development
Policy Financing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. It candidly discusses the issues during implementation, the shortcomings with the monitoring
and evaluation and Bank supervision. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this
project.

However, there were some shortcomings. The theory of change however could have explicitly stated the
assumptions. The evidence provided in the text for the ratings is not adequate. The split rating was not
conducted in line with the Bank Guidance. The project achievements before the restructuring should be
assessed for the entire duration of the project, not partially before and after the restructuring.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
KG Financial Sector Development Project (P125689)




                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
