     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023055

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157136                                    AR - PS Modernization and Innovation

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                  Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87100                                30-Jun-2021                                          78,783,585.54

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Feb-2017                               31-Oct-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        78,783,585.54                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Konstantin Atanesyan       Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original project development objective (PDO), as per the Loan Agreement and the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) was "To improve the quality and accessibility of selected government administrative
   services and enhance transparency in the public administration".

   The Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) report unpacks the PDO into three objectives/outcomes
   (ICR, p.7):


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



   Outcome 1: To improve the quality of selected government administrative services

   Outcome 2: To improve the accessibility of selected government administrative services

   Outcome 3: Enhance transparency in public administration.

   This review concurs with this unpacking and applies it in this ICR Review (ICRR) .

   The project was restructured twice (2019 and 2021), with no changes to the PDO.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Improvements in Service Delivery to Citizens, Businesses and Government.

   Implementation and effective use of improved administrative services to citizens, businesses, and
   government agencies at the national and subnational levels, with two subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1
   (Improvements in Government-to-Citizen (G2C) and Government-to-Business (G2B)) services sought to
   improve the quality, accessibility, and transparency of selected citizen and business services at the national
   and subnational levels. Subcomponent 1.2 (Improvements in Government-to-Government (G2G) services)
   supported improvements in the efficiency and transparency of selected internal government administrative
   services. Cost at approval was US$17.9 million. Cost at closing was US$24.9 million.

   Component 2. Strengthening of Cross-Cutting Public Sector Management Systems and Platforms.

   Development and streamlining of key public management systems required to improve public service
   delivery, four subcomponents. Subcomponent 2.1 (Performance Management System) supported the Chief
   of Cabinet Office (supported by the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Modernization) and other
   national line ministries in developing a performance management system. Subcomponent 2.2 (Electronic
   Procurement System) supported upgrading an e-procurement system for the national public
   administration, the creation of a helpdesk, and elaborating a national procurement strategy. Subcomponent
   2.3 (Human Resource Management Systems) supported the implementation of modern human resource
   (HR) management practices and systems. Subcomponent 2.4 (Open Government, Open Data, and
   Innovation Platforms) supported the promotion of open government, open data, and open innovation
   principles through the strengthening of the National Open Data Initiative, and the promotion of access, use,
   and re-use of public data by broader audiences. Cost at approval was US$20.9 million. Cost at closing was
   US$25.9 million.

   Component 3. Enabling Technology and Reform Management (Includes Project Implementation Unit).

   Investments to enable the successful development and implementation of modernized transversal
   management systems and platforms, three subcomponents. Subcomponent 3.1 (Change Management


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



  Strategy and Project Management) supported developing and implementing a comprehensive and centrally
  managed change management and communication strategy. Subcomponent 3.2 (Electronic Document
  Management Platform and Information Services (eDMS)), supported the implementation of an electronic
  workflow management platform for documents, and electronic identification document authentication
  mechanisms, the expansion of the use of the digital signature, and the installation of data warehouse and
  business intelligence tools. Subcomponent 3.3 (ICT Infrastructure) financed activities undertaken by the
  Argentinian Satellite Solutions Corporation (ARSAT), the government-owned company that provides
  telecommunications services to Government entities and hosts the National Data Center. Cost at approval
  was US$49.9 million. Cost at closing was US$37.9 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The total project cost at approval was US$80 million, and US$78.8 million at closing. The difference is
  attributed to the Argentine peso fluctuation. The borrower contribution was US$8.9 million at approval. The
  ICR does not mention the actual borrower contribution. The 2021 restructuring extended the closing date
  from May 2021 to October 2021, responding to the client’s request for additional five months to complete
  the delivery of goods for specific procurement processes.

  The 2019 restructuring revised the target for the third PDO indicator (cumulative number of government
  internal administrative processes mapped and modeled with eDMS across national line ministries and other
  entities of the national public administration). According to the ICR, since the original targets were achieved,
  the restructuring included increases to the annual Year 3 and Year 4 targets for the PDO indicator capturing
  the number of government internal administrative processes mapped and modeled with the eDMS. The
  same restructuring included three new activities: for Component 1 - implementation of digital access points
  to facilitate citizen access to digital services at locations across the territory of the Borrower; for Component
  2 - competitive hiring processes for the top management cadre in line with the Human Resource
  Management system under implementation, and support for to the National Institute of Public Administration
  (Instituto Nacional de Administración Pública, INAP) to strengthen its institutional capacities and develop
  training modules.

  The 2019 restructuring also reallocated loan proceeds between expenditure categories, shifting US$18
  million from input-based to results-based modalities. The cost of Component 1 increased from US$17.9
  million to US$ 24.9 US$ million, Component 2 increased from US$ 20.9 million to US$ 25.9 million, and
  Component 3 decreased from US$ 49.9 to US$ 37.9 million. New intermediate indicators were introduced,
  capturing: progress on the volume of administrative services processed through remote-based services
  (trámites a distancia, TAD); implementation of digital access points; training for public employees on topics
  related to the Government’s modernization program; carrying out competitive hiring processes within the top
  management cadre; disaggregation of the user satisfaction indicator; adjustment to the indicator on
  electronic processing of asset declarations; and dropping one intermediate indicator on innovation projects.
  The 2019 restructuring included the conversion of an intermediate indicator measuring the number of pilot
  municipalities with improved digital public services into a disbursement-linked indicator (DLI), with the
  subsequent increase in the annual targets corresponding to Year 3 and Year 4.

  The restructuring shifted resources to results-based financing (RBF), responding to faster than expected
  progress towards targets, the fact that much of the RBF had already disbursed; and expectation that future
  spending on the input-based activities could be affected by austerity measures and tight fiscal space.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Low levels of transparency and accountability across the public administration had affected Argentina’s
development. They undermined its growth potential, with the country lagging behind regional and
international comparators in several dimensions of governance, creating headwinds in convergence with
high-income economies (CPF p.26). The PDOs were consistent with Bank priorities in the CPF (FY19-22),
which strongly emphasized institutional strengthening. The project responded to some key institutional
constraints for development, such as the institutional capacity for service delivery (including procurement
regulatory framework and fiduciary controls to curb corruption and intergovernmental cooperation and
service delivery) (CPF, p.15). The project conformed to the Selectivity Filter for WBG financing in Argentina
(CPF, pp. 18-19), falling into the category of interventions that "address key institutional challenges to
shared prosperity and inequality; and/or deliver global public goods" (CPF p. 18), Focus Area 2 of the CPF
(Addressing key institutional Constraints for Better Governance and Service Delivery). Focus area 2 of the
CPF included several objectives, with Objective 4 (Strengthening transparency and reducing corruption)
most directly linked to the PDOs. Objective 4 anticipated that increased use of the e-procurement system
and implementation of anti-corruption risk-based-warning systems together with the public employees
effectively fulfilling their asset declarations would reduce the risk of corruption, (CPF p. 25). The CPF also
recognizes that the introduction of IPFs with DLIs provided the opportunity to strengthen financial
management knowledge on the implementation of budget programs of line departments.

PDOs targeted improving relevant government services, such as modernization of civil registry services,
improvement of Government-to-Government (G2G) services; strengthening cross-cutting systems,
development of digital systems for performance management, e-procurement, and human resource
management, and implementation of the eDMS, electronic ID authentication, and upgrading the ICT
infrastructure. These activities broadly contributed a better quality of selected government administrative
services.

The project was consistent with and relevant to the WBG response to the COVID-19 crisis, contributing to
pillar 4 of the Crisis Response Approach paper by strengthening policies, institutions, and investments for
sustainable recovery. The COVID-19 pandemic saw significant expansion in the use of the eDMS and
digital services by citizens and firms. The project also enabled the implementation of COVID passes. The
PDOs were consistent with the government’s priorities, as reflected in the digital governance and state
modernization plan, which remained a priority despite political changes at the top (presidential elections of
Oct 2019). The central aspects of the digital governance and state modernization plan launched by
President Macri’s administration (2015-2019) have continued under President Fernandez (2019-present),
even though they belong to parties with contrasting political agendas. In March 2021, the Board of the
World Bank approved a follow-up project that will continue to support the digital government agenda (Digital
Inclusion and Innovation in Public Services in Argentina, P174946).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the quality of selected government administrative services.

               Rationale
               PDO 1: To improve the quality of selected government administrative services. According to the theory of
               change (TOC, ICR, p. 6), activities under all three project components contributed to the achievement of this
               PDO. They included the modernization of civil registry services in the Province of Buenos Aires (PBA) and
               improvement of Government-to-Government (G2G) services (Component 1); strengthening cross-cutting
               systems, development of digital systems for performance management, e-procurement, and human resource
               management (Component 2); and implementation of the eDMS, electronic ID authentication, and upgrading
               the ICT infrastructure (Component 3). These activities contributed to increased government ICT capacity,
               better cost-efficiency, enhanced cybersecurity, availably of digital information for public sector management,
               and faster and more efficient processes – and eventually, a better quality of selected government
               administrative services. The key indicator for the achievement of this PDO was the cumulative number of
               government internal administrative processes mapped and modeled with the eDMS across national line
               ministries and other entities of the national public administration. The project initially targeted 460 paper-
               based internal processes or digital services. Eventually, it achieved a total of 1,384 digital services available
               in the TAD Platform, representing 213 percent of the initial target. In addition, by 2021, the 450 entities in the
               central national administration used the eDMS. The number of eDMS registered users increased by 73
               percent from 2020 to 2021. The project used seven intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to measure the
               quality of government services, from which six associated targets were achieved or exceeded (operation of
               the civil registry; the number of framework agreements processed through the e-procurement portal; number
               of pilot Province governments with back-office processes supported by the eDMS; number of Results-Based
               Management Dashboards implemented at the ministry level; number of public administration employees
               passing at least one INAP class related to the modernization program; and increased government IT
               processing and data storage capacity - racks installed). The ICR mentions five achieved indicators out of
               seven (p. 12), but Table 3 on p. 13 provides data for six indicators achieved. The project did not complete
               activities related to HR processes due to changes in government priorities following the change of
               administration in December 2019. The Secretariat of Public Employment decided to discontinue the HRM
               system reform. Overall, these and other indicators (for example, Argentina reached second place in Latin
               America on the 2020 UN E-Government Index and 32nd place in the world, improving 11 positions compared
               to 2018) reflect progress on the effectiveness and efficiency of government services. A potentially informative
               indicator of service quality would have been the perceptions of the direct beneficiaries – citizens and
               businesses. The ICR does not discuss it in relation to PDO1, but mentions later for PDO2 (ICR, p. 14): at
               project closing, 82 percent of users were satisfied with TAD government services, achieving the target for this
               activity (baseline 76, target 82 percent). However, a separate target for the Mi Argentina portal (68 percent of
               users who evaluate Argentina.gob.ar's services satisfactorily) was not met. The baseline satisfaction with this
               service stood at 58.5 percent of users and only 48.5 percent by project closing. Changes in the methodology
               explain the difference: the baseline was constructed from a dedicated survey, whereas monitoring data was
               collected by asking users to rate their satisfaction with the experience when accessing a service. ICR argues


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



that service satisfaction may reflect changes in public expectations and their experience with the government
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The overall achievement of this PDO is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the accessibility of selected government administrative services.

Rationale
These services included creation of a single-entry government portal and the development of digital services
to citizens (G2C) and businesses (G2B). This led to an increase in the number of online services offered to
citizens and businesses, and consolidation of government websites in one place. The key indicator for the
achievement of this PDO was the number of users registered on the argentina.gob.ar portal with a Citizen
Digital Profile. The target was exceeded: the number of registered users increased from 500 (baseline) in
2016 to 1.6 million in March 2019 (target) and 9 million by the end of the project in 2021. The project
consolidated the platform for government services by relaunching a single portal, made additional online
services available to citizens and businesses, and implementing digital access points for the excluded
population. COVID-19 accelerated platform use, as citizens had to access government services remotely.
The project exceeded or fully achieved six out of seven IRIs related to improving accessibility of services: (i)
number of key citizen-centric processes designed and available online (target 22 – actual 22); (ii) percentage
of transactions related to SMEs carried out through electronic means (target 90 – actual 99) (iii) percentage of
users who evaluate TAD government services satisfactorily (target 82 – actual 82); (iv) number of
administrative processes generated through the virtual services platform (target 5.6 million – actual 8.3
million); (v) number of participating municipalities with new digital public services (target 1240 – actual 1247);
(vi) number of new digital access points implemented, contributing to close the gap for digitally excluded
populations across the territory (target 110 – actual 156). The indicator on user satisfaction with
argentina.gob.ar services was not achieved, (referred to earlier on PDO1), with a target of 68 percent and an
actual of 48 percent. Achievement of this PDO is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance transparency in the public administration.

Rationale
The TOC includes the following project activities that contributed to the achievement of this objective: (i)
launch of open data and innovation platforms; and (ii) development of digital systems for performance
management, e-procurement, and human resource management. These activities contributed to better public

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



                            access to public administration information and enhanced transparency. The key indicator for the
                            achievement of this PDO was Argentina’s improved performance in the Open Data Barometer Index (ODBI, a
                            global measure of governments’ use of open data for accountability, innovation, and social impact). The ICR
                            claims that the target was achieved (baseline 24, target 46, actual 47, out of 100), however it also notes that
                            the latest available data for ODBI is for 2017 (the year of project approval) and although this was an
                            improvement compared to 2016 (24 out of 100), it cannot be attributed to the project - and therefore the
                            actual achievement is unknown. The ICR notes that the project explored alternative indicators, such as OECD
                            surveys and World Bank data, but none of these could provide comparable information on 2020 or 2021
                            performance. Out of four IRIs related to this PDO two were achieved or exceeded: (i) number of datasets in
                            open formats published in the national open data portal (baseline 200, target 800, actual 1000); and (ii)
                            percentage of purchasing units within the national public administration operating with the new electronic
                            procurement system (target 95, actual 100). The other two IRIs were not achieved/discontinued due to
                            changed government priorities: (i) percentage of public employees required to submit asset declarations
                            whose declarations are electronically captured, processed, and analyzed (baseline 0, target 70, actual 0); and
                            (ii) the number of competitive employment processes for positions within the top management cadre (baseline
                            80, target 450, actual 89). A quick review of a relevant proxy for public administration transparency, such as
                            the Open Budget Survey (https://internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/country-results) shows that
                            Argentina’s performance was, at best, stagnant during the period of the project. On a scale of 1-100,
                            Argentina scored 13 in 2017 and 15 in 2021 on public participation (slight improvement), 56 and 54 on budget
                            oversight (slight decrease), and 50 in both years on transparency (no change). While achievement on public
                            procurement and dataset publication is indeed a positive development, the absence of progress on other
                            important indicators related to HR management and disclosure leads to a Modest rating for this PDO.



                            Rating
                            ---


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project developed and strengthened cross-cutting administrative and management systems that provided
                            shared management tools, such as e-filing and e-procurement. It also strengthened the technological
                            infrastructure and improved the availability of standardized, reliable, and secure information.

                            The overall efficacy rating for the project is Substantial, considering the sum of efficacy ratings of three PDOs
                            (one high, one substantial, one modest), as well as the achievement of two out of three key indicators, and
                            the majority of IRIs, 14 out of 18.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




 5. Efficiency
The PAD provides a detailed breakdown of expected efficiency gains by project subcomponents, focusing on
the areas in which the benefits can be quantified: (i) reduced transaction costs and time savings for processes
related to SME certification and civil registries (subcomponent 1.1), procurement (subcomponents 1.2 and 2.2),
and workflow management (subcomponent 3.3). The Bank expected the project to yield a net present value
(NPV) of $203.1 million at appraisal. The Bank estimated the benefits of reduced prices for commonly procured
goods using framework agreements (financial benefits) and in terms of time saved by citizens, businesses, and
government staff (economic benefits). The analysis assumed an exchange rate of 15 Argentinian pesos per US$
and a 6% discount rate over ten years and accounted for 10% in price and physical contingency for unexpected
delays. The subcomponent cost values provided in Annex 4 of the PAD (Economic and Financial Analysis) differ
significantly (are higher) from the main text of the PAD and ICR (after the 2019 restructuring), which provide cost
at the component level only. The difference could be attributed (although the PAD is not explicit about it) to the
inclusion in the analysis of estimated future costs to sustain the interventions (which are not specified). The PAD
does not provide an estimate of the expected ERR. Using the simple standard formula for ERR calculation and
the estimated project cost of $88 million at appraisal yields an expected ERR of 130 percent.

Subcomponent 1.1: Improvements in G2C and G2B services. The total estimated cost for this subcomponent
per Annex 4 of the PAD was US$32.3 million (the estimated cost of the whole Component 1 is US$17.9 million
according to the PAD and the actual cost is US$24.9 million per ICR), including investments in the Citizen Digital
Profile, selected services to SMEs, and the automation of civil registry processes, and estimated future costs to
sustain the intervention. The benefits (financial and economic savings) were expected to yield an NPV of $100.2
million from digitizing processes related to SMEs and civil registries, and accounting for time and travel cost
savings for SME representatives, additional fees that can be generated as a result of processing higher volumes
of SME certifications, and the reduced transaction costs related to government staff time.

Subcomponents 1.2 and 2.2: G2G services and electronic procurement system. The total cost of two
subcomponents was estimated at US$37.3 million in Annex 4 of the PAD (the estimated cost of Components 1
and 2 combined per PAD is US$38.8 million and the actual cost $50.8 million per ICR), including investments for
the expansion of framework agreements, updated e-procurement system, training of personnel, and elaboration
of a National Procurement Strategy, as well as estimated future costs to sustain the intervention. The total value
of savings was expected at US$41.9 million, resulting from reduced prices of commonly procured goods using
framework agreements.

Subcomponent 3.3: ICT Infrastructure. The total estimated cost for this subcomponent per Annex 4 of the PAD
was US$74.9 million (the estimated cost of Component 3 at approval (PAD) was US$49.9 million, and the actual
cost of US$37.9 million after restructuring (ICR)) for investments in the ARSAT’s capacity to host ICT services
for government agencies, consultancy services, software licenses, hardware infrastructure, operational costs, as
well as estimated future costs to sustain the intervention. Economic benefits from staff time saved by electronic
workflow management were expected at an NPV of US$99.9 million.

The ICR provides a summary of efficiency gains (Annex 4, tables 7-9) in the aggregate, not breaking it down by
subcomponents (as in PAD), and notes that it was not possible to replicate calculations similar to PAD at closing
due to the volatility of peso to dollar exchange rate throughout project implementation. While this would have
been a valid explanation for possible discrepancies in expected and actual efficiency gains as measured in US$,
this does not explain why a similar analysis (by subcomponent) was not done at completion.



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



The ICR notes that the project led to efficiency gains in services for government agencies and users (citizens
and firms), which are expected to outlast the project’s lifetime. The government can provide administrative
services more quickly, and deploying the e-filing system and the remote access platform (TAD) brought time
savings. The ICR calculates that the project generated an estimated US$159 million in savings for citizens from
the efficiencies gained in digitizing government services and an estimated U$136 million in efficiency gains
related to time savings for public sector employees (assuming the use of digital service platforms results in 25
percent time savings for civil servants). With this, the ERR for the project is calculated at 78.97 percent, using
the savings related to citizens’ use of digital services ($159 million). The ICR, however, does not provide details
on how it arrived at that number. The simple standard formula for ERR calculation (159(savings)-78(project cost
at closing)/78(project cost at closing)X100) arrives at 103 percent or 80.7 percent using the total appraisal cost
of 88 million, including borrower contribution.

Other non-quantified efficiency gains included: (i) improved user interface with service providers to ensure that
citizens and businesses have easier, faster access to a wider range of services and spend less time dealing with
administrative processes; (ii) faster and easier application and tracking of government administrative services,
allowing citizens and firms to track the status of their digital services through their online accounts; (iii) reduction
in environmental costs - reduced paper use and greenhouse emissions due to travel savings; (iv) improved
business continuity due to the automation and digitalization of public administrative services and critical
government records.

Overall, this review broadly concurs with the ICR conclusions regarding the clear efficiency gains of the project.
The ICR did not exactly follow the analytical path charted at the appraisal (by subcomponents and specific
activities), and the methods of arriving at the final number are not specified. Nevertheless, the analysis
presented in the ICR (at the aggregate level) appears to be broadly acceptable and credible in terms of arriving
to an overall positive assessment and high ERR.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 78.97
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                          Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



The overall outcome of this project is rated Satisfactory, based on the combined ratings of High for Relevance of
Objectives and Substantial for both Efficacy and Efficiency.

The project objectives were consistent with Bank priorities in Argentina as reflected in the current CPF (FY19-
22). It responded to some of the key constraints for development, such as the institutional capacity for service
delivery, as reflected in Focus Area 2 of the CPF (Addressing key institutional Constraints for Better
Governance and Service Delivery), Objective 4 (Strengthening transparency and reducing corruption). The
project was also consistent with and relevant to the WBG response to the COVID-19 crisis, contributing to pillar
4 of the Crisis Response Approach paper by strengthening policies, institutions, and investments for sustainable
recovery. The PDOs were consistent with the government’s priorities, as reflected in the digital governance and
state modernization plan, which remained a priority despite political changes at the top in 2019. In March 2021,
the Board approved a follow-up project that will continue to support the digital government agenda (Digital
Inclusion and Innovation in Public Service).

The project activities contributed to achieving most stated objectives, as they developed and
strengthened cross-cutting administrative and management systems that provided shared management tools,
such as e-filing and e-procurement systems, strengthened the technological infrastructure, and ensured the
availability of standardized, reliable, and secure information.

The project contributed to improving the quality of selected government administrative services through the
development of G2G services and digital systems of management, upgrading the ICT infrastructure, and other
activities that led to increased government ICT capacity, better cost-efficiency, enhanced cybersecurity,
availably of digital information for public sector management, and faster and more efficient processes. At
the same time, the project did not complete activities related to HR processes due to changes in government
priorities, and the public satisfaction survey results were rather low at project closing (substantial achievement).
To improve the accessibility of selected government administrative services, the project supported the creation
of a single-entry government portal. It developed G2C and G2B services, reflected in the vastly expanded use of
the portal and services (high achievement). To enhance transparency in public administration, the project
activities helped to launch open data and innovation platforms; developed digital systems for performance
management, e-procurement, and human resource management, increasing the number of open format
datasets published and higher usage of the new electronic procurement system. At the same time, several
chosen indicators were either unavailable (ODBI), or not achieved - asset declarations for public employees and
competitive employment processes for the top management cadre (modest achievement). The failure to
implement the system of asset declarations was an important shortcoming that potentially undermined
confidence in the government’s commitment to governance reform. This shortcoming led IEG to downgrade the
level of achievement of PDO3 to modest. The government has subsequently engaged in a follow up project
supported by the Bank to implement the income and asset declaration system, a positive development if
sustained.

Despite some minor discrepancies between PAD and ICR on component costs and efficiency gains, and a lack
of full methodological information on the calculation of the ERR, there is enough evidence to conclude that the
project led to efficiency gains in services both for government agencies and users (citizens and firms), many of
which can be expected to outlast the project lifetime. The government can provide administrative services more
quickly, and deploying the e-filing system and the remote access platform (TAD) brought time savings.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

This review concurs with the ICR that the risk that development outcomes achieved will not be maintained is
low. The online platforms increased citizens’ and businesses’ access to digital government services and
achieved considerable uptake. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand for digital services has
grown and is expected to increase further. The change in government (2019 presidential elections) did not
derail the project’s main activities, and its objectives were supported by the new administration – despite
some shortcomings on the HRM side of the transparency objective. The digital transformation of core
government systems allowed state agencies to move to a paperless administration with no risk of reversal,
as digital government practices are now well entrenched. In November 2020, the Government launched its
connectivity plan (Plan Conectar) and requested support from the Bank through a follow-up project, “Digital
Inclusion and Innovation in Public Services in Argentina” (P174946, approved in March 2021) to finance the
strengthening of ARSAT’s capacities and expansion of its National Data Center to respond to the increased
demand for its services from the national public administration and subnational governments. It will be
important to ensure that adequate resources are made available to sustain this system.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed in response to the government’s request in 2016 to support the implementation
  of the State Modernization Plan. The Bank closely aligned project preparation with the Modernization
  Plan, which ensured government ownership and commitment to project activities. The operation was
  consistent with CPF, supporting CPF focus area 2 on “Addressing key institutional Constraints for Better
  Governance and Service Delivery” and its first objective, “Strengthening transparency and reducing
  corruption.” The Bank broadly considered most technical, political, and institutional aspects. The project
  adopted a results-oriented approach and flexible design. The RBF approach using DLIs helped to
  incentivize effective implementation, allowed flexibility in the implementation arrangements, and
  facilitated disbursement during a period of fiscal constraint and reduced budget allocations.

  There were some design issues mainly related to M&E. The baseline and follow-up surveys measuring
  user satisfaction with the Mi Argentina portal were not comparable. The baseline was constructed from a
  dedicated survey, whereas monitoring data was collected by asking users to rate their experience
  accessing a service. One of the three PDO level indicators (measuring the achievement of PDO3), the
  Open Data Barometer Index (a global measure of governments’ use of open data for accountability,
  innovation, and social impact) has not been updated since 2017, the year of project approval, and was
  not replaced by a commensurate indicator(s). The project chose generally appropriate measures for
  efficiency assessment at appraisal, which were not fully replicated at the ICR stage. The ICR notes that it
  was impossible to replicate these calculations at closing due to the volatility of the peso-to-dollar
  exchange rate over the project implementation. While this is a fair observation (in relation to possible US$
  value discrepancies), peso volatility is a well-documented phenomenon in Argentina and should have
  been factored in at the appraisal.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



  Overall, the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory, despite some minor shortcomings related to the aspects
  of M&E. The project was well-designed, and most technical, and institutional aspects were considered.
  An important component of the transparency objective (income and asset declaration system) was
  dropped after a change in administration, affecting achievement of the associated PDO, and drawing into
  question the commitment to governance reform. However, a follow-up project supported by the Bank
  (“Digital Inclusion and Innovation in Public Services in Argentina”, approved in March 2021), is intended
  to address this shortcoming.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project implementation was supervised effectively, especially factoring in the project’s technical
 complexity and changes in government halfway through implementation. The Bank identified and resolved
 issues that could have hindered the achievement of the objectives, capitalizing on a strong physical
 presence in the country. The close relationship with government counterparts facilitated implementation
 support and project restructuring. ISRs and Aide Memoires candidly documented the activities and
 developments during project implementation. The low turnover of TTLs (one at approval, two co-TTLs at
 closing)was helpful.

 Institutional arrangements were adjusted to reflect changes after the Government reshuffling of September
 2018, which transferred the responsibilities of the Ministry of Modernization to the Chief of Cabinet’s Office.
 The 2019 restructuring effectively raised the level of ambition of the proposed outcomes. It included
 additional activities that reflected updated priorities within the project scope, as some targets had been met
 or outperformed at the mid-term review. In 2019, the macroeconomic risk was assessed as high, and
 measures introduced to reduce the fiscal deficit constrained budget assignment to ministries and agencies,
 threatening disbursement. The shift to RBF mitigated this threat as loan proceeds remained a viable way to
 support project implementation.

 The COVID-19 pandemic put government systems under extraordinary stress, testing the project
 achievements and institutional capability. The digital systems and infrastructure financed by the project
 were able to respond effectively, exceeding project targets for platform users and processes generated
 through the platform by a wide margin.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework of the project was well-designed, with mostly adequate indicators to monitor progress
 toward the achievement of the PDOs. The Bank team adjusted project activities and raised targets for
 some indicators during implementation. The project had one broad PDO at appraisal, appropriately broken
 down into three PDOs (outcomes) at the ICR stage. Clear and quantifiable indicators supported the PDOs
 with one key indicator for each of the three objectives/outcomes and 18 intermediate results indicators
 (IRIs): seven for PDO1 (quality of government services), seven for PDO2 (accessibility of services) and
 four for PDO3 (transparency). Most IRIs adequately captured the contribution of activities or provided
 plausible proxies for them, with a few exceptions. All but one of the PDOs and intermediate indicators had
 baselines and targets at appraisal. The use of the Open Data Barometer Index as a PDO indicator proved
 problematic when it was discontinued. The project did not replace this indicator which made the
 measurement of the achievement of PDO3 complicated. One indicator was dropped during the 2019
 restructuring due to difficulties in measuring the universe of total innovation projects across different
 implementing entities. DLIs for the RBF part (one for the PDO level and several for intermediate results)
 incentivized implementation well. The M&E framework did not produce gender-disaggregated data,
 although the PAD recognized the potential to have it incorporated. In some cases, indicators would have
 been better placed under a different objective – the user satisfaction survey to be situated under PDO1
 (quality) instead of PDO2 (accessibility), or both PDOs.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data were collected and analyzed soundly. Most of the data sources and methodology chosen
  allowed for robust measurement of the indicators. Progress was measured and consistently reported in
  ISRs, with reliable and good-quality data. The sustained focus on ensuring the achievement of DLIs
  allowed for quick loan disbursement, demonstrating the incentivizing effect and an increased focus on the
  results of an IPF with DLIs. According to the ICR, the authorities continue to collect data after the project
  closing as M&E has become institutionalized through the reform effort. The follow-up project was
  approved in March 2021 and built on the same M&E framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data appears to have been well utilized by the project team and the government and helped inform
  project management and decision-making related to shifts in the project implementation. At the 2019
  restructuring, two indicators were split to measure activities more accurately, several targets were
  increased to raise the level of ambition, and one indicator was dropped. Three indicators were dropped
  (results dashboards, asset declarations, and competitive selection of senior management) because of
  changes in government priorities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C. The safeguards policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) was
   triggered, and the project complied with the triggered policy. The government prepared an Indigenous
   Peoples Development Plan (IPP), which was discussed with relevant authorities, approved by the Bank,
   and published in January 2017. The project obtained satisfactory ratings for safeguards throughout
   implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project received a moderate fiduciary risk rating which was maintained throughout implementation.
   The project’s financial management (FM) was conducted following the Legal Agreement. In most reports,
   project performance on FM was rated as Moderately Satisfactory (MS) due to internal control weaknesses
   reported in 2019 and delayed audited financial statements in 2020. There have not been any significant
   changes to either inherent risk factors (that is, country governance environment, rules, and regulations) or
   control risk factors (budgeting, accounting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing).
   Project performance on Procurement was rated as Moderately Satisfactory (MS) in most ISRs.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project turned out to be very timely with the onslaught of the COVID-19 pandemic, as it digitized many
   government services, ensured business continuity, and helped deliver COVID-19-related emergency
   response services such as "Certification for Authorization to Circulate" during the national lockdown, a
   mobile app for self-evaluation of health conditions linked with the Mi Argentina platform, various subsidies,
   and transfers policies to compensate for the loss of work during the lockdown. No negative impacts were
   identified.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)



Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identifies eight lessons, which it frames as "Lessons and Recommendations". This review
concurs with the lessons in the ICR. It focuses on the following lessons that can best inform projects
with similar area focus (GovTech, e-government) or implementation modality (investment loans with
RBF component).

Successful, e-government reforms build on a government vision and strategy, and a central agency
with the authority to drive the reform agenda. In the case of this project, the positioning of the
implementing agency within the Chief of Cabinet office provided the authority needed to align sector
ministries with the reform. The implementing agency's shared vision and leadership authority greatly
facilitated the design and implementation of digital solutions, with explicit political commitment during
the implementation period.

Adequate resources for change management activities are critical for e-government reforms, along
with flexibility to adjust the specific services and range of supported institutions. Digital government
reforms entail cultural, behavioral, and process changes that can be derailed by resistance from key
stakeholders. In supporting this operation, the government carried out multiple change management
activities, including consultation, communication, awareness raising, and capacity building during
project implementation to accompany the reform process.

Results-based financing incentivizes governments to make the difficult changes needed for e-
government to succeed. In this operation, the RBF component helped align incentives and set a
road map for advancing the Government reform program. Close monitoring of DLI targets and other
indicators sent a clear message to stakeholders on the importance of achieving results. The budget
allocated for input-based expenditures decreased during implementation because of fiscal
tightening, putting project implementation at risk. The project mitigated this risk using RBF with DLIs,
enabling full disbursement of the loan amount.

GovTech reforms may require a longer period than a single Bank project can support. This project
was the first GovTech project in Argentina to follow a whole of government approach, with citizen-
focus design and transparency as key principles. It did not address issues such as civil society co-
design of public policies use of data analytics and machine learning techniques, with little attention
to sub-national reforms. The recognition of further work needed in these aspects was one of the
drivers of the new follow-up project on Digital Inclusion and Innovation in Public Services. Future
projects should consider a phased approach that supports a sequence of projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR - PS Modernization and Innovation (P157136)




This ICR provides a very thorough and candid assessment of the project. It presents a detailed description of
the country context, including political developments and their impact on the project, exogenous shocks and
risks which affected the design and implementation of the project. The ICR built a credible Theory of Change
that reflects well the general logic of the interventions under the project. The ICR properly breaks down the
initial PDO into three parts and constructs the assessment similarly. It describes the achievements and
contributions of the project activities and makes good use of the project’s M&E framework. It is generally candid
about shortcomings, such as using the ODBI for measuring one of the PDOs, lack of gender-tagged indicators,
and incompatible entry and end-level surveys. The ICR provides a detailed assessment of project efficiency,
but it does not replicate the model introduced at the appraisal and lacks details on the actual calculation of the
ERR. The ICR provides a detailed account of changes made at MTR and the 2019 restructuring (indicators and
targets). The ICR also includes important information about the project’s contribution to dealing with the
COVID-19 emergency. It includes several relevant and valuable lessons that can be useful for similar projects
in Argentina and elsewhere, although some could have been consolidated. Overall, the quality of the ICR is
rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
