     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023266

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P145234                                  Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP)

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55260,TF-A3418                       30-Jun-2021                                        47,025,321.22

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jul-2014                              31-Aug-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          56,699,607.00                                   6,699,607.00

 Revised Commitment                           55,847,686.19                                   5,847,686.19

 Actual                                       47,025,321.22                                   5,847,686.19




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan               Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7) is:

   " To strengthen the capacity of the Recipient to manage its petroleum sector and wealth for
   sustainable development impacts ".



                                                                                               Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 8 - 11).

   1. Petroleum Sector Reforms and Capacity Building. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$39.68
   million. The actual cost was US$40.23 million. This component planned to finance technical assistance (TA)
   activities aimed to strengthen the capacities of the major institutions engaged in the governance of the
   petroleum sector. There were five subcomponents.

   (a) Petroleum resource deals. Activities included: (i) support to the petroleum cadaster through updating
   the cadastral procedures and integrating the database for the project area and the Geographical
   Information Systems (GIS) with other systems; (ii) support for selective geoscience data collection for
   promoting explorative investments in the project area; and (iii) strengthening the Government's negotiating
   capacity in the extractive industry sector.

   (b) Petroleum vision, policy and communications. Activities included: (i) support for drafting and
   implementing a petroleum policy and establishing a framework for sector planning and monitoring and
   evaluation (M&E); (ii) support sector coordination through establishing a Petroleum Council supported by an
   inter-ministerial committee and a secretariat; (iii) support for preparing a sector master plan that assessed
   options for investments; and (iv) developing a National Communication Strategy (NCS) to ensure that a
   greater proportion of the population participates in the dialogue on using the petroleum deposits.

   (c) Legal, regulatory and institutional reform. Activities included; (i) support for designing the legal and
   regulatory framework for developing petroleum resources; (ii) implementing measures for clarifying roles
   and responsibilities; (iii) institutional capacity building, including through diagnosis of the relevant
   institutions, organizational reforms and a human resources development plan.

   (d) Managing the impacts. Activities included: (i) support for developing sector-specific occupational safety
   and health regulations and capacity building of the Directorate of Occupational Safety and Health Services
   (DOSHS) and the Ministry of Health (MOH); (ii) support for designing and implementing sector-specific
   environmental and social regulations; (iii) supporting gender assessments for identifying gender
   impacts; and (iv) support for developing a framework for oil spill preparedness and response capacity,
   including preparing a national oil spill contingency plan.

   (e) Institutional reform of the National Oil Corporation Limited (NOCK) and the Kenya Pipeline
   Company (KPC). Activities included: (i) support for restructuring NOCK and implementing a transformation
   plan; and (ii) capacity building for setting a KPC Center of Excellence for oil and gas infrastructure.

   2. Revenue and investment management - reforms and capacity building. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$6.65 million. The actual cost was US$6.63 million. This component aimed to strengthen




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



  the Government's capacity for managing revenue streams from the sector for sustainable development
  impacts. There were three subcomponents.

  (a) Revenue management. Activities included: (i) support for developing and implementing a petroleum
  fiscal framework including a legal framework for resource management and capacity building of institutions
  in charge of implementing the laws; (ii) support for improving the capacity for administering oil revenues and
  taxes; (iii) designing and implementing fiscal policies for short and long term economic management; (iv)
  support for developing savings instruments (such as the Sovereign Wealth Fund); and (iii) support for
  ensuring understanding the fiscal impact of resource revenue management at the national and county
  levels.

  (b) Transparency and accountability. Activities included: (i) Technical Assistance (TA) for improving and
  strengthening the transparency of petroleum contracts and revenues; (ii) TA for preparing sector audits and
  capacity building of audit institutions: and (iii) support to the institutions engaged in transparency and
  community monitoring of environmental impacts.

  (c) Public investment management. Activities included: (i) support to enhance the quality of sector
  investments through a public investment management system; and (ii) capacity building of institutions that
  are likely to become involved in implementing projects financed from the oil revenue.

  3. Sustainable impact of oil and gas industry - reforms and capacity building. The estimated cost at
  appraisal was US$5.20 million. The actual cost was US$5.05 million. This component aimed to strengthen
  the Government's capacity to integrate the petroleum sector with the broader economy. There were two
  subcomponents:

  (a) Strengthen upward and downward linkages. Activities included: (i) support for stimulating
  procurement of local goods and services; and (ii) support for developing downstream oil and gas industry
  activities.

  (b) Education and skills development. Activities included; (i) support for skills assessment; (ii) support for
  composing a national skills development strategy; and (iii) piloting different models of skills development.

  4. Project management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.97 million. The actual cost was
  US$2.97 million. This component planned to support project coordination and management and capacity
  building in fiduciary and safeguards management and M&E.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$66.00 million (including US$4.00 million of physical
  and price contingencies costs). The actual cost was US$54.88 million.

  Project Financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$50.00 million and co financing Grant
  from the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development (DFATD), Canada. With this, the total
  project financing was US$56.69 million. Of this, US$47.02 million was disbursed. Exchange rate changes
  between the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) and the US$ resulted in a US$5.70 million shortage of funds of
  the IDA credit. A refund of the undisbursed amount of US$687,538.35 of the IDA credit and US$0.85 million
  of the Grant was pending at project closure. The team clarified that the undisbursed amounts have been


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



   refunded to date. There was parallel financing from the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) of US$1.9 million
   from the United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) and US$1.00 million from the
   Government of Canada.

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 24, 2014, and became effective on October 2, 2014. According to
   the PAD (paragraph 41, the project was scheduled to close on February 28, 2021. However, it actually
   closed six months behind schedule on August 31, 2021.

   Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings.

   The main changes made through the first project restructuring on October 12, 2016 are as follows.

         The co-financing arrangements were changed. The amount of grant financing was reduced from
          US$16.00 million to US$6.69 million.
         A new deadline was established for preparing the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
          (SESA) as it was behind schedule.
         The sub-component activities of of skills development (component three) and establishing the
          sovereign wealth fund (component two) were dropped, and the intermediate indicators pertaining to
          these activities were removed.
         Funds were reallocated between project components.

   The Bank supported the following changes through the second project restructuring on December 18,
   2019:

         Establishing new fiduciary arrangements. Under the new arrangement, the Project Implementation
          Units (PIUs) in the National Treasury and the Ministry of Industrialization and Enterprise
          Development were relieved of their fiduciary responsibilities. All fiduciary responsibilities were
          henceforth to be managed by the Project Management Unit (PMU) at the Ministry of Petroleum and
          Mining.
         Several activities related to petroleum revenue management (component two) were dropped.

   The Bank supported the following change through the third project restructuring on December 16, 2020:

         Extending the closing date by six months from February 28, 2021 to August 31, 2021 for completing
          the activities that had been delayed due to factors such as, delays in payments for completed
          contracts and restrictions in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic.

   The fourth project restructuring that took pace on July 29, 2021, reconciled the disbursement
   categories between the IDA credit and the co financing Grant.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                 Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



Rationale
Country context. Although Kenya had no known commercial petroleum reserves, oil discoveries in
northwestern Kenya in March 2012 and in the Tertiary Risk Basin kindled exploration prospects in other
basins. Also, discovery of natural gas reserves in Tanzania and Mozambique generated private sector
interest in Kenya on onshore and offshore exploration of natural gas. The experience of countries such as
Australia, Finland, South Africa and several Gulf countries demonstrated that positive impacts on overall
poverty levels are achievable with sound governance and resource management policies. The PDO of
strengthening the Government's capacity for managing the petroleum sector and petroleum wealth for
sustainable development impacts was hence relevant in the country context.

Government strategy. Kenya's long-term development strategy articulated in Vision 2030 for 2000 - 2030,
identified six sectors (tourism, agriculture, trade, manufacturing, business services and the financial sector).
In light of the oil discoveries, the Second Medium Term Plan (MTP) for 2013 - 2017 and the Third MTP for
2018 - 2022 identified the oil sector as the seventh key sector for accelerating economic growth for
sustained poverty reduction.

Bank strategy. The PDO was consistent with the the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2014 - 2018,
which remained in place until this project closed, and also with the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostics
(SCD). The CPS recognized the role of the extractive sector, citing the emerging petroleum sector as an
area in which the Bank could support the Government in helping maximize private sector involvement and
sharing benefits with all segments of the population, while the SCD acknowledged the importance of proper
management of the sector.

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has been engaged with the Government in the energy sector since
the early 2000's, and in the gas sector since 2011. In 2012 and 2013, the Bank provided support through
policy dialogue and short-term grant-financed projects (such as the extractive industries value chain
diagnostics and support to sector development under the Extractive Industry Technical Advisory Facility (EI
-TAF). This TA project supported governance of the petroleum sector. Given that global experience has
shown that developing the petroleum sector is not just about petroleum alone, but also about managing its
impacts for sustainable development, such as through efforts to obtaining the best possible deals and
managing them, managing the revenue streams from the sector and investing them in other forms of
wealth, the PDO was relevant in the country context in the wake of commercial oil discoveries and natural
gas deposits in Kenya.

That said, the project scope was overly optimistic and complex involving many stakeholders and ministerial
agencies with weak implementation capacities. A more targeted, strategic and phased approach would
nave been more appropriate, instead of trying to meet the immediate and future needs at the same time.
The project was further undermined due to the scaling down of operations by oil companies, which in turn
led to the significant delay in start of oil production (now expected in 2025/2026). As such, the relevance of
the PDO is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the Government's capacity to manage its petroleum sector and wealth for sustainable
               development impacts.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. The project supported technical assistance activities aimed at improving the
               Government's capacity to manage the petroleum sector and wealth for sustainable development impacts that
               became important, in the wake of the oil discoveries in Kenya before appraisal The causal links between
               project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.

               As the legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks developed for the sector in 1986 prior to the oil
               discoveries were inadequate, outputs of activities such as updating the legal and regulatory
               frameworks, developing sector-specific occupational safety and health and environmental and social
               regulations, developing a framework for oil spill preparedness and response capacity and preparing a national
               oil spill contingency plan, restructuring the National Oil Corporation (NOCK) and capacity building for setting a
               Kenya Pipeline Company (KPC) Center of Excellence for oil and gas infrastructure, were aimed at improving
               the Government's capacity to manage the sector.

               Given the limited history of oil exploration in the past, outputs of activities such as implementing a petroleum
               fiscal framework for petroleum resource management (including administering of oil revenues and taxes), and
               developing savings instruments (such as a sovereign wealth fund), strengthening transparency of petroleum
               contracts and preparing sector audits, were aimed at managing the revenue streams from the sector for
               sustainable development impacts.

               As there were no frameworks linked the sector to the overall economy, the outputs of activities such as
               support for procuring local goods, developing downstream oil and gas activities, developing a national skills
               development strategy and piloting models of skills development, were aimed to increase linkages between
               the sector and the economy. These activities were likely to reinforce the Government's capacity for managing
               the petroleum wealth for sustainable development impacts. The intended outcomes were based on the
               expectation that oil production would commence in Kenya before the project closed. The combination of these
               activities were likely to aid in strengthening the Government's capacity for managing the petroleum sector and
               wealth for sustainable development impacts.

               The chosen indicators for monitoring performance were appropriate. These indicators were: (i) The draft of
               the legal and regulatory acts developed under the project are developed and approved by the Cabinet and in
               force (legally effective) by the relevant sector ministries; (ii) The percentage of petroleum production and
               transmission projects subject to annual formal environmental and safety inspections following the
               international practices set under the project; (iii) Public disclosure by the Government of a report on
               transparency with internationally recognized transparency standards: and (iv) The establishment by
               Government of a Sovereign Wealth Fund for generating sustainable development impacts.



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



Outputs (ICR, pages 18 - 24).

      The project supported the drafting the Petroleum Act of 2019 with stakeholder consultations. This
         framework provided an overarching strategic framework to guide the development and administration
         of the petroleum sector in a sustainable manner, and specified upstream petroleum regulations,
         sector-specific occupational safety and health regulations and a Resettlement Policy Framework
         (RPF). This act included clear provisions on sharing petroleum revenues between communities,
         county government and the national government. This Act, although developed, was not yet approved
         by the Cabinet when the project closed.
        The Kenya National Petroleum Master Plan (KPMP) was developed and approved by the Technical
         Committee led by the Ministry Of Petroleum and Mining's (MOPM's) technical team.
        A National Communications Strategy was developed and implemented for the petroleum sector. An
         information Awareness Campaign strategy was developed and civil society and community-based
         organizations were trained on the sector's life cycle.
        742 staff of relevant institutions (the MOPM, the National Treasury, the National Oil Corporation of
         Kenya (NOCK), the Kenya Pipeline Corporation (KPC) and the Energy Regulation Commission
         (ERC) were trained. This exceeded the target of 80.
        379 staff from the Directorate of Occupational Safety and Health Services (DOSHS) and other lead
         agencies in the sector were trained on matters pertaining to enforcing safety and health regulations in
         the sector. This exceeded the target of 10.
        136 public agencies staff and organizations engaged in transparency issues in the sector were trained
         on matters pertaining to monitoring transparency in the sector.
        The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) was completed and publicly available
         when the project closed. The Transparency and Accountability (TA) Framework for the Oil and Gas
         sector was completed and published. A dedicated gender assessment identifying gender-specific
         impacts of the sector were completed.
        The relevant government agencies were trained on oil spill preparedness and response capacity. The
         ICR notes that this aided the Kenya Maritime Authority (KMA), the Kenya Pipeline Corporation (KPC)
         and the National Disaster Operation Center (NDOC) to respond to the oil spills at Mbaraki, Mombasa
         and Kiboko in Makueni country.
        The project supported the Ministry of Petroleum and Mining (MOPM) in undertaking: (i) the
         independent audit of petroleum cost in Tullow oil in Kenya as specified in the sharing of petroleum
         revenues in the Petroleum Act; (ii) a cost recovery audit and (iii) the Hydrocarbon Resources Audit.
         These activities strengthened the capacities of the Ministry of Petroleum and Mining's (MOPM)
         technical staff to engage with the sector operators on cost recovery audits.
        The project aided in training twelve pipeline welders. The ICR (page 31) notes that prior to this project,
         there were only three qualified pipeline welders and KPC had to rely on expatriates.
        Although the National Oil Corporation of Kenya's (NOCK's) 15 year transformation plan was
         finalized, the implementation of the plan was yet to start when the project closed. According to the
         team, NOCK has to date adopted the plan and the plan is now operational.
        As part of the project, advisory services (including a communications and distribution plan) were
         provided to the MOPM on Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) for improving access to cheaper and cleaner
         cooking fuel in communities.

The following activity was not fully completed when the project closed.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)




      The project supported preparation of a stand-alone petroleum policy with upstream, mainstream and
       downstream petroleum regulations. Although the draft was completed, this policy had not been
       submitted for Cabinet for approval when the project closed as targeted.

The following activities were not completed as targeted.

      The new regulatory body for the petroleum sector, the "Kenya Regulatory Authority" reporting to the
       Cabinet Secretary of the Ministry of Petroleum and Mining" was not established.
      The multi-year perspective for fiscal planning was dropped. The ICR (page 20) noted that it is unclear
       if the Government will pursue the development and implementation of a fiscal policy rule for transfer of
       oil/gas revenues to the annual budget.
      The activities for developing a local content policy, establishing the sovereign wealth fund and skills
       development were dropped during the restructuring of the project. These activities were dropped due
       to the lack of support for these activities by the respective beneficiaries and to reduce the overall
       project envelope because of the unfavorable exchange rate changes.
      The Lokichar's " Field Development Plan " (FDP) review was not completed by the time of project
       closure due to the effect of the COVID - 19 pandemic and changes in Kenya's taw laws. According to
       the clarifications provided by the team, this review was to be conducted to inform the government on
       whether the FDP proposed by the operators met international standards and was aligned with national
       interests from an economic, technical, safety and environmental perspective.

Outcomes.

The project supported TA activities aimed at improving the government's capacity to manage its petroleum
sector and wealth for sustainable development impacts.

      The project supported the development of new legislation for the petroleum sector, and eight out of
       ten acts were enacted. The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that there was evidence that the outputs of the
       project aided in building capacity, improving petroleum sector management, enhancing transparency
       and accountability, promoting linkages and in developing modern legal and regulatory frameworks for
       petroleum and developing the capacities to discharge their respective mandates in the petroleum
       sector.

However, there were shortcomings. Although the project supported the preparation of a draft Petroleum Act
(2019), the draft was not yet approved by the Cabinet when the project closed. It is not clear if the draft would
be approved and become legally effective in its present form or be subject to modifications.

Activities associated with legal and institutional framework for petroleum resource revenue management
(including laws of resource taxation and revenue sharing), activities associated with developing local
development through fostering linkages between the petroleum sector and the overall economy, establishing
the sovereign wealth fund and skills development were dropped during implementation due to a combination
of factors including lack of support by the respective beneficiaries and unfavorable exchange rate changes.
The scaling down of operations by oil companies contributed to delays in the start of oil production. As such, it
is not clear regarding the extent to which the project actually contributed to the Government's capacity to
manage the petroleum wealth for sustainable development impacts.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



                            Overall efficacy is hence rated as modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                             Primary Reason
                            Modest                                              Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted at appraisal using a Macroeconomic General
   Equilibrium model. The project benefits were expected to come from: (i) more private investment in the
   sector; (ii) greater public spending for development due to the higher government take of oil income; and (iii)
   enhanced linkages between the sector and the economy, leading to more employment opportunities and
   thereby to overall poverty reduction. The model assumed that oil production would commence during the project
   lifetime and that the expected benefits would continue for several years after project closing. As per the model,
   the present value of non-oil Gross Domestic Product (GDP) between 2014 and 2050 "with the project" was
   expected to exceed "without the project" by a range between US$720.00 million to US$853.00 million. Since oil
   production in expected to commence only by 2025/2026, there was no validation of the project's development
   impact when the project closed.

   Operational efficiency. The design at appraisal specified that the ratio of actual operational cost to total project
   cost was not to exceed 15%. The actual operational cost to the total cost was 10%.

   Operational issues during implementation. Implementation was affected by a combination of factors
   including: (i) Procurement delays which significantly affected the timeline of the operation; (ii) The delays in
   investment decisions due to political economy factors; (iii) The complex implementation arrangements, with
   three project management teams tasked with the responsibilities of implementing project components led to
   delays (discussed in section 9); (iii) The Project Steering Committee (PSC) responsible for
   overseeing implementation experienced delays in decision-making, either due to their inability to reach a
   consensus or having the required quorums for the meetings; (iv) delays in implementing the recommendations
   of the Mid-Term Review (MTR) regarding simplifying the implementation arrangements; and (v) delays in
   payments for completed contracts. These delays which were within the control of the project, were exacerbated
   by factors beyond the project control, such as scaling down of operations by the oil companies which resulted in
   a significant delay in start of oil production (now expected by 2025/2026) and delays due to the physical


                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic in the final years. At closure, a much reduced scope of
activities was completed with the funding for the project.

In sum, efficiency is modest because of the operational issues during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO is substantial. Overall efficacy is modest due to the low achievement. Efficiency is
modest due to the operational issues during implementation. With these ratings, in accordance with the
OPCS/IEG Guidelines, overall outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. This project supported capacity building activities of the petroleum ministries and
agencies. Since there is uncertainty regarding when oil production will start and what the future volumes
would be, there is substantial risk that the relevant staff may switch jobs and therefore not be able to utilize
the knowledge achieved under this project.

Government ownership/commitment. Although this project aided in preparing key drafts (such as the
Petroleum Act of 2019, the restructuring (NOCK) and establishing an independent regulator), the drafts had
not yet been approved by the Cabinet, when the project closed. It is therefore not clear, whether the
Government would be committed to approving the drafts in their present form. Also, while the project aided in
establishing the frameworks for three activities (the Lokichar Field Development, the Hydrocarbon resource
audit and legal support for cost recovery audit) they were transferred over to Government's financing and

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



management when the project closed. As such, risk regarding Government's commitment for completing
these activities is substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the Bank's experience with TA projects in the energy sectors
  (the Tanzania Energy Sector Capacity Building Loan and the Mozambique Mining and Gas TA project
  (PAD, pages 12-13). Since the experience of prior projects had shown that TA activities are most
  effective when they specifically address issues relevant to the Government's reform agenda, the design
  of this project responded to the Government's priority to streamlining the institutional setup for planning
  petroleum sector investments. Given the number of intended beneficiaries, the project was prepared in
  close collaboration with the broader Bank team, including country economists, private sector
  development specialists, environment and social teams and the Country Management team. The
  analytical underpinnings of the project were sound and based on a series of independent reviews of the
  extractive industries value chain in Kenya conducted by the Bank in collaboration with other donors.

  The preparation team identified several risks such as stakeholder and governance risks and risks arising
  from the weak implementation capacity. Even with mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated
  as substantial, given the: (i) complexity of the sector and the envisioned multifaceted cross-sector
  reforms; and (ii) the inadequate institutional capacity to manage the sector (PAD, paragraph 54). The
  arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  However, there were moderate shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry. For one thing, the project did not include
  provisions for possible delays or changes of direction of a nascent petroleum sector. For another, there
  were shortcomings in implementation arrangements. The arrangements included a steering Committee
  responsible for overall coordination. The Steering Committee which required participation of major
  beneficiaries experienced delays in decision-making either due to the inability to reach a consensus or
  due to the difficulties in securing a quorum at the meetings. The implementation arrangements at
  appraisal included three implementing agencies - a Project Management Unit (PMU) in MEP and two
  Project Implementation Units (PIUs) - one in the National Treasury and the other in the Ministry of
  Industrialization and Enterprise Development (MoIED). These arrangements proved to be to be
  cumbersome in practice and led to delays during implementation. These arrangements were changed on
  the recommendations of the MTR - whereby the PIUs in the National Treasury and the Ministry of
  Industrialization and Enterprise Development were relieved of their fiduciary responsibilities, which were
  henceforth to be managed PMU at the Ministry of Petroleum and Mining.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



 Twelve Implementation Status Results (ISR) reports were filed over a project lifetime of approximately
 seven years, implying twice a year supervision missions. The supervision included support on the ground -
 a member supporting operational matters and follow up with beneficiaries and a technical expert. The
 support provided by the team aided in fiduciary and safeguards compliance (discussed in section 10).

 There were shortcomings in supervision. For one thing, continuity of leadership was undermined, with three
 Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over a project lifetime of seven years. For another, there were delays on the
 Bank side in processing the MTR recommendations. Prompt actions taken through project restructurings
 following the MTR could have arguably helped in improving project performance. For instance, the MTR
 proposed simplification of the Project Steering Committee (discussed above) by which quorum could be
 reached with the participation of the major beneficiaries (as opposed to all beneficiaries). This
 recommendation made in 2016 was only adopted via the project restructuring in 2019, just two years
 before project closure. Finally, the project's execution of M&E was not particularly effective (discussed in
 section 9).

 In sum, overall Bank performance is moderately unsatisfactory, due to the significant shortcomings in
 supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Given that the project focused only on capacity building activities, the M&E arrangements were similar to
 that of other TA projects. The indicators were for the most part, output-oriented. The PMU at the MEP and
 PIMs at the National Treasury and in the MoIED were overall in charge of collecting the data for monitoring
 project performance.

 Although the M&E arrangements were similar to other TA projects, the Results Framework was overly
 ambitious and not flexible enough to a changing sector environment such as cutting down of operations by
 oil companies and delay in the start of oil production. The ICR (paragraph 109) acknowledges that the
 indicators were significantly beyond the scope of a TA project. As a result, two of the the original PDO
 indicators (out of five) and five of the intermediate indicators (out of fifteen) were dropped during
 implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes (para 110) notes that M&E implementation was weak in the initial years. Although the
  PMU provided the required financial and fiduciary reports, and the National Treasury provided the data

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



  on performance indicators, progress on reporting was insufficient. However, M&E improved in the final
  years of implementation, with the PMU engaging an M&E consultant. The consultant ensured that the
  quarterly reports were produced and shared regularly and took the lead for collecting data for the final
  report and convened a committee to evaluate results at project completion.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR noted (para 112) that M&E data were not consistently applied to fine-tune the project
  implementation towards achievement of the PDO. According to the ICR, M&E under the project was
  reactive, and there was no guidance on how to use the information or how to improve performance
  based on changes in data. Further, M&E data were not widely shared with project beneficiaries and
  other agencies. The beneficiaries' feedback at project completion workshop indicated that the
  beneficiaries were not clear about the potential sustainable development impacts of the petroleum
  wealth. The PMU did not use the data collected and there was insufficient assessment of the
  progress. The ICR noted that some beneficiaries (such as the Kenya Pipeline Company and the Kenya
  Revenue Authority) created their own systems for tracking their activities and these were shared with
  other agencies.

  In sum, although there were moderate shortcomings in M&E design, the M&E framework was adequate
  to measure progress. However, neither did the PMU sufficiently utilize the data collected, nor did it use
  the data to qualitatively assess project progress. Although efforts made to address these deficiencies
  through the 2016 and 2019 restructuring, the efforts had limited impact as they were late in the project's
  life.

  As such, the overall quality of the M&E is rated as negligible.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. One safeguard policy was triggered at appraisal; Environmental Assessment. This TA project
   focused on capacity building activities, including policy dialogues and training and did not support any
   construction activities on the ground. Therefore, none of the envisaged project activities were expected to
   have adverse environmental impacts.

   The ICR (paragraph 116) notes the project's environmental and social performance moderately
   satisfactory. Safeguards arrangements during implementation, included the preparation of a Strategic
   Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), an action plan for implementing the SESAs, an
   Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
   The SESA and related documents identified gaps in the legal and management frameworks for the
   environmental and social aspects for the sector and outlined 60 recommendations. Of these. 25 were

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



   prioritized (such as, the development of an Environmental Inspection and Monitoring Manual by the National
   Environment Management Authority (NEMA) which brought on board all the relevant agencies for promoting
   coordination, development of key relevant tools by NEMA such as the Resettlement Policy Framework,
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Guidelines for the petroleum sector and development of
   Waste Management and Air Quality Guidelines by NEMA for the upstream, midstream and downstream
   petroleum sector, among others).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the PMU in the MEP and the PIMs in the
   National Treasury and the MoIED at appraisal. The agencies had executed Bank-financed projects and
   were familiar with the Bank's financial policies. The assessment concluded that the financial arrangements
   were satisfactory and with mitigation measures, the financial risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 61).

   According to the ICR (paragraph 120), the financial performance for most of the project lifespan was
   satisfactory. The project complied with all the financial covenants. The financial reports were submitted in a
   timely fashion. The team confirmed that the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the implementing agencies at appraisal.
   The procurement risk was rated as high at appraisal, given the large number of procurement activities
   needed to support the project activities. The risk mitigation measures incorporated at design, included
   recruiting qualified procurement specialists, ensuring a clear linkage between project activities and the
   procurement plan through training staff and establishing a contract monitoring system.

   The ICR (paragraph 119) notes that project's procurement management was satisfactory. The PMU
   complied with the Bank's procurement guidelines and there were no reported cases of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Relevance of the PDO is
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome                                                                           substantial. Efficacy and
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  efficiency are modest. Even if

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



                                                                                   Relevance of PDO had been
                                                                                   rated High, as did the ICR, a
                                                                                   Modest rating for efficacy and
                                                                                   efficiency automatically means
                                                                                   that outcome is Moderately
                                                                                   Unsatisfactory as per IEG
                                                                                   Guidelines
                                                                                   Since Quality-at-Entry is rated
                                                                                   as Moderately Satisfactory and
                                                                                   Quality of Supervision is rated
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                   as Moderately Unsatisfactory,
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   the rating for Bank performance
                                                                                   is determined by the rating for
                                                                                   Efficacy.
Quality of M&E                   Negligible            Negligible

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. A flexible design in the ever-evolving oil and gas sector has a better potential for
addressing unforeseen circumstances during implementation. In this project, many project
activities associated with sustainable management of petroleum wealth were undermined by the
delays that occurred in oil exploration. A more targeted, strategic and phased approach would have
been more appropriate, instead of trying to meet the immediate and future needs at the same
time. The lesson arising is that a flexible design that prioritizes interventions, rather than addressing
all the possible impacts, is likely to have a greater impact in petroleum projects.

2. Streamlined project implementation arrangements can help in minimizing delays during
implementation. The design of this project originally included in addition to a project steering
committee responsible for project oversight, three implementing agencies. Having three
implementing agencies proved to be cumbersome and contributed to delays during implementation.
Eventually this arrangement was changed with only one implementing agency following the
recommendations of the Mid-Term Review. The experience of this project further demonstrates that
the scope of the Project Steering Committee in multi-disciplinary projects is better limited to
informing and engaging beneficiaries, facilitating networking and collaboration and identifying cross-
cutting issues, rather than covering all aspects of project implementation.

3. Multiple beneficiary TA projects may require intensive and time-consuming Bank
supervision, especially in countries with limited implementation capacities. Bank teams may
also be required to identify if/when restructurings are needed, given the realities on the
ground. Given that a standard supervision budget allocation may not be sufficient for such intensive



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya Petroleum TA Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)



supervision, it would help if Bank team supervising such projects are involved in more than one
activity in the country in order to spread costs for travel and other costs across multiple activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written for most the part. The ICR acknowledges the challenges associated with the complex
project design, with many project sub-components, implementing agencies and the political economy
constraints in a sector with vested interests of the stakeholders. The quality of evidence and analysis provided
in the ICR is adequate for assessing project performance.

However, there is some inconsistency with the IEG Guidelines in the ICR. According to the guidelines, when
Efficacy is modest or lower, outcome is going to be rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory or lower, even if the
ratings for Relevance and Efficiency are High or Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                          Page 16 of 16
