     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022979

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P092724                                  DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10)

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of            Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59800,IDA-H5550,IDA-V0680,TF-        15-Dec-2015                                        186,442,201.76
 A4870

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Mar-2010                              30-Jun-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                         120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     189,411,283.97                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally              Chikako Miwa                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Agriculture Rehabilitation and Recovery Support Project
   (PARRSA) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (page 6) was identical to the one in the PAD (paragraph
   11), except that the PAD statement lacked the underlined part, and aimed to:




                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



   "increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products by
   smallholder farmers in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory."

   Revised PDO. At the time of the Additional Financing (AF) in 2017, the PDO was revised as follows:

   "To increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products in
   targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory."

   According to the ICR (paragraph 30), the revised PDO broadened the scope of project beneficiaries as it was
   no longer limited to smallholder farmers.

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the PDO as stated in AF Paper (page 9) and based on
   the following two objectives:

   1. To increase agricultural productivity in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory.

   2. To improve marketing of crops and animal products in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory.

   A split rating will not be applied. At the AF stage, the project scope was expanded to cover an additional
   beneficiary group (small and medium enterprises) and three additional provinces (Sud-Ubangi, Nord-Ubangi,
   and Mongala). Two additional perennial crops (cocoa and coffee) were introduced to support the
   government’s goals towards diversification of agricultural productivity and more robust commercial crops with
   strengthened private sector linkages (ICR, paragraph 34). However, the PDO and the PDO indicators were
   not substantively changed relative to the original ones. This ICRR will assess the project based on the revised
   indicators and targets.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Improve agricultural and animal production (appraisal cost: US$59.42 million, actual cost:
   US$19.90 million). This component aimed to improve the productivity of crops and livestock by enhancing
   the capacity of farm households to produce rainfed crops (Equateur), irrigated rice (Pool Malebo), small

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



  ruminants, and poultry. Activities included the provision of improved seed, seedlings, and animal breeds;
  the provision of advice to improve production management; the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure to
  improve water management; and the capacity strengthening for basic product transformation. This
  component also supported activities to develop the capacity of farmer organizations in the project areas,
  with the view to promoting their effectiveness in marketing agricultural inputs (primarily seed) and outputs
  and in building linkages with private agri-business. It included three sub-components

  1.1. Improving production by providing seed, planting materials, and advisory services.

  1.2. Improving rice production through better water management in Pool Malebo.

  1.3. Improving animal production capacity for small ruminant and poultry.

   2. Improve market related Infrastructure (appraisal cost: US$50.58 million, actual cost: US$33.58
  million). This component aimed to support the rehabilitation of feeder roads and rehabilitation construction
  of a few local markets in Equateur Province. It included the following two sub-components:

  2.1. Improving feeder roads.

  2.2. Rehabilitation construction of market infrastructure.

  3. Strengthening of Capacity Building and Project Management (appraisal cost: US$20.00
  million, actual cost: US$15.87 million). This component aimed to support strengthening capacity at
  relevant ministries, funding project management activities including monitoring and evaluation (M&E). It
  included three sub-components:

  3.1. Capacity-building support to the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Rural Development.

  3.2. Project management.

  3.3. Monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost net of taxes was US$130.00 million including US$7.06 million physical
  contingencies and US$3.52 million price contingencies. In January 2017, the project received US$78.64
  million in additional financing to bring the total project cost to USS$198.64 million. The actual cost was
  US$189.41 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

  Financing. The project was expected to be implemented with a total International Development Association
  (IDA) grant financing of US$120.00
  million. In April 2017, the project received IDA additional financing of US$78.64 million. The total project
  financing was US$198.64 million. The actual amounts disbursed were US$114.89 million for the original
  IDA grant amount and US$72.27 million for the AF. The total disbursed amount was US$189.41 million
  (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



   Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to contribute US$10.00 million of counterpart funds
   through local communities. None of the expected amount at appraisal was contributed.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 30, 2010 and became effective nine months later on December
   31, 2010. The Mid-term Review was conducted on February 20, 2014 compared to a planned date on July
   15, 2012. The project closed on June 30, 2021 which was 66 months beyond the planned closing date on
   December 15, 2015. According to the ICR (paragraph 33) "these extensions were in response to
   implementation delays experienced and, in the case of the January 2017 extension, to enable completion of
   processing of the AF in March of that year." The project was restructured six times and received one AF as
   follows:

   1. On March 21, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$88.25 million, in order to reallocate funds
   between disbursement categories.

   2. On October 14, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$101.86 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from December 15, 2015, to January 31, 2017.

   3. On January 18, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$114.63 million, in order to approve additional
   IDA financing of US$78.64 million. This allowed to further scale up the project by providing additional
   resources to reinforce the basic production capacity (staple crops and livestock) of smallholder farmers in
   the three provinces to ensure food and nutrition security, relaunch the perennial crops production, and
   embark on commercial farming by selling surplus production on local markets (ICR, paragraph 9). Also, the
   loan closing date was extended from January 31, 2017 to March 23, 2020.

   4. On January 8, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$157.42 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework (RF), change components and costs, extend the Loan closing date from March 23, 2020, to
   December 31, 2020, to reallocate funds between disbursement categories, and change the implementation
   schedule.

   5. On December 28, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$176.89 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from December 31, 2020 to June 18, 2021.

   6. On June 18, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$187.17 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from to June 18, 2021 to June 30, 2021.

   7. On June 28, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$187.17 million, in order to change components
   and costs, cancel financing (undisbursed balance) worth US$5.88 million (Restructuring Paper, Report
   number: RES47291), and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) had a total area of 228 million hectares
that could potentially be cultivated, but only one-third of this area was farmed. Agriculture provided
employment for 70-75% of the active population and an additional 10% through agro-industries. Poverty

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



was widespread; with 76% of rural people live below the poverty line. According to the PAD (paragraph 1),
much of this poverty was a result of the underperforming agricultural sector. The proposed project aimed
to promote growth in rural agricultural incomes, support institutional capacity building, improve access to
basic services for enhancing food security, and provide decentralized support to agriculture and community
development.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has a history of investment projects and analytical work related to
agriculture. Assistance to agriculture was featured prominently under the Bank’s reengagement in DRC
through the Emergency Multi-Sector Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project (known by its French
acronym, PMURR). The agricultural component of PMURR responded to emergency needs in selected
provinces, including the distribution of farm inputs and the partial rehabilitation of important rural road
networks. Building on the PMURR’s experience, this project was designed as a fully dedicated agricultural
project aiming to increase agricultural productivity and improve marketing of crops and animal products.
The Bank undertook an agricultural sector review in 2006. The review identified five geographic areas
(domains) with high agricultural potential. Based on the review, this project implemented activities in two out
of the five high potential domains: Equateur Province (Domain 4) and Pool Malebo (Domain 5) (PAD, para
22).

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Bank’s Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS, FY 2008-FY2011) where the project was noted in the CAS. The CAS was aligned with three
out five pillars under the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP, 2006): (i) promoting good governance
and consolidating peace; (ii) safeguarding macroeconomic stability and growth; (iii) improving access to
social services and reducing vulnerability. Specifically, the project would promote growth in rural
agricultural incomes, support institutional capacity building, improve access to basic services for enhancing
food security, and provide decentralized support to agriculture and community development. The project
would also help indirectly to relieve pressure on forest resources in areas contiguous to project sites.

At completion, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for DRC (FY2013-
FY2016) which mainly aimed at significantly contributing to the Government’s efforts to alleviate extreme
poverty and malnutrition. Specifically, the PDO was in line with the fourth outcome of the CAS that aimed to
address state fragility through increased agricultural productivity and production and access to
markets. The PDO was also in line with the DRC Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2018). The SCD
identified agriculture as one of the five priority areas (SCD Priority Area 3) where policy actions could
provide quick wins and build cumulative and virtuous cycles to sustain inclusive growth and foster resilience
and shared prosperity in the coming years. The project aimed at strengthening governance and the
capacity of state actors to effectively plan, manage, and supervise investment operations and building
stronger and more inclusive institutions (SCD Priority Area 2). The PDO was also in line with the second
pillar (vulnerability and resilience) of the World Bank’s Africa Strategy and Africa Climate Business Plan.

Consistency with the Government Strategies. The PDO was in line with the Government priorities.
According to the (PAD, page 28), “the government considers that rejuvenating agricultural production is a
key policy instrument to spur pro-poor economic growth.” The PDO was also in line with the national
strategy of DRC and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (ICR, paragraph 36). The
ICR (footnote#2) noted that the project was prepared after a prolonged civil war and the multiple related
challenges in institutional capacity and functioning, which led to a lengthy preparation period.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The original and revised statement of objectives
were both clear and focused. The PDO was pitched at the right level of ambition given the Bank's


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



               experience. The PDO was also in line with the Bank's strategies. While there was limited information on the
               priorities of the Government for the agriculture sector, it is plausible to assume that developing agriculture
               will continue to be important for alleviating poverty in the DRC. In a further communication, the project team
               explained that “the objectives were relevant and very well aligned with the CPF at the time of design, but
               the team realized that there were few shortcomings in those objectives due to the fact that the Institutional
               framework at the Provincial level was not that strong enough. For the report, the inclusion of perennial
               crops in the additional phase was ambitious given the short time for project implementation. The same
               applies to the time needed to complete the infrastructure works.” Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is
               rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would implement activities to support
                             the provision of improved seed, planting materials, and advisory services, to farmers. The project would also
                             support activities to improve water management for rice production in project areas. These activities would
                             contribute to the intermediate outcome of the increased crop productivity in targeted areas. In addition, the
                             project would implement activities to support distributing genetically improved small stock and
                             poultry, providing training of community animal health agents, and establishing veterinary pharmacies/depots.
                             These activities were expected to contribute to the intermediate outcome of the improved animal production
                             capacity for small ruminants and poultry. All these intermediate outcomes combined would contribute to the
                             outcome of the increased agricultural productivity in targeted areas. Anticipated long-term impacts included:
                             rural poverty reduction; improved local food production; and agricultural sector growth.

                             The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four assumptions: (i) Improved agricultural
                             inputs, especially certified seeds, were continuously available, (ii) Farmers had access to high-quality
                             agricultural extension services, (iii) Research continued producing improved varieties, and (iv) Provincial and
                             local committees have capacity to maintain rural roads and bridges.

                             The stated activities were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. The stated assumptions were
                             realistic and logical. However, the ToC could have benefited from a better layout that clearly reflected
                             activities and outputs to establish clear causal links between activities, outputs, and outcomes.

                             Outputs/Intermediate Results


                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)




      No administrative sectors, territories, and provinces with land use plans implemented (target: 25,
         achievement rate: 0%).
        360 hectares (ha) of lands were reforested with increased tree covers (target: 10,000 ha, achievement
         rate: 4%).
        90% of farmers were reached with agricultural assets or services (target: 70%, target exceeded).
        US$500,000 of savings were mobilized (target: US$500,000, fully achieved).
        5,605 tons of improved certified seed were produced annually (target: 3,500 tons, target exceeded).
        3,550 village cash boxes were established (target: 2,500, target exceeded). Through the village-
         managed cash boxes, 54,000 farm households received better handheld tools that were expected to
         improve the efficiency of their field work.
        4,943 ha were rehabilitated/planted with coffee/cocoa (target: 5,000 ha, achievement rate: 99%).
        18 storage facilities constructed/rehabilitated (target: 18, fully achieved).
        31,797 producers adopted improved animal husbandry practices (target: 30,000, target exceeded).
        1 advisory services and agricultural research reform strategy was adopted by central government
         (target: 2, achievement rate: 50%).
        300 client days of training per annum were provided by different service providers (target: 180 days,
         target exceeded).
        140,580 farmers adopted improved agricultural technologies (target: 156,200, achievement rate:
         90%).
        The project reached 160,141 beneficiaries exceeding its revised target of 155,000 beneficiaries, while
         the percentage of female beneficiaries was 57% versus a target of 60% (95% achievement).
        90% of households in targeted areas satisfied with agricultural advisory services received compared
         to a target of 80% (target exceeded).

Outcome

The project contributed to improving crop production by providing improved seeds, planting materials, and
advisory services. At the same time, improved breeding stock (goats, pigs, and poultry) was made available
to livestock owners. The increase in agricultural productivity in targeted zones was assessed by
measuring the increase in the productivity per hectare of crops (cassava, groundnuts, maize and rice) and the
increases in livestock production per farmer (goats, pigs, and poultry).

By project completion, Maize yield reached 1.1 t/ha, which was well below the target value of 2.0 t/ha but
more than twice the baseline situation (0.5 t/ha). During 2019, the direct project beneficiaries produced
237,000 tons of maize due to increases in yields and in the area planted. Cassava yield increased from the
baseline of only 7 t/ha to 22.1 t/ha, but did not achieve the target value of 25 t/ha (88% achievement). Overall
production of cassava by the direct project beneficiaries over the project period was totaled 5.0 million tons.
Rice yield in project areas reached 1.6 t/ha, which was 80% achievement of the target value of 2 t/ha, with the
baseline of 1.0 t/ha. Groundnut yield was 1.0 t/ha, which was 67% achievement of the target value of 1.5 t/ha,
with the baseline of 0.7 t/ha. By project completion, farmers raising poultry had 189 heads per farmer, which
was 105% achievement of the target of 180 heads. No information was available for goats and pigs. The
project objective of establishing a private network of veterinary pharmacies was not achieved, and the
Boyambi animal transit station was closed due to lack of government funding (ICR, paragraph 53).

Summary of efficacy Assessment. As noted above, yield targets were not achieved. The ICR (paragraph
43) attributed this underachievement to a number of factors: first, the original yield targets were overoptimistic

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



and could not be achieved under variable climate conditions experienced during implementation; second,
there was limited additional investments made in critical areas such as soil fertility, where evidence suggested
that high levels of soil fertility depletion in the project areas resulted from intensive cultivation without
adequate nutrient replenishment; and third, there was a limited number of well-experienced extension staff in
the range of crops being targeted, which meant that farmers did not receive the best extension advice with
regards to their respective crops. Finally, given the relative weakness of the M&E system, there were few
other data sources available to triangulate findings and the data collected to substantiate yield indicators.

In a further communication, the project team explained that the yield increases seen for all key crops were a
significant and substantial achievement by the project in the DRC fragile context, also, "despite not achieving
100% of the targets, analysis of comparative data shows that the operation achieved its objective of
increased productivity as a direct result of the project’s interventions. This can be considered noting that
average cassava fresh root yields have only increased very modestly in Africa from around 6 to 10 t/ha over
the last 50 years (FAOStat 2015). The continent’s top cassava producer (Nigeria) had an average yield of
8.75 tons per hectare in 2017, followed by the DRC with 8.14 tons per hectare (FAO 2019). Similarly for
maize, yields have remained stagnant and below other regional benchmarks, with rates in DRC of around
0.75 t/ha. The results achieved by PARRSA across all the targeted crops, including the 22.1t/ha for cassava
and 1.1 t/ha for maize, show that the project’s efficiency was Substantial. In non-project areas across DRC,
yield rate for these crops have remained stable.

Therefore, and based on the team's clarification, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve marketing of crops and animal products in targeted areas of the Recipient’s territory.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would fund the activities for
the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural road network in project area, which were expected to contribute to
the intermediate outcome of the reduced travel time between agricultural production areas and food markets.
Also, the project would fund the activities for the rehabilitation of local markets and storage facilities, which
were expected to contribute to the intermediate outcome of the improved farmers' access to marketing
infrastructure. The project would also fund activities to support a matching grant facility to promote certified
seed production and resale to farmers. The project would also finance studies at the national and regional
levels covering restructuring of the ministry, agricultural extension and research, agricultural and land use
plans, which would contribute to the intermediate outcome of the improved capacity of the targeted
institutions. These intermediate outcomes combined were expected to contribute to the outcome of the

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



improved marketing of crops and animal products in targeted areas. Anticipated long-term impact would be
the improved food supply in local and regional markets.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by one assumption: provincial and local committees having
the capacity to maintain rural roads and bridges.

While most activities were linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain, it was not clear in the ToC how
matching grants and financing restructuring studies were connected to the stated PDO.

Outputs/ Intermediate Results

      8 market infrastructures were constructed/rehabilitated (target: 8, achieved).
      2,839 km of roads constructed or rehabilitated (target: 2,800 km, exceeded).
      8 hours of transport time for specific inputs/outputs were reduced (target: 5 hours, exceeded).
      18 storage facilities were constructed/rehabilitated (target: 18, achieved).
      1,800,000 were direct beneficiaries of rehabilitated roads of which 53% were females
       (target: 1,500,000 of which 60% females, target exceeded).
      4,860 km of roads were maintained (baseline: 1,122 km, target: 7,000 km, achievement rate: 69%).
      10 bridges were completed (target: 20, achievement rate: 50%). The ICR partly attributed this
       shortcoming to COVID-19 on one side and lack of funding on the other.
      31,797 producers adopted improved animal husbandry practices (target: 30,000, target exceeded).

In addition to the results measured by the results framework, the ICR reported the following outputs and
intermediate results, which did not have any formal targets.

      A total of 165 entrepreneurs (78 women) benefitted from sub-projects (ICR, para 51).
      4 slaughterhouses were constructed, but the provision of water and electricity were not yet completed
         (ICR, paragraph 54).

Outcome

The objective was measured in terms of increases in average sales of specific crops and livestock products in
targeted markets/warehouses, and improvements and maintenance of the rural roads network.

The project-financed road works opened access to road infrastructure for 1,850 villages with a population of
about 2 million (ICR, paragraph 54). According to the ICR (paragraph 44) along road corridors of 28 to 69 km
in length, the travel time in hours after rehabilitation was reduced by between 14% to 54%. The construction
of 8 marketplaces and 18 warehouses combined with the improved road network increased sales of farmers
and traders by 49% annually compared to the end target of 40% (ICR, paragraph 45). Also, the number of
chickens sold increased from 2.5 million in 2016 to 10 million by the end of 2020. The number of goats sold
on the market in 2020 reached 1.5 million (ICR, paragraph 53). While the impact of improved roads on
conveyance of goods and reduction of post-harvest losses was not measured, it is plausible to assume that
reduced transport time would improve the volume of agricultural produce conveyed to the markets and would
result in a reduction in post-harvest losses. Finally, the rural roads component improved access to 76 health
centers and 205 schools, and allowed the creation of short-term employment for 7,422 people and injected in
the form of remuneration US$2.4 million into the local economy (ICR, paragraph 54).


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. Overall, the project achieved mixed results, on one hand it slightly
                            exceeded its target on constructed or rehabilitated roads (2,839 km compared to a target of 2,800 km), but on
                            the other hand, it fell short of achieving the target on maintained roads (4,860 km compared to a target of
                            7,000 km) and on bridges (10 compared to target of 20 bridges). While the impact of improved roads on
                            conveyance of goods and reduction of post-harvest losses was not measured, it is plausible to assume that
                            reduced transport time would improve the volume of agricultural produce conveyed to the markets and would
                            result in a reduction in post-harvest losses. Sales of farmers and traders increased by 49% annually
                            compared to an end target of 40% (ICR, paragraph 45). Despite the shortcomings, the project achievements
                            are notable and are expected to have positive impacts on the targeted areas.

                            Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial, but with shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project improved crop yields of cassava, maize and rice compared
                            to the baseline situation, but fell short from achieving its targets on all crop yields. That said, the yield
                            increases seen for all key crops were a significant and substantial achievement by the project in the DRC's
                            fragile context. Also, worth noting that the yield targets were ambitious in the context of the DRC. The
                            increments in Cassava yield in project areas (main staple crop) were significant reaching 22.1 t/ha, which was
                            threefold the baseline. The project achieved mixed results on road maintenance and rehabilitation, on one
                            hand it slightly exceeded its target on constructed of rehabilitated roads (2,839 km compared to a target of
                            2,800km), but on the other hand it fell short of achieving the target on maintained roads (4,860 km compared
                            to a target of 7,000 km) and on bridges (10 compared to target of 20 bridges). That said, the ICR (paragraph
                            45) reported that sales of farmers and traders increased by 49% annually compared to an end target of 40%.
                            The project also improved food security in the target areas. A food security survey carried out by the National
                            Agricultural Statistics Service between the end of 2019 and June 2020 showed that, prior to the project,
                            50% of households had only one meal per day, while in 2019 the percentage of households that had at least
                            two meals a day increased to 95% (ICR, footnote #4).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency (EFA)


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 21
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



ex ante

     The economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 29% while the financial rate of return (FRR)
      measuring benefits at the project level was estimated at 25%. The corresponding net present values
      (NPV) were positive and in the order of US$56-69 million under a 12%
      opportunity cost of capital (OCC) for a 15-year project lifecycle.
     Key benefits form project activities included: increased yields (cassava, maize, and rice), increased
      seasonal production of livestock and reduced vehicle operating costs and improved traffic due to road
      rehabilitation/maintenance.
     The analysis used cost-benefit analysis and farm models to calculate internal rates of return (IRRs) and
      their corresponding NPVs. The analysis focused on components 1 and 2 of the project. Overall project
      costs for components 1 and 2 were extracted from the detailed costing of the various activities
      (COSTAB), and overall net benefits were computed.
     Sensitivity Analysis. Two key variables affecting the project were analyzed: (i) output prices and (ii) yields
      for the three commodities analyzed. The sensitivity analysis found that returns to the project were
      particularly sensitive to output price changes, where a 10% decrease in crop prices would decrease the
      ERR to 24% and the FRR to 19%. While a 5% decrease in yields would decrease the ERR to 27% and
      the FRR to 23%.

ex post

     The EFA at completion followed the same methodology at appraisal. The ERR of the project was
        estimated at 21.9% which was lower than the ERR at appraisal (29%) as well as at the AF stage
        (25.3%). The economic NPV was positive (US$11.6 million) under an OCC at 12% and the benefit-cost
        ratio was 1.2.
       The EFA at completion was based on the development of 12 production models: five models for
        improved seed production (maize, rice, cassava, peanuts, cowpeas, and cassava), five production
        models for consumption (maize, rice, cassava, peanuts, cowpeas, and cassava), and two animal
        production models (poultry farming and small ruminants).
       While road delivery, rehabilitation and maintenance underpinned part of the overall PDO, it was not
        possible to analyze the impacts of these activities due to limitations on data availability (ICR, paragraph
        63).
       Sensitivity Analysis. The analysis indicated that price variations of seeds, goat, and chicken did not affect
        the project profitability, while a reduction in prices of crops by 25% generated an ERR lower than the
        OCC. Also, a decrease in benefits from 5% to 10% and an increase in costs from 10% to 20% resulted in
        an ERR higher than the OCC. However, a cost increase of 30% resulted in an ERR lower than the OCC.
        The delay in achieving project benefits by one year would result in an ERR above the OCC while a delay
        of two years resulted in an unprofitable project.
       Implementation Efficiency. The project closed 5.5 years beyond the original closing date. It experienced
        preparation delays where project took a total of 58 months from preparation to effectiveness (ICR,
        footnote #2). The ICR noted that these delays were a result of political instability which did not allow the
        parliament to legislate on the financing in a timely manner. Implementation also faced initial delays
        related to Environment and Social safeguards processes (ICR, paragraph 27). The implementation of
        feeder roaders faced considerable delays and cost overruns (ICR, paragraph 54). The ICR (paragraph
        84) attributed this to the internal review procedures of agency implementing the roads component, which



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



       was by far the largest single contract accounting for over 40% of total project cost. The project also
       experienced delays in finalizing contracts to construct bridges (ICR, paragraph 97).

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. At 21.9%, the ex-post ERR was lower than the ERR estimated at
appraisal (29%) and at the AF stage (25.3%). Implementation efficiency was poor and the project took a
relatively long time-frame to complete. Despite the lengthy implementation time-frame, the project closed with
some uncompleted activities related to infrastructure. The project also experienced cost overruns. The benefits
from the road component, which utilized 40% of the total project cost, were not reflected in the ex-post EFA.
Finally, there are concerns regarding the quality of the data due to M&E weaknesses and lack of other sources
to validate the accuracy of the data on crop yields.

Therefore, based on the afore-mentioned assessment, Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     82.00
 Appraisal                                                 29.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     82.00
 ICR Estimate                                              21.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project improved
crop yields compared to the baseline situation, with notable improvements recorded for Cassava-the main
staple crop. Also, sales of farmers and traders increased by 49% annually compared to an end target of 40%.
However, the project achieved mixed results on road maintenance and rehabilitation. On one hand, it slightly
exceeded its target on constructed of rehabilitated roads (2,839 km compared to a target of 2,800km). On the
other hand, it fell short of achieving the target on both maintained roads (4,860 km compared to a target of
7,000 km) and on bridges (10 compared to target of 20 bridges). Efficiency was rated Modest. The ex-post ERR
(21.9%) was lower than the ERR estimated at appraisal (29%) and at the AF stage (25.3%). Furthermore,
implementation efficiency was poor and the project took a relatively long time-frame to complete.

Based on a Substantial rating for both Relevance of Objectives and overall Efficacy and a Modest rating for
Efficiency, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 102) discussed the following three risks that could potentially impact the Development
Outcome:

1. Financial risk. Maintenance and further development of physical investments financed under the project in
(rural roads, bridges, and marketing and storage facilities) all depend on the satisfactory functioning of
institutions (provincial and regional rural roads maintenance committees). Also, some key bridges still need
to be completed. The additional and recurrent costs of this rural infrastructure need to be adequately
funded. The functioning of the rural road network is vulnerable as climate conditions are characterized by a
heavy and prolonged rainy season which requires maintenance work every five months. This will only
happen if the beneficiary communities actively engage in these activities through their local road
maintenance committees.

2. Technical risk. This related to the continued improvement of seeds and the functioning of the seed sector.
This is dependent on the performance of the National Institute for Agricultural Studies and Research (INERA)
and the National Seed Service (SENASEM) where both are expected to need continuous
government funding to sustain their regular operating expenditures.

3. Government ownership/commitment risk. The risk related to sustaining productivity increases in the crops
grown and the animals raised (poultry and small ruminants) by project beneficiaries. This requires
continuation of public extension advice provided by the provincial agricultural inspectorates (IPAPEL). Also,
the Department of Veterinary Services (DSV) needs to continue fulfilling its mandate and conduct regular
vaccination campaigns, and at the same time herders need to have access to animal medications.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was prepared in the aftermath of a prolonged
          civil war where agriculture was expected to benefit greatly from the cessation of conflict, the
          improved macroeconomic and governance environments, and construction or reconstruction of
          the road network. The project was noted in the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, FY
          2008-FY2011). Finally, the project was in line with the World Bank’s goal of promoting shared
          prosperity and reducing poverty (see section 3 for further details). Overall, the project was
          strategically relevant to the DRC given the importance of agriculture to the economy of the
          country.
         Technical, Financial, and Economic aspects. The technical preparation of the project was
          guided by: 1. The Government's Strategy for Agriculture which envisaged four key initiatives: (i)

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



      improving marketing efficiency; (ii) enhancing the productivity of traditional, smallholder-based
      agriculture; (iii) recapitalization of agricultural and livestock production through farm investments;
      and (iv) providing decentralized and deconcentrated support services to a broad range of
      community-led initiatives; 2. The Bank's Agricultural Sector Review (2006) which identified five
      geographic areas (domains) with high agricultural potential. However, the project design lacked
      activities to improve soil fertility. Finally, the EFA at appraisal showed high economic returns of
      the project. Overall, the project design had sound technical, financial and economic aspects.
      However, “cost estimates including the timeline for execution of certain infrastructure works could
      not be precisely established at the time of appraisal (ICR, paragraph 82).”
     Implementation Arrangements. Implementation readiness suffered from too many actions that
      were included as conditions of effectiveness or dated covenants which according to the
      ICR "made implementation of the project in early stages sluggish" (paragraph 82). The capacity of
      the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), the delegated management contractor
      for the infrastructure component, was overestimated. Furthermore, cost estimates of road
      maintenance/rehabilitation were underestimated at appraisal. This resulted in cost
      overruns, implementation delays, and eventually cancellation of some works.
     Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. The project was expected to have a
      beneficial social impact through improving agricultural productivity to small holders (male and
      female farmers), which was expected to improve incomes, improve food security, and alleviate
      poverty. Other benefits included improvements in the quality of transport services as well as
      improved access to public services, schools, health clinics, and agricultural inputs such as seeds.
      However, the project did not specifically monitor the increase in farmers' income generated by the
      project. The project sought to reduce the gender gap that characterized the agricultural sector in
      DRC and to ensure that women actively participated and benefitted from project activities.
      However, a more systematic attention to the gender aspect could have been provided in some
      areas, such as the recruitment of project staff/field agents (ICR, paragraph 71).
     Environmental Aspects. The planned activities were not expected to have significant or
      irreversible negative environmental or social impact. The triggered safeguard policies triggered
      would ensure that appropriate measures would be taken to manage potential negative impacts
      related to the implementation of the project. However, the project could have benefited from more
      attention to activities that aimed to enhance soil fertility through using organic manure and
      compost, and reducing the need to use chemical fertilizers.
     Fiduciary Aspects. The assessment of the Financial Management/procurement
      capacity revealed some weaknesses mainly in the areas of staffing arrangements. Despite the
      mitigation measures implemented, the procurement capacity remained to be problematic,
      which contributed to implementation delays.
     Adequacy of Risks and Mitigation Measures Identification. The project's overall risk was rated
      High. Eight risks were identified at appraisal classified under two main areas: Country-related
      risks and Project-related risks. While the risk related to the lack of implementation capacity was
      determined to be high, the recommended mitigation measures were not successful in addressing
      this risk when it materialized during implementation, particularly for the infrastructure activities.
     M&E Design. The Results Framework (RF) included poorly defined indicators that
      lacked sufficient detail to reliably measure the impact of the project (see section 9 a for more
      details). Also, the complexity and difficulty of collecting and analyzing a great volume of data over
      a large geographic area with over 100,000 potential project beneficiaries was not sufficiently
      considered (ICR, paragraph 86).



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project experienced a very lengthy preparation
  process. Design was relatively complex with respect to implementation capacity. The lack of activities to
  enhance soil fertility was a notable design shortcoming. Implementation readiness was poor and
  infrastructure costs were underestimated, which later contributed to implementation delays and cost
  overruns. While risk identification and mitigation measures were acceptable, more attention should have
  been given to address limited implementation capacity. Finally, M&E design had notable shortcomings.

  Overall, QAE had significant shortcomings and is therefore rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project was implemented under a challenging political environment. The Bank conducted 24
        implementation support missions (ISMs) over the duration of the project implementation period.
        However, according to the ICR "ISMs were focused on the PIU in the capital Kinshasa and did not
        have enough time and manpower to sufficiently supervise project activities in the field (paragraph
        99)." This questions the efficacy of ISMs if project areas were not visited. Also, action plans that
        were agreed upon with project management to speed implementation often lacked sufficient detail
        to allow monitoring of their execution. The ICR (paragraph 99) also noted that ISMs were not
        always conducted every six months due to political events.
       Bank missions frequently drew the attention of the project management to the need to address
        procurement issues, especially those related to the infrastructure component. Despite the Bank
        efforts and meeting with the UNOPs country director, there was limited progress on this matter
        (ICR, paragraph 99). The Bank team was flexible and responded to the borrower requests to
        support some needed actions that were not in the original design including two animal vaccination
        campaigns.
       The activities included under the AF(perennial crops and infrastructure work) were too ambitious
        given the implementation timeframe (direct communication with the project team).
       Due to COVID-19 restrictions over the last one and a half years of the project, ISMs were
        carried remotely as field visits were not possible. The Bank team held monthly teleconferences with
        the PIU to review project progress. The only exception was one short ISM that was conducted on
        April 12 to18, 2021. The Bank team held monthly teleconferences with the PIU to review project
        progress. The Bank team also processed extension of closing dates on time and insisted on the
        necessary activities for project closing early on. However, the Bank team could have used the six
        restructurings to address M&E design/implementation weaknesses to enable a more
        comprehensive and accurate assessment of the project.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. Overall, the Bank supervision guided the project
 through a challenging political environment and through the COVID-19 restrictions. However, project
 implementation could have benefited from better attention to M&E. The Bank team could have used the
 restructurings to adequately revise the Results Framework and develop the PDO outcome indicators and
 IRIs in sufficient detail to reliably measure the impact of the project. M&E weaknesses were not addressed
 by earlier ISMs. According to the ICR (paragraph 101), "the Project Paper for the AF dealt with the

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



 definition and the measurement of project indicators unsatisfactorily." Therefore, Quality of Supervision is
 rated Moderately Satisfactory due to Moderate shortcomings.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline between
 OPCS and IEG.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since a ToC was not required at the time of
        preparation of the PAD. Nevertheless, the ICR included an ex-post ToC that was constructed based
        on the PDO, the project activities and the results indicators as reported in the PAD. The ToC also
        included four critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO. While most
        activities in the ToC were directly linked to the PDO in a plausible causal chain, the ToC could have
        benefitted from a better layout to clearly reflect causal links.
       The achievement of the PDO was to be assessed through measuring three outcome indicators:
        1. Average seasonal yield per standard area of specific crops among targeted farmers; 2. Average
        number of poultry produced annually by targeted farmers; and 3. Average annual sales of specific
        crops and animal products in targeted markets/warehouses. These indicators were directly
        connected to the PDO and measurable. However, the targets for the average seasonal yields were
        according to the ICR "unrealistically high (paragraph 86)." The ICR also noted that the distinction
        between direct and indirect beneficiaries was not clearly spelled out nor was the distinction between
        individual beneficiaries and farm families (paragraph 86).
       At appraisal, the RF included 25 intermediate outcome indicators (IRI) to assess the impact of
        activities per component and to track the progress of the project implementation (PAD, annex 3,
        pages 37-39). Most IRI included baseline data and clear targets. However, this relatively high
        number of IRI added complexity to the M&E design given the multi-sectoral nature of the project
        with several executing agencies, both public and private, and at the national and provincial levels.
       Overall, M&E design was complex, lacked details on methods, and underestimated the difficulty of
        collecting and analyzing a great volume of data over a large geographic area and over 100,000
        potential project beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 86).



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation was overseen by the Studies and Planning Directorate of The Ministry of
         Agriculture. M&E implementation performance was low despite the recruitment of a statistician


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



           and an M&E specialist, the later resigned a few months after the effectiveness of the parent
           project (ICR, paragraphs 86 & 87).
          M&E implementation suffered from a staffing gap as there was no specialist assigned to collect
           and analyze the data at the provincial level (ICR, paragraph 87). While this was partially
           addressed at the AF stage through hiring an M&E specialist, the specialist lacked experience to
           use digital tools for data collection and monitoring.
          A baseline survey took place in the second half of 2012 and two final surveys in 2013/2014. In
           addition, a survey to judge the food security situation was carried out in 2019 by the National
           Agricultural Statistics Service. According to the ICR, the survey was well designed; however, no
           further details were provided on its size and methodology. Finally, two beneficiary assessments
           were conducted by a local firm toward the end of the original project financing (April 2015) and the
           final project closing (April 2021). However, the project did not specifically monitor the increase in
           farmers' income generated by the project.
          Revision of the RF. At the AF stage some adjustments were made to increase the focus on cross-
           cutting issues, including nutrition and climate-sensitive approaches, and to add some indicators
           and adjust targets in the Results Framework. However, this was not enough to remedy the
           design/implementation weaknesses (ICR, paragraph 89). Also, under the AF three provincial M&E
           units were established in the three provinces, which improved M&E activities compared to under
           the parent project.
          Overall, the project suffered from poor implementation of M&E activities. There were concerns on
           the methodologies used to measure the crop yields in project areas.



c. M&E Utilization
       The ICR (paragraph 89) acknowledged that the quality of data and its utilization were a concern.
         According to the ICR (paragraph 89) "key aspects regarding adoption and diffusion of
         innovations by farmers (the introduction of seeds/planting material, and changes in cropping
         patterns) were not followed due to weak M&E design."
        Despite the studies and surveys noted above, the ICR (paragraph 89) stated that it was "unclear
         to what extent these evaluations influenced project execution."

  Summary of the M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was relatively complex and lacked clear
  methodologies for data collection. Implementation was poor and was undermined by limited capacity
  combined with a weak institutional setup. M&E utilization was limited.

  Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



  The project was classified as an environmental and social category B. The project activities were not
  expected to induce significant adverse environmental and social impacts. However, some of the planned
  investments, including rural road rehabilitation and productive investment sub-projects, were anticipated
  to cause localized, temporary environmental and social impacts. At appraisal, the project triggered six
  safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Indigenous
  Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
  4.12); and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). Two more safeguard policies were triggered
  at the Additional Financing in 2017, Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) since the
  project would support commercial agriculture in the rain forest area in the Congo Basin.

  Mitigation measures were included in the four safeguard instruments: i) an Environment and Social
  Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Pesticide Management Plan (PMP); (iii) a Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF); and (iv) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). In 2017, as part of the AF
  process, these instruments were updated, cleared, redisclosed according to the World Bank’s disclosure
  policies, and published. Although OP 7.50 regarding Projects on International Waterways was triggered, an
  exception to the notification requirement was applied because the project activities were not expected
  to adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to other riparian countries (PAD, paragraph 71).

  The ICR did not provide an explicit statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguards policies, but stated
  that "at project closure, the implementation of environmental and social safeguards was rated Moderately
  Satisfactory (paragraph 93)."

  Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The project reported 2 occupational health and safety
  incidents since its start; both of them were classified as severe. All incidents were confirmed accounted
  through the environment and social incident response tool kit and were considered closed at project closing
  (ICR, paragraph 94).

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. The implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was
  delayed due to difficulties in identifying a qualified consultant. The consultant eventually began work and the
  activities that had been planned for the project’s indigenous peoples were implemented (ICR, paragraph
  92). A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) sensitive to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
  aspects was operational throughout the project area. The project registered and resolved about 55
  complaints and all the complaints registered were dealt with and considered closed (ICR, footnote #8).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). While FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory during most of the
  implementation period, it was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in the last Implementation Status
  and Results Report (ISR) (ICR, paragraph 96). This downgraded was due to: (a) insufficient follow up
  of budget execution; (b) unclear status of execution of various contracts, especially the one with UNOPs;
  (c) advance payments made to UNOPs were not adequately documented; (d) late transmission of financial
  and audit reports to the Bank; (e) weak internal financial control procedures; and (f) the latest audit report
  was late (ICR, paragraph 96). The ICR did not report on the timeliness of project external audits and
  whether the external auditors’ opinions were qualified, and the nature of the qualifications as well as on
  any measures taken to address them.


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



   Procurement. Procurement activities suffered from delays due the low procurement capacity at the
   Ministry of Agriculture. Monitoring of contracts was deficient and contracts had to be amended and
   extended several times. While procurement was most of the time rated Moderately Satisfactory, it
   was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in the final ISR. This downgrade was due to significant
   delays in several contacts, especially with regard to the infrastructure component (building of bridges), and
   that could not be finished before the project closing date (ICR, paragraph 97).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included eight lessons. The following two are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. A well designed M&E system is critical to ensure accurate assessment of outcomes. In
FCV countries, a trial run of the M&E system shortly after effectiveness can ensure that all the
necessary elements of the M&E system are in place (staffing, indicator definition, data collection and
sampling methods). Data collection, especially in case of large data requirements, must feed into an
electronic project database in real time. This project had a relatively high number of IRI, which
added complexity to the M&E design, as discussed in section 9.a. Moreover, according to the ICR
(paragraph 86), the PDO targets for the average seasonal yields were "unrealistically high." This can
lead to a negative assessment at project end that might not be justified. Finally, counter verification
of the project data through consultants/an independent agency must be considered to improve
validity.


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



2.To ensure price stability, yield increments in certain crops like cassava can be
accompanied by the transformation of the raw product into a processed product. The
project significantly boosted Cassava yields from 7 tons per hectare to 19 tons per hectare (ICR,
para graph 39). It incentivized a company to invest “about US$50,000 to produce and transform
cassava into flour, suitable for bread making” (ICR, paragraph 70). When production increases to
the point where demand for the raw product reaches a limit, processing the raw product becomes an
alternative to ensure price stability. The use of cassava flour for bread making has been expanded
under the World Bank-financed West African Agricultural Productivity Program and is now being
widely used in countries such as Senegal, Ghana, and Nigeria. The World Bank team in DRC in
charge of policy dialogue and governance need to discuss with the Government the necessary
regulatory steps to convert this opportunity into reality.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

3. Supporting an enhancement of soil fertility practices together with a use of improved
seeds/plant materials through a provision of improved crop management and advisory
services can boost crop yields to reach the full productivity potential. The project experience
demonstrated that the full productivity potential was not achieved even though using improved
seeds/plant materials and enhancing crop management and advisory services boosted yields. This
was mainly due to the absence of activities/practices that aimed to enhance soil fertility (ICR,
paragraph 43). These activities needed to be applied in parallel to the other yield boosting activities
supported by the project.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The project had a weak M&E system that could not comprehensively and accurately capture the project
  achievements. Further assessment is warranted to verify results on the ground and to generate further lessons
  that could inform similar projects in the future.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that both M&E design and implementation had shortcomings. Yield
data could not be validated due to the absence of other data sources. Also, the ICR Annex 3 did not reflect the
updated project costs. Overall, there are concerns on the quality of data collected through the project's M&E
system. The project task team provided additional data and explanation to support the substantial efficacy
rating during the ICRR drafting stage.



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10) (P092724)



Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections.

Lessons. Lessons could have benefited from better formulation in terms of focus, length and reflecting actual
project experience.

Results Orientation. The ICR discussed the achievement of the PDO based on the available data to the extent
possible. The discussion was adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome
indicators and what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to the extent possible to justify most of the
assigned ratings. The ICR discussion on the triggered safeguard policies was limited. It was not clear
whether the project activities generated environmental or social impacts during implementation and, if so, to
what extent the project addressed them through the planned mitigation activities. The ICR did not include an
explicit statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies. Out of the eight safeguard policies that
were applicable at project closing, the ICR did not mention anything about OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural
Resources) and the exception to the notification requirement applied to OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International
Waterways). The ICR also did not report on the timeliness of project external audits and whether the external
auditors’ opinions were qualified, and the nature of the qualifications as well as on any measures taken to
address them.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. However, reporting on safeguards was limited and did not include an
explicit statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies, and two triggered Safeguard policy were
not mentioned in the ICR (Projects on International Waterways - OP 7.50 and Physical Cultural Resources -
OP/BP 4.11). Finally, the ICR Annex 3 did not reflect the updated project costs.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but with shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
